The Code
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 4-27-1971 by Ord. No. 461]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus
of a general and permanent nature, adopted by the Mayor and Council of
the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus and accepted and adopted by the Shade Tree
Commission of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus and the Board of Health of the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, as revised, codified and consolidated into titles,
chapters and sections by General Code Publishers Corp. and consisting of
Chapters 1 through 86, together with an Appendix and Index, are hereby
approved, ordained and enacted as "The Code of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus,
County of Bergen, State of New Jersey."
§ 1-2. Code to supersede prior ordinances.
This ordinance shall supersede all other general and permanent ordinances
passed by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, prior to the
enactment of this Code, except such ordinances as are expressly saved from
repeal or continued in force and effect as shall hereafter be set forth by
reference.
§ 1-3. When effective.
All provisions of the Code of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, County of Bergen,
State of New Jersey, shall be in full force and effect on and after the effective
date of this ordinance.
§ 1-4. Repeal of ordinances not contained in or inconsistent with
provisions of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature, adopted by the Mayor
and Council of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus and in force on the date of the
adoption of this ordinance and not contained in the Code of the Borough
of Ho-Ho-Kus, County of Bergen, State of New Jersey, or which are
inconsistent with any provisions contained in such Code, are hereby
repealed as of the effective date of this adopting ordinance, except as
hereinafter provided.
§ 1-5. Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-4 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus prior to the effective
date of the ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the
enforcement of such right or liability.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5
1:3
§ 1-6. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
In compiling and preparing the ordinances of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus
for adoption and revision as part of the Code of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus,
County of Bergen, State of New Jersey, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain
grammatical changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of
said ordinances. It is the intention of the Mayor and Council of the Borough
of Ho-Ho-Kus that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code of the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, County of Bergen, State of New Jersey, as if the
ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended to read as
such.
§ 1-7. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, County of Bergen, State
of New Jersey, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the Borough
B. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Borough of Ho-
Ho-Kus or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result
therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Borough of Ho-Ho-
Kus.
D. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Mayor and Council.
E. Any ordinance of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus providing for the laying
out, opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing
grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any
right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or other public place
within the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, or any portion thereof.
F. Any ordinance or resolution of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus appropriating
money or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of
money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus or other instruments or evidence of the
Borough's indebtedness.
G. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
I. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
J. Any ordinance of the Mayor and Council adopted subsequent to the
effective date hereof.
§ 1-5 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 1-7
1:4
Clerk of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus and shall remain there for the use and
examination of the public until final action is taken on this ordinance, and if
this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk
of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus by impressing thereon the seal of the Borough
of Ho-Ho-Kus, as provided by law and such certified copy shall remain on
file in the office of the Borough Clerk of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus to be
made available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times
while the said Code is in effect.
§ 1-8. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code of the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, County of Bergen, State of New Jersey, when passed
and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the Mayor and
Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such
Code, so that reference to "The Code of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, County
of Bergen, State of New Jersey" shall be understood and intended to include
such additions and amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or
supplements to the Code of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, County of Bergen,
State of New Jersey, shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and,
as provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing the said
Code, as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-9. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Clerk, or someone authorized and
directed by the Borough Clerk, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the
book containing the Code of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, County of Bergen,
State of New Jersey, required to be filed in the office of the Borough Clerk
for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances
adopted by the Mayor and Council subsequent to the effective date of this
codification which the Mayor and Council shall adopt specifically as a part
of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference
until such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said
Code book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-10. Sale of Code book; supplements provided.
Copies of the Code book containing the Code of the Borough of Ho-Ho-
Kus, County of Bergen, State of New Jersey, may be purchased from the
Clerk of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus upon the payment of a fee to be set by
resolution of the Mayor and Council, who may also arrange by resolution,
for procedures for the periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-11. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, pursuant to law, shall cause to be
published in the manner required, a copy of this adopting ordinance in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus. Sufficient
copies of the Code of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, County of Bergen, State
§ 1-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-11
1:5
of New Jersey, shall be maintained in the office of the Borough Clerk
for inspection by the public at all times during regular office hours. The
enactment and application of this adopting ordinance, coupled with
availability of copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be
deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-12. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part
thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not
be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section or
parts thereof.
§ 1-13. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other section or part thereof.
§ 1-14. Altering or tampering with Code; violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Borough
of Ho-Ho-Kus to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of
this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not more than
$200 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both, in the discretion
of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-15. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately after final approval and
publication according to law.
§ 1-16. General penalty. [Added 12-20-1988 by Ord. No. 634]
Any person, firm or corporation which shall violate any provision of this
Code shall, upon conviction therefore, be subject to a fine not to exceed
$1,000 or imprisonment for a term of not more than 90 days, at the
discretion of the Judge of the court rendering the conviction, unless
otherwise provided by law. A minimum fine for violation of any ordinance
provision of this Code is hereby established in the amount of $100, at the
discretion of the court.
§ 1-11 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 1-16
1:6
Chapter 2
AFFORDABLE HOUSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Development fees — See Ch. 17. Zoning — See Ch. 85.
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:7

ARTICLE I
General Program Purposes, Procedures
§ 2-1. Affordable housing obligation.
A. This section of the Borough Code sets forth regulations regarding the
low- and moderate-income housing units in the Borough consistent with
the provisions known as the "Substantive Rules of the New Jersey
Council on Affordable Housing," N.J.A.C. 5:93 et seq.;1 the Uniform
Housing Affordability Controls (UHAC), N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.,
except where modified by the terms of a settlement agreement between
the Borough and Fair Share Housing Center (FSHC) such that the
statutory requirement to provide very-low-income units equal to 13% of
affordable units approved and constructed after July 1, 2008, to be
affordable to households at 30% of the regional median income,
overrides the UHAC requirement that 10% of all low- and moderateincome
units must be affordable at 35% of the regional median income,
and the Borough's constitutional obligation to provide a fair share of
affordable housing for low- and moderate-income households. In
addition, this section applies requirements for very-low-income housing
as established in P.L. 2008, c. 46 (the "Roberts Bill," codified at N.J.S.A.
52:27D-329.1). [Amended 3-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-04]
B. This chapter is intended to assure that very-low-, low- and moderateincome
units ("affordable units") are created with controls on
affordability over time and that very-low-, low- and moderate-income
households shall occupy these units. This chapter shall apply to all
inclusionary developments and one-hundred-percent affordable
developments (including those funded with low-income housing tax
credit financing) except where inconsistent with applicable law.
[Amended 3-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-04]
C. The Ho-Ho-Kus Borough Planning Board has adopted a Housing
Element and Fair Share Plan pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law
at N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. The plan has also been endorsed by the
Borough Council of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus. The Fair Share Plan
describes the ways the Borough shall address its fair share for low- and
moderate-income housing as determined by the Superior Court and
documented in the Housing Element.
D. This chapter implements and incorporates the Fair Share Plan and
addresses the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:93, as may be amended and
supplemented.
E. The Borough shall file monitoring and status reports with the Superior
Court and place the reports on its municipal website. Any plan
evaluation report of the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan and
monitoring evaluation report prepared by the Special Master in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:912 shall be available to the public at the Ho-
1. Editor's Note: The regulations in N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired October 16, 2016.
§ 2-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-1
1:9
Ho-Kus Borough Municipal Building, 333 Warren Avenue, Ho-Ho-Kus,
New Jersey 07423.
F. On or about January 12 of each year through the end of the period of
Third Round Judgment of Repose, the Borough will provide annual
reporting of the status of all affordable housing activity within the
municipality through posting on the municipal website with a copy of
such posting provided to all parties to the Borough's Court-approved
settlement agreements, using forms previously developed for this
purpose by the Council on Affordable Housing or any other forms
endorsed by the Special Master and Fair Share Housing Center (FSHC).
[Added 3-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-04]
G. The Fair Housing Act includes two provisions regarding action to be
taken by the Borough during the ten-year period of protection provided
in the Borough's agreement with FSHC. The Borough agrees to comply
with those provisions as follows:
(1) By July 1, 2020, the Borough must prepare a midpoint realistic
opportunity review, as required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-313,
which the Borough will post on its municipal website, with a copy
provided to FSHC and the Intervenors, a status report as to its
implementation of its plan and an analysis of whether any unbuilt
sites or unfulfilled mechanisms continue to present a realistic
opportunity. Such posting shall invite any interested party to
submit comments to the municipality, with a copy to FSHC and the
Intervenors, regarding whether any sites no longer present a
realistic opportunity and should be replaced and whether any
mechanisms to meet unmet need should be revised or
supplemented. Any interested party may by motion request a
hearing before the Court regarding these issues. In the event the
Court determines that a site or mechanism no longer presents a
realistic opportunity and should be replaced or supplemented, then
the municipality shall have the opportunity to supplement or revise
its plan to correct any deficiency.
(2) Within 30 days of January 12, 2020 and January 12, 2023 the
Borough shall prepare a review of compliance with the very-lowincome
housing requirements required by N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.1
and its settlement agreement with Fair Share Housing Center. The
Borough will post on its municipal website, with a copy provided to
FSHC and the Intervenors, a status report as to its satisfaction of
its very-low-income requirements, including the family very-lowincome
requirements referenced herein and in the Borough's
settlement agreement with FSHC. Such posting shall invite any
interested party to submit comments to the municipality and FSHC
and the Intervenors on the issue of whether the municipality has
complied with its very-low-income housing obligation.
2. Editor's Note: The regulations in N.J.A.C. 5:91 have expired.
§ 2-1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 2-2
1:10
§ 2-2. Definitions.
As used herein, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — A self-contained residential dwelling unit with
a kitchen, sanitary facilities, sleeping quarters and a private entrance,
which is created within an existing home, or through the conversion of
an existing accessory structure on the same site, or by an addition to
an existing home or accessory building, or by the construction of a new
accessory structure on the same site.
ACT — The Fair Housing Act of 1985, P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301
et seq.).
ADAPTABLE — Constructed in compliance with the technical design
standards of the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity responsible for the administration
of affordable units in accordance with this chapter, N.J.A.C. 5:91, N.J.A.C.
5:93 and N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.3
AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING — A regional marketing strategy designed
to attract buyers and/or renters of affordable units pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.15.
AFFORDABILITY AVERAGE — The average percentage of median income at
which restricted units in an affordable housing development are affordable
to low- and moderate-income households.
AFFORDABLE — A sales price or rent within the means of a low- or
moderate-income household as defined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4; in the case of an
ownership unit, that the sales price for the unit conforms to the standards
set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6, as may be amended and supplemented,
and, in the case of a rental unit, that the rent for the unit conforms to
the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.12, as may be amended and
supplemented.
AFFORDABLE DEVELOPMENT — A housing development all or a portion of
which consists of restricted units.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included in the
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan and includes, but is not limited to,
an inclusionary development, a municipal construction project or a onehundred-
percent affordable development.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRAM(S) — Any mechanism in a municipal
Fair Share Plan prepared or implemented to address a municipality's fair
share obligation.
AFFORDABLE UNIT — A housing unit proposed or created pursuant to the
Act, credited pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93 and/or funded through an Affordable
Housing Trust Fund.
3. Editor's Note: The regulations in both N.J.A.C. 5:91 and 5:93 have expired.
§ 2-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-2
1:11
AGE-RESTRICTED UNIT — A housing unit designed to meet the needs
of, and exclusively for, the residents of an age-restricted segment of the
population such that:
AGENCY — The New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency
established by P.L. 1983, c. 530 (N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1 et seq.).
ALTERNATIVE LIVING ARRANGEMENT — A structure in which households
live in distinct bedrooms, yet share kitchen and plumbing facilities, central
heat and common areas. Alternative living arrangement includes, but is not
limited to, transitional facilities for the homeless; Class A, B, C, D, and E
boarding homes as regulated by the New Jersey Department of Community
Affairs; residential health care facilities as regulated by the New Jersey
Department of Health; group homes for the developmentally disabled and
mentally ill as licensed and/or regulated by the New Jersey Department of
Human Services; and congregate living arrangements.
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — A facility licensed by the New Jersey
Department of Health and Senior Services to provide apartment-style
housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted living services
are available when needed for four or more adult persons unrelated to the
proprietor and that offers units containing, at a minimum, one unfurnished
room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette and a lockable door on the unit
entrance.
CERTIFIED HOUSEHOLD — A household that has been certified by an
administrative agent as a low-income household or moderate-income
household.
COAH — The Council on Affordable Housing, which is in, but not of, the
Department of Community Affairs of the State of New Jersey, that was
established under the New Jersey Fair Housing Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et
seq.).
DCA — The State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
DEFICIENT HOUSING UNIT — A housing unit with health and safety code
violations that require the repair or replacement of a major system. A
major system includes weatherization, roofing, plumbing (including wells),
heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic systems), lead paint
abatement and/or load-bearing structural systems.
DEVELOPER — Any person, partnership, association, company or
corporation that is the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or any
All the residents of the development where the unit is situated are 62
years or older;
A.
At least 80% of the units are occupied by one person who is 55 years or
older; or
B.
The development has been designated by the Secretary of the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development as "housing for older
persons" as defined in Section 807(b)(2) of the Fair Housing Act, 42
U.S.C. § 3607(b)(2).
C.
§ 2-2 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 2-2
1:12
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option to contract or purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation, or enlargement of any use or change in the use of any building
or other structure, or of any mining, excavation or landfill, and any use or
change in the use of any building or other structure, or land or extension
of use of land, for which permission may be required pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
FAIR SHARE PLAN — The plan that describes the mechanisms, strategies
and funding sources, if any, by which the Borough proposes to address
its affordable housing obligation as established in the Housing Element,
including the draft ordinances necessary to implement that plan, and
addresses the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.
HOUSING ELEMENT — The portion of the Borough's Master Plan, required
by the Municipal Land Use Law (MLUL), N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28b(3), and the
Act, that includes the information required by N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.1 and
establishes the Borough's fair share obligation.
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT — A development containing both
affordable units and market rate units. This term includes, but is not
necessarily limited to, new construction, the conversion of a nonresidential
structure to residential and the creation of new affordable units through the
reconstruction of a vacant residential structure.
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 50% or less of the median household income.
LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a low-income
household.
MAJOR SYSTEM — The primary structural, mechanical, plumbing,
electrical, fire-protection, or occupant service components of a building
which include, but are not limited to, weatherization, roofing, plumbing
(including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic
systems), lead paint abatement or load-bearing structural systems.
MARKET-RATE UNIT — Housing not restricted to low- and moderateincome
households that may sell or rent at any price.
MEDIAN INCOME — The median income by household size for the
applicable county, as adopted annually by COAH or approved by the New
Jersey Superior Court.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross
annual household income in excess of 50% but less than 80% of the median
household income.
MODERATE-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a
moderate-income household.
§ 2-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-2
1:13
NONEXEMPT SALE — Any sale or transfer of ownership other than the
transfer of ownership between husband and wife; the transfer of ownership
between former spouses ordered as a result of a judicial decree of divorce
or judicial separation, but not including sales to third parties; the transfer of
ownership between family members as a result of inheritance; the transfer
of ownership through an executor's deed to a class A beneficiary and the
transfer of ownership by Court order.
RANDOM SELECTION PROCESS — A process by which currently incomeeligible
households are selected for placement in affordable housing units
such that no preference is given to one applicant over another except for
purposes of matching household income and size with an appropriately
priced and sized affordable unit (e.g., by lottery).
REGIONAL ASSET LIMIT — The maximum housing value in each housing
region affordable to a four-person household with an income at 80% of the
regional median as defined by adopted/approved regional income limits.
REHABILITATION — The repair, renovation, alteration or reconstruction of
any building or structure, pursuant to the Rehabilitation Subcode, N.J.A.C.
5:23-6.
RENT — The gross monthly cost of a rental unit to the tenant, including the
rent paid to the landlord, as well as an allowance for tenant-paid utilities
computed in accordance with allowances published by DCA for its Section
8 program. In assisted living residences, rent does not include charges for
food and services.
RESTRICTED UNIT — A dwelling unit, whether a rental unit or an
ownership unit, that is subject to the affordability controls of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented, but does not include a
market-rate unit financed under UHORP or MONI.
SPECIAL MASTER — An expert appointed by a judge to make sure that
judicial orders are followed. A master's function is essentially investigative,
compiling evidence or documents to inform some future action by the Court.
UHAC — The Uniform Housing Affordability Controls set forth in N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1 et seq.
VERY LOW INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 30% or less of the median household income.
VERY LOW INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a verylow-
income household.
WEATHERIZATION — Building insulation (for attic, exterior walls and crawl
space), siding to improve energy efficiency, replacement storm windows,
replacement storm doors, replacement windows and replacement doors and
is considered a major system for rehabilitation.
§ 2-3. Borough-wide mandatory set-aside.
A. A multifamily or single-family attached development providing a
minimum of five new housing units created through any municipal
§ 2-2 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 2-3
1:14
rezoning or Zoning Board action, use or density variance,
redevelopment plan, or rehabilitation plan that provides for densities
at or above six units per acre is required to include an affordable
housing set-aside of 20% if the affordable units will be for sale and
15% if the affordable units will be for rent. This requirement does not
give any developer the right to any such rezoning, variance or other
relief or establish any obligation on the part of Ho-Ho-Kus to grant such
rezoning, variance or other relief. No subdivision shall be permitted or
approved for the purpose of avoiding compliance with this requirement.
B. This Borough-wide mandatory set-aside requirement does not
supersede the effects or requirements of the Downtown Inclusionary
Overlay Zoning (§ 85-13.1) for any inclusionary multifamily residential
development that occurs within the boundaries of the overlay area.
C. Fractional units. [Added 3-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-04]
(1) In the event that the inclusionary set-aside percentage (15% or
20%) of the total number of residential units does not result in a full
integer, the developer may choose one of two options of addressing
the fractional unit:
(a) The developer shall round the set-aside upward to construct a
whole additional affordable unit; or
(b) If the set-aside includes a fractional unit equal to 0.49 or less,
the developer may round the set-aside downward and
construct the lesser whole number of affordable units but must
also make a payment in lieu of constructing the fractional
additional unit ("fractional payment in lieu").
[1] The fractional payment in lieu amount shall be calculated
as the fractional unit multiplied by the base payment in
lieu dollar amount established in § 2-4C(1) of the Borough
Code.
(2) For example, if seven total units are developed at an inclusionary
site, a set-aside of 20% would require 1.4 affordable units. Per the
requirements above:
(a) The developer shall round up the 0.4 unit to one whole
affordable unit so as to construct a total of two affordable
housing units, in accordance with § 2-3C(1)(a); or
(b) In accordance with § 2-3C(1)(b), the developer shall round the
set-aside downward so as to construct only affordable unit and
shall pay into the Borough's Affordable Housing Trust Fund a
fractional in-lieu payment equal to the dollar amount
established in § 2-4C(1) multiplied by 0.4 unit.
§ 2-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-4
1:15
§ 2-4. New construction.
The following requirements shall apply to all new or planned developments
that contain low- and moderate-income housing units:
A. Phasing. Final site plan or subdivision approval shall be contingent
upon the affordable housing development meeting the following
phasing schedule for low- and moderate-income units, whether
developed in a single-phase development or in a multiphase
development:
Maximum Percentage of
Market-Rate Units Completed
Minimum Percentage of Lowand
Moderate-Income Units
Completed
25 0
25 + 1 10
50 50
75 75
90 100
B. Design. In inclusionary developments, to the extent possible, low- and
moderate-income units shall be integrated with the market units.
C. Payments in lieu and off-site construction. The standards for the
collection of payments in lieu of constructing affordable units or
standards for constructing affordable units off site shall be in
accordance with the requirements below: [Amended 3-27-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-04]
(1) The base dollar amount of the payment in lieu of constructing an
affordable unit at the time of adoption of this chapter shall be
$180,267. [NOTE: As set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:97-6.4(c)3.4] This
amount shall be adjusted periodically by the Borough to reflect the
most current and accurate market conditions or better cover the
cost to the Borough to subsidize affordable housing construction.
The payment shall be imposed as a condition of development
approval by the Planning Board.
(a) During the development approval process, a developer may
demonstrate to the governing body that the actual
construction cost of an affordable unit less estimated
capitalized revenue at the development in question is lower
than the imposed payment in lieu in § 2-4C(1)(a). At its
discretion, the governing body may impose a lower paymentin-
lieu amount equal or proximate to the amount estimated by
the developer.
4. Editor's Note: The regulations in N.J.A.C. 5:97 expired June 2, 2015.
§ 2-4 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 2-4
1:16
D. Utilities. Affordable units shall utilize the same type of heating source
as market units within the affordable development.
E. Low/moderate split and bedroom distribution of affordable housing
units.
(1) The fair share obligation shall be divided equally between low- and
moderate-income units, except that where there is an odd number
of affordable housing units, the extra unit shall be a low-income
unit.
(2) In each affordable development, at least 50% of the restricted units
within each bedroom distribution shall be low-income units.
(3) Within rental developments, of the total number of affordable
rental units, at least 13% shall be affordable to very-low-income
households.
(4) Affordable developments that are not age-restricted shall be
structured in conjunction with realistic market demands such that:
(a) The combined number of efficiency and one-bedroom units
shall be no greater than 20% of the total low- and moderateincome
units;
(b) At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
two-bedroom units;
(c) At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
three-bedroom units; and
(d) The remaining units may be allocated among two- and threebedroom
units at the discretion of the developer.
(5) Affordable developments that are age-restricted shall be structured
such that the number of bedrooms shall equal the number of agerestricted
low- and moderate-income units within the inclusionary
development. The standard may be met by having all one-bedroom
units or by having a two-bedroom unit for each efficiency unit.
F. Accessibility requirements.
(1) The first floor of all new restricted townhouse dwelling units and all
restricted multistory dwelling units attached to at least one other
dwelling unit shall be subject to the technical design standards of
the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
(2) All restricted townhouse dwelling units and all restricted
multistory dwelling units attached to at least one other dwelling
unit shall have the following features:
(a) An adaptable toilet and bathing facility on the first floor;
(b) An adaptable kitchen on the first floor;
§ 2-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-4
1:17
(c) An interior accessible route of travel on the first floor;
(d) An interior accessible route of travel shall not be required
between stories within an individual unit;
(e) An adaptable room that can be used as a bedroom, with a door
or the casing for the installation of a door, on the first floor;
and
(f) An accessible entranceway as set forth at P.L. 2005, c. 350
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311a et seq.) and the Barrier Free Subcode,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, or evidence that the Borough has collected
funds from the developer sufficient to make 10% of the
adaptable entrances in the development accessible:
[1] Where a unit has been constructed with an adaptable
entrance, upon the request of a disabled person who is
purchasing or will reside in the dwelling unit, an
accessible entrance shall be installed.
[2] To this end, the builder of restricted units shall deposit
funds within the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus's Affordable
Housing Trust Fund sufficient to install accessible
entrances in 10% of the affordable units that have been
constructed with adaptable entrances.
[3] The funds deposited under Subsection F(2)(f)[2] herein
shall be used by the Borough for the sole purpose of
making the adaptable entrance of any affordable unit
accessible when requested to do so by a person with a
disability who occupies or intends to occupy the unit and
requires an accessible entrance.
[4] The developer of the restricted units shall submit a design
plan and cost estimate for the conversion from adaptable
to accessible entrances to the Construction Official of the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
[5] Once the Construction Official has determined that the
design plan to convert the unit entrances from adaptable
to accessible meets the requirements of the Barrier Free
Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, and that the cost estimate of
such conversion is reasonable, payment shall be made to
the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus's Affordable Housing Trust
Fund in care of the Municipal Treasurer, who shall ensure
that the funds are deposited into the Affordable Housing
Trust Fund and appropriately earmarked.
[6] Full compliance with the foregoing provisions shall not be
required where an entity can demonstrate that it is site
impracticable to meet the requirements. Determinations of
§ 2-4 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 2-4
1:18
site impracticability shall be in compliance with the
Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
G. Maximum rents and sales prices.
(1) In establishing rents and sales prices of affordable housing units,
the administrative agent shall follow the procedures set forth in
UHAC and by the Superior Court, utilizing the regional income
limits established.
(2) The maximum rent for restricted rental units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 60% of median income, and the average rent for
restricted low- and moderate-income units shall be affordable to
households earning no more than 52% of median income.
(3) The developers and/or municipal sponsors of restricted rental units
shall establish at least one rent for each bedroom type for both lowincome
and moderate-income units.
(a) At least 13% of all low- and moderate-income rental units shall
be affordable to households earning no more than 30% of
median income.
(4) The maximum sales price of restricted ownership units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 70% of median income, and each affordable
development must achieve an affordability average of 55% for
restricted ownership units; in achieving this affordability average,
moderate-income ownership units must be available for at least
three different prices for each bedroom type, and low-income
ownership units must be available for at least two different prices
for each bedroom type.
(5) In determining the initial sales prices and rents for compliance with
the affordability average requirements for restricted units other
than assisted living facilities, the following standards shall be met:
(a) A studio or efficiency unit shall be affordable to a one-person
household;
(b) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-one-halfperson
household;
(c) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a three-person
household;
(d) A three-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a four-and-one-halfperson
household; and
(e) A four-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a six-person
household.
§ 2-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-4
1:19
(6) In determining the initial rents for compliance with the
affordability average requirements for restricted units in assisted
living facilities, the following standards shall be met:
(a) A studio or efficiency unit shall be affordable to a one-person
household;
(b) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-one-halfperson
household; and
(c) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a two-person
household or to two one-person households.
(7) The initial purchase price for all restricted ownership units shall be
calculated so that the monthly carrying cost of the unit, including
principal and interest (based on a mortgage loan equal to 95% of
the purchase price and the Federal Reserve H.15 rate of interest),
taxes, homeowner and private mortgage insurance and
condominium or homeowners' association fees do not exceed 28%
of the eligible monthly income of the appropriate size household as
determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and
supplemented; provided, however, that the price shall be subject to
the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may
be amended and supplemented.
(8) The initial rent for a restricted rental unit shall be calculated so as
not to exceed 30% of the eligible monthly income of the appropriate
household size as determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be
amended and supplemented; provided, however, that the rent shall
be subject to the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.3, as may be amended and supplemented.
(9) The price of owner-occupied low- and moderate-income units may
increase annually based on the percentage increase in the regional
median income limit for each housing region. In no event shall the
maximum resale price established by the administrative agent be
lower than the last recorded purchase price. Income limits for all
units for which income limits are not already established through a
federal program exempted from the Uniform Housing Affordability
Controls pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 shall be updated by the
Borough annually within 30 days of the publication of
determinations of median income by HUD as follows: [Amended
3-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-04]
(a) Regional income limits shall be established for Region 1 based
on the median income by household size, which shall be
established by a regional weighted average of the uncapped
Section 8 income limits published by HUD. To compute this
regional income limit, the HUD determination of median
county income for a family of four is multiplied by the
estimated households within the county according to the most
§ 2-4 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 2-4
1:20
§ 2-5. Condominium and homeowners' association fees.
For any affordable housing unit that is part of a condominium association
and/or homeowners' association, the master deed shall reflect that the
recent decennial census. The resulting product for each county
within the housing region is summed. The sum is divided by
the estimated total households from the most recent decennial
census in Region 1. This quotient represents the regional
weighted average of median income for a household of four.
The income limit for a moderate-income unit for a household
of four shall be 80% of the regional weighted average median
income for a family of four. The income limit for a low-income
unit for a household of four shall be 50% of the HUD
determination of the regional weighted average median
income for a family of four. The income limit for a very-lowincome
unit for a household of four shall be 30% of the regional
weighted average median income for a family of four. These
income limits shall be adjusted by household size based on
multipliers used by HUD to adjust median income by
household size. In no event shall the income limits be less than
those for the previous year.
(b) The income limits calculated each year shall be the result of
applying the percentages set forth in Subsection G(9)(a) above
to HUD's determination of median income for the relevant
fiscal year and shall be utilized until the Borough updates the
income limits after HUD has published revised determinations
of median income for the next fiscal year.
(c) The regional asset limit used in determining an applicant's
eligibility for affordable housing pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.16(b)3 shall be calculated by the Borough annually by
taking the percentage increase of the income limits calculated
pursuant to Subsection G(9)(a) above over the previous year's
income limits and applying the same percentage increase to
the regional asset limit from the prior year. In no event shall
the regional asset limit be less than that for the previous year.
(10) The rent levels of very-low-, low- and moderate-income units may
be increased annually based on the percentage increase in the
Housing Consumer Price Index for the Northeast Urban Area, upon
its publication for the prior calendar year. This increase shall not
exceed 9% in any one year. Rents for units constructed pursuant to
low-income housing tax credit regulations shall be indexed
pursuant to the regulations governing low-income housing tax
credits. [Amended 3-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-04]
(11) Tenant-paid utilities that are included in the utility allowance shall
be so stated in the lease and shall be consistent with the utility
allowance approved by DCA for its Section 8 program.
§ 2-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-5
1:21
association fee assessed for each affordable housing unit shall be
established at 100% of the market rate fee.
§ 2-6. through § 2-9. (Reserved)
§ 2-5 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 2-6
1:22
ARTICLE II
Affordable Unit Controls and Requirements
§ 2-10. Purpose.
The requirements of this article apply to all developments that contain
affordable housing units, including any currently unanticipated future
developments that will provide low- and moderate-income housing units.
§ 2-11. Affirmative marketing.
§ 2-12. Occupancy standards.
A. The Borough shall adopt by resolution an Affirmative Marketing Plan,
subject to approval of the Superior Court, compliant with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.15, as may be amended and supplemented.
B. The Affirmative Marketing Plan is a regional marketing strategy
designed to attract buyers and/or renters of all majority and minority
groups, regardless of race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry,
marital or familial status, gender, affectional or sexual orientation,
disability, age or number of children to housing units which are being
marketed by a developer, sponsor or owner of affordable housing. The
Affirmative Marketing Plan is also intended to target those potentially
eligible persons who are least likely to apply for affordable units in that
region. It is a continuing program that directs all marketing activities
toward COAH Housing Region 1 and covers the period of deed
restriction.
C. The Affirmative Marketing Plan shall provide a regional preference for
all households that live and/or work in COAH Housing Region 1,
comprised of Hudson, Bergen, Sussex, and Passaic Counties.
D. The administrative agent designated by the Borough shall assure the
affirmative marketing of all affordable units is consistent with the
Affirmative Marketing Plan for the municipality.
E. In implementing the Affirmative Marketing Plan, the administrative
agent shall provide a list of counseling services to low- and moderateincome
applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit issues,
mortgage qualification, rental lease requirements, and landlord/tenant
law.
F. The affirmative marketing process for available affordable units shall
begin at least four months prior to the expected date of occupancy.
G. The costs of advertising and affirmative marketing of the affordable
units shall be the responsibility of the developer, sponsor or owner,
unless otherwise determined or agreed to by the Borough of Ho-Ho-
Kus.
§ 2-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-12
1:23
§ 2-13. Selection of occupants of affordable housing units.
§ 2-14. Control periods for restricted ownership units and
enforcement mechanisms.
A. In referring certified households to specific restricted units, to the
extent feasible, and without causing an undue delay in occupying the
unit, the administrative agent shall strive to: [Amended 3-27-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-04]
(1) Provide an occupant for each bedroom;
(2) Provide separate bedrooms for parents and children;
(3) Provide children of different sexes with separate bedrooms; and
(4) Prevent more than two persons from occupying a single bedroom.
B. Additional provisions related to occupancy standards (if any) shall be
provided in the municipal operating manual.
A. The administrative agent shall use a random selection process to select
occupants of low- and moderate-income housing.
B. A waiting list of all eligible candidates will be maintained in accordance
with the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26 et seq.
A. Control periods for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5, and each restricted ownership unit shall remain
subject to the controls on affordability for a period of at least 30 years,
until the municipality takes action to release the controls on
affordability. [Amended 3-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-04]
B. Rehabilitated owner-occupied housing units that are improved to code
standards shall be subject to affordability controls for a period of 10
years. [Amended 3-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-04]
C. The affordability control period for a restricted ownership unit shall
commence on the date the initial certified household takes title to the
unit.
D. The affordability controls set forth in this chapter shall remain in effect
despite the entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure with
respect to restricted ownership units.
E. A restricted ownership unit shall be required to obtain a continuing
certificate of occupancy or a certified statement from the Construction
Official stating that the unit meets all code standards upon the first
transfer of title that follows the expiration of the applicable minimum
control period provided under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5(a), as may be amended
and supplemented.
§ 2-12 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 2-15
1:24
§ 2-15. Price restrictions for restricted ownership units,
homeowners' association fees and resale prices.
Price restrictions for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented, including:
§ 2-16. Buyer income eligibility.
§ 2-17. Limitations on indebtedness secured by ownership unit;
subordination.
A. The initial purchase price for a restricted ownership unit shall be
approved by the administrative agent.
B. The administrative agent shall approve all resale prices, in writing and
in advance of the resale, to assure compliance with the foregoing
standards.
C. The method used to determine the condominium association fee
amounts and special assessments shall be indistinguishable between
the low- and moderate-income unit owners and the market unit owners.
D. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
administrative agent to increase the maximum sales price for the unit
on the basis of capital improvements. Eligible capital improvements
shall be those that render the unit suitable for a larger household or the
addition of a bathroom.
A. Buyer income eligibility for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented, such that low-income ownership units shall be reserved
for households with a gross household income less than or equal to 50%
of median income and moderate-income ownership units shall be
reserved for households with a gross household income less than 80%
of median income.
B. The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted ownership unit when the household is a low-income
household or a moderate-income household, as applicable to the unit,
and the estimated monthly housing cost for the particular unit
(including principal, interest, taxes, homeowner and private mortgage
insurance and condominium or homeowners' association fees, as
applicable) does not exceed 33% of the household's certified monthly
income.
A. Prior to incurring any indebtedness to be secured by a restricted
ownership unit, the administrative agent shall determine in writing that
the proposed indebtedness complies with the provisions of this section.
B. With the exception of original purchase money mortgages, during a
control period neither an owner nor a lender shall at any time cause or
permit the total indebtedness secured by a restricted ownership unit to
§ 2-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-17
1:25
§ 2-18. Control periods for restricted rental units.
§ 2-19. Price restrictions for rental units; leases.
§ 2-20. tenant income eligibility.
exceed 95% of the maximum allowable resale price of that unit, as such
price is determined by the administrative agent in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6(b).
A. Control periods for restricted rental units shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11, and each restricted rental unit shall remain subject
to the controls on affordability for a period of at least 30 years, until the
municipality takes action to release the controls on affordability.
B. Rehabilitated renter-occupied housing units that are improved to code
standards shall be subject to affordability controls for a period of 10
years.
C. Deeds of all real property that include restricted rental units shall
contain deed restriction language. The deed restriction shall have
priority over all mortgages on the property, and the deed restriction
shall be filed by the developer or seller with the records office of the
County of Bergen. A copy of the filed document shall be provided to the
administrative agent within 30 days of the receipt of a certificate of
occupancy.
D. A restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the affordability controls
of this chapter, despite the occurrence of any of the following events:
(1) Sublease or assignment of the lease of the unit;
(2) Sale or other voluntary transfer of the ownership of the unit; or
(3) The entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure.
A. A written lease shall be required for all restricted rental units, except
for units in an assisted living residence, and tenants shall be
responsible for security deposits and the full amount of the rent as
stated on the lease. A copy of the current lease for each restricted
rental unit shall be provided to the administrative agent.
B. No additional fees or charges shall be added to the approved rent
(except, in the case of units in an assisted living residence, to cover the
customary charges for food and services) without the express written
approval of the administrative agent.
C. Application fees (including the charge for any credit check) shall not
exceed 5% of the monthly rent of the applicable restricted unit and shall
be payable to the administrative agent to be applied to the costs of
administering the controls applicable to the unit as set forth in this
chapter.
§ 2-17 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 2-20
1:26
§ 2-21. Conversions.
Each housing unit created through the conversion of a nonresidential
structure shall be considered a new housing unit and shall be subject to the
affordability controls for a new housing unit.
A. Tenant income eligibility shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.13, as may be amended and supplemented, and shall be
determined as follows:
(1) Very low income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than or equal to 30% of median
income.
(2) Low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with a
gross household income less than or equal to 50% of median
income.
(3) Moderate-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than 80% of median income.
B. The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted rental unit when the household is a very-low-income, lowincome
or a moderate-income household, as applicable to the unit, and
the rent proposed for the unit does not exceed 35% (40% for agerestricted
units) of the household's eligible monthly income as
determined pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16, as may be amended and
supplemented; provided, however, that this limit may be exceeded if
one or more of the following circumstances exists:
(1) The household currently pays more than 35% (40% for households
eligible for age-restricted units) of its gross household income for
rent, and the proposed rent will reduce its housing costs;
(2) The household has consistently paid more than 35% (40% for
households eligible for age-restricted units) of eligible monthly
income for rent in the past and has proven its ability to pay;
(3) The household is currently in substandard or overcrowded living
conditions;
(4) The household documents the existence of assets with which the
household proposes to supplement the rent payments; or
(5) The household documents proposed third-party assistance from an
outside source, such as a family member, in a form acceptable to
the administrative agent and the owner of the unit.
C. The applicant shall file documentation sufficient to establish the
existence of the circumstances in Subsection B(1) through (5) above
with the administrative agent, who shall counsel the household on
budgeting.
§ 2-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-22
1:27
§ 2-22. through § 2-24. (Reserved)
§ 2-22 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 2-22
1:28
ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 2-25. Municipal Housing Liaison.
§ 2-26. Administrative agent.
A. The position of Municipal Housing Liaison for the Borough of Ho-Ho-
Kus is hereby established. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be
appointed by duly adopted resolution of the Borough Council and be
subject to the approval by the Superior Court.
B. The Municipal Housing Liaison must be either a full-time or part-time
employee of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
C. The Municipal Housing Liaison must meet the requirements for
qualifications, including initial and periodic training found in N.J.A.C.
5:93.5
D. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight and
administration of the affordable housing program for the Borough of
Ho-Ho-Kus, including the following responsibilities, which may not be
contracted out to the administrative agent:
(1) Serving as the municipality's primary point of contact for all
inquiries from the state, affordable housing providers,
administrative agents and interested households;
(2) The implementation of the Affirmative Marketing Plan and
affordability controls.
(3) When applicable, supervising any contracting administrative agent.
(4) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in the Borough of Ho-
Ho-Kus's Fair Share Plan;
(5) Compiling, verifying and submitting annual reports as required by
the Superior Court;
(6) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as applicable; and
(7) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by the Superior Court.
A. The Borough shall designate by resolution of the Borough Council,
subject to the approval of the Superior Court, one or more
administrative agents to administer newly constructed affordable units
in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:936 and UHAC.
5. Editor's Note: The regulations in N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired October 16, 2016.
6. Editor's Note: The regulations in N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired October 16, 2016.
§ 2-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-26
1:29
§ 2-27. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
B. An operating manual shall be provided by the administrative agent(s) to
be adopted by resolution of the governing body and subject to approval
of the Superior Court. The operating manuals shall be available for
public inspection in the office of the Municipal Clerk and in the office(s)
of the administrative agent(s).
C. Duties and responsibilities.
(1) The administrative agent shall perform the duties and
responsibilities of an administrative agent as are set forth in UHAC
and which are described in full detail in the operating manual,
including those set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.14, 5:80-26.16 and
5:80-26.18 thereof, which includes:
(a) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by the Superior Court;
(b) Affirmative marketing;
(c) Household certification;
(d) Affordability controls;
(e) Records retention;
(f) Resale and rerental;
(g) Processing requests from unit owners; and
(h) Enforcement, although the ultimate responsibility for retaining
controls on the units rests with the municipality.
(2) The administrative agent shall, as delegated by the Borough
Committee, have the authority to take all actions necessary and
appropriate to carry out its responsibilities, hereunder.
A. Upon the occurrence of a breach of any of the regulations governing the
affordable unit by an owner, developer or tenant, the municipality shall
have all remedies provided at law or equity, including but not limited to
foreclosure, tenant eviction, municipal fines, a requirement for
household recertification, acceleration of all sums due under a
mortgage, recoupment of any funds from a sale in the violation of the
regulations, injunctive relief to prevent further violation of the
regulations, entry on the premises, and specific performance.
B. After providing written notice of a violation to an owner, developer or
tenant of a low- or moderate-income unit and advising the owner,
developer or tenant of the penalties for such violations, the municipality
may take the following action against the owner, developer or tenant for
§ 2-26 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 2-27
1:30
any violation that remains uncured for a period of 60 days after service
of the written notice:
(1) The municipality may file a Court action pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2A:58-11 alleging a violation, or violations, of the regulations
governing the affordable housing unit. If the owner, developer or
tenant is found by the Court to have violated any provision of the
regulations governing affordable housing units, the owner,
developer or tenant shall be subject to one or more of the following
penalties, at the discretion of the Court:
(a) A fine of not more than $500 or imprisonment for a period not
to exceed 90 days, or both. Each and every day that the
violation continues or exists shall be considered a separate and
specific violation of these provisions and not as a continuing
offense.
(b) In the case of an owner who has rented his or her low- or
moderate-income unit in violation of the regulations governing
affordable housing units, payment into the Borough of Ho-Ho-
Kus Affordable Housing Trust Fund of the gross amount of rent
illegally collected.
(c) In the case of an owner who has rented his or her low- or
moderate-income unit in violation of the regulations governing
affordable housing units, payment of an innocent tenant's
reasonable relocation costs, as determined by the Court.
(2) The municipality may file a Court action in the Superior Court
seeking a judgment, which would result in the termination of the
owner's equity or other interest in the unit, in the nature of a
mortgage foreclosure. Any judgment shall be enforceable as if the
same were a judgment of default of the first purchase money
mortgage and shall constitute a lien against the low- and moderateincome
unit.
C. Such judgment shall be enforceable, at the option of the municipality,
by means of an execution sale by the Sheriff, at which time the low- and
moderate-income unit of the violating owner shall be sold at a sale price
which is not less than the amount necessary to fully satisfy and pay off
any first purchase money mortgage and prior liens and the costs of the
enforcement proceedings incurred by the municipality, including
attorney's fees. The violating owner shall have the right to possession
terminated as well as the title conveyed pursuant to the Sheriff's sale.
D. The proceeds of the Sheriff's sale shall first be applied to satisfy the first
purchase money mortgage lien and any prior liens upon the low- and
moderate-income unit. The excess, if any, shall be applied to reimburse
the municipality for any and all costs and expenses incurred in
connection with either the Court action resulting in the judgment of
violation or the Sheriff's sale. In the event that the proceeds from the
Sheriff's sale are insufficient to reimburse the municipality in full as
§ 2-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-27
1:31
aforesaid, the violating owner shall be personally responsible for and to
the extent of such deficiency, in addition to any and all costs incurred
by the municipality in connection with collecting such deficiency. In
the event that a surplus remains after satisfying all of the above, such
surplus, if any, shall be placed in escrow by the municipality for the
owner and shall be held in such escrow for a maximum period of two
years or until such earlier time as the owner shall make a claim with the
municipality for such. Failure of the owner to claim such balance within
the two-year period shall automatically result in a forfeiture of such
balance to the municipality. Any interest accrued or earned on such
balance while being held in escrow shall belong to and shall be paid to
the municipality, whether such balance shall be paid to the owner or
forfeited to the municipality.
E. Foreclosure by the municipality due to violation of the regulations
governing affordable housing units shall not extinguish the restrictions
of the regulations governing affordable housing units as the same apply
to the low- and moderate-income unit. Title shall be conveyed to the
purchaser at the Sheriff's sale, subject to the restrictions and provisions
of the regulations governing the affordable housing unit. The owner
determined to be in violation of the provisions of this plan and from
whom title and possession were taken by means of the Sheriff's sale
shall not be entitled to any right of redemption.
F. If there are no bidders at the Sheriff's sale, or if insufficient amounts
are bid to satisfy the first purchase money mortgage and any prior liens,
the municipality may acquire title to the low- and moderate-income unit
by satisfying the first purchase money mortgage and any prior liens and
crediting the violating owner with an amount equal to the difference
between the first purchase money mortgage and any prior liens and
costs of the enforcement proceedings, including legal fees and the
maximum resale price for which the low- and moderate-income unit
could have been sold under the terms of the regulations governing
affordable housing units. This excess shall be treated in the same
manner as the excess which would have been realized from an actual
sale as previously described.
G. Failure of the low- and moderate-income unit to be either sold at the
Sheriff's sale or acquired by the municipality shall obligate the owner to
accept an offer to purchase from any qualified purchaser which may be
referred to the owner by the municipality, with such offer to purchase
being equal to the maximum resale price of the low- and moderateincome
unit as permitted by the regulations governing affordable
housing units.
H. The owner shall remain fully obligated, responsible and liable for
complying with the terms and restrictions of governing affordable
housing units until such time as title is conveyed from the owner.
§ 2-27 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 2-28
1:32
§ 2-28. Appeals.
Appeals from all decisions of an administrative agent designated pursuant
to this chapter shall be filed in writing with the Borough.
§ 2-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-28
1:33
Chapter 3
AMBULANCE CORPS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Volunteer incentives — See Ch. 80.
§ 2-28 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 2-28
1:34
ARTICLE I
Department Established
§ 3-1. Ambulance Corps established.
There shall be appointed by the Mayor of the Borough a committee of two
members who shall act as liaison to the Ambulance Corps. Members as
hereinafter provided shall comprise the Ambulance Corps of the Borough.
§ 3-2. Membership.
The membership of said Corps shall not exceed 60 in number. Any person of
at least 16 years of age, of good moral character, who is a resident of Ho-
Ho-Kus, a surrounding community or gainfully employed within the Borough
shall be eligible for acceptance to membership in the Corps. Each applicant
must be physically fit to perform the duties of a Corps member. Applicants
must be able to read, write and speak the English language. Applicants
must not have been convicted of a criminal offense. Every person accepted
to membership in the Corps shall sign the membership roll which shall be
kept by the Borough Clerk, and such member shall promise to perform all
the duties of Corps member as prescribed by the bylaws and rules of the
Corps and the ordinances of the Borough.
§ 3-2.1. Application for membership; procedure.
A. Every person seeking to join the Corps shall make application to the
Captain or such other officer designated to receive applications, who
shall date each application with the time of receipt and shall number
the application according to its order of receipt. The Captain or officer
designated to receive applications shall promptly send written notice to
each applicant stating the number of their application and the date and
time in which it was received.
B. An Executive Board shall be solely responsible for evaluating and ruling
upon applications for membership. The Board, within 60 days of receipt
of an application, shall make a report to the Corps as to whether or not
the applicant qualifies for membership. Its decision shall be binding on
the Corps, and no vote of the membership shall be conducted on the
issue of whether or not an applicant shall be admitted to membership.
Qualified applicants shall be admitted in the order in which their
applications were received in the manner set forth above, as soon as
vacancies exist. If, at any time, the number of qualified applicants
exceeds the number of current vacancies, a waiting list shall be
established according to the order in which the applications were
received, and appointments shall be made to the Corps in that same
order.
C. If the Executive Board determines that an applicant does not meet the
minimum requirements for membership, the Captain shall promptly
advise the applicant, in writing, of their rejection, and the qualifications
which the applicant has not met shall be described with particularity.
§ 3-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-3
1:35
§ 3-3. Bylaws and rules.
The Ambulance Corps shall adopt bylaws and make rules for the
government of the Corps which shall be subject to the approval and
confirmation of the Mayor and Council.
§ 3-4. Officers.
The officers of the Ambulance Corps shall be President, Vice President,
Recording Secretary, Corresponding Secretary, Treasurer and Corps
Captain, all of whom shall be elected by the members of the Corps. All
officers shall be subject to confirmation of the Mayor and Council. In the
event that the Mayor and Council fails to confirm an officer so elected, the
Mayor shall appoint a member of the Corps to fill the vacancy so created
until an officer is elected by the Corps and confirmed by the Mayor and
Council.
§ 3-5. Suspension or expulsion of members or officers.
The Borough Council shall have the right to expel or suspend any member
or officer based upon charges preferred by Executive Board and a trial by
the Council.
§ 3-6. Monthly report by Captain.
It shall be the duty of the Captain to report to the Council at its meeting
each month the activities of the Corps, the condition of the rigs and
equipment and upon such other matters as he/she shall deem advisable.
§ 3-7. Badge and certificate of membership.
Each member of the Corps shall, upon signing the roll, be entitled to receive
a badge and certificate of membership signed by the Mayor, Borough Clerk
and Secretary of the Corps. The badge shall remain the property of the
Corps and shall be surrendered to the Borough on the death, resignation,
suspension or expulsion of any member.
§ 3-8. Members to serve without compensation.
The services of the members of the Ambulance Corps shall be voluntary and
without compensation.
§ 3-9. Amendment of chapter and bylaws.
The Borough Council shall have the right to alter or amend this chapter
and the bylaws adopted by the Corps from time to time as it shall deem
advisable.
§ 3-3 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 3-10
1:36
§ 3-10. Junior Auxiliary.
There is hereby established as part of the Ambulance Corps of the Borough
a Junior Corps Auxiliary in accordance with all of the provisions of law. The
qualifications for membership in the Auxiliary shall be as follows:
§ 3-11. Appropriation of funds.
There shall be appropriated in the budget or budgets of the Borough of Ho-
Ho-Kus sufficient funds to be held in a trust fund to pay any claims which
may be determined to be eligible under this chapter.
§ 3-12. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication as
provided by law.
A. A junior member is eligible to join the Corps between the ages of 16 and
18. When he/she reaches the age of 18, he/she is eligible to transfer into
senior membership subject to bylaws, Section 1, Subparagraphs L and
K. Further guidelines regarding junior membership shall be stated in
the rules and regulations or bylaws.
B. Membership shall be conditioned upon acceptance by the Corps and
confirmation of the Borough Council. Upon such approval, such
member shall sign the membership roll which shall be kept by the
Borough Clerk and he/she shall promise to perform all the duties of a
junior member as prescribed by the bylaws and rules of the Ambulance
Corps.
C. Every member of the Junior Auxiliary shall be required to obtain
permission to join the Auxiliary from his/her parents or guardians, and
such permission shall be in writing, acknowledged or proved in the
manner provided by law for deeds to real estate.
§ 3-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-12
1:37
Chapter 3A
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 25.
Miscellaneous offenses — See Ch. 38.
Police Department — See Ch. 46.
§ 3A-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM BUSINESS — Any business operated by a person, partnership,
corporation or other business entity, for profit, which engages in the activity
of altering, installing, leasing, maintaining, repairing, replacing, selling,
servicing or responding to a fire or burglar alarm system or which causes
any of these activities to take place. This definition does not include those
retail establishments which only sell alarm devices or alarm systems over
the counter.
ALARM DEVICE — Any type of alarm-activating equipment which provides
warning of burglary, intrusion, fire, flood or other potential for harm to life
or property. Medical alert devices, smoke detectors and carbon monoxide
detectors not integrated/connected into a central alarm receiving station
are exempt from the registration provisions of this chapter.
ALARM MALFUNCTION — An alarm system failing to operate or work
properly.
ALARM SYSTEM — The installation in a building or structure of one or
more alarm devices for the express purpose of giving visual, audible and/or
electronic warning of an emergency such as burglary, intrusion, fire, flood
or other potential for harm to life or property.
ALARM USER — Any person, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization or authorized agent thereof of any kind in control
of any building, structure or facility wherein an alarm device or alarm
system is operated.
FALSE ALARM — An alarm signal eliciting a response by police, firefighters,
other emergency personnel or other public officials when a situation
requiring a response by police, firefighters, other emergency personnel or
other public officials does not in fact exist. A false alarm shall not include an
alarm signal caused by violent conditions of nature, such as, but not limited
to, lightning, tornadoes, hurricanes, windy conditions, power issues or other
extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm
business or alarm user.
§ 3-12 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 3A-1
1:38
INDEPENDENT SMOKE/FIRE DETECTOR — A device giving an audible
alarm indicating smoke and/or fire within a structure and not connected to
an alarm system or to any external warning device.
§ 3A-2. Registration of alarm device or alarm system; fees.
A. No person or business entity shall install, operate or maintain any alarm
device or alarm system unless the alarm device or alarm system is
annually registered with the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus Police Department.
An alarm device or alarm system shall be deemed registered at such
time as a registration form supplied by the Police Department is
completed as to all information requested therein and is returned to the
Police Department along with the annual registration fee paid in full.
This registration shall take place no later than January 30 or within 30
days of installation of a new system; provided, however, that any alarm
device or system installed before the effective date hereof shall be
registered within 45 days of the adoption of this chapter. Among the
information to be provided on the registration form is the following:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the
property upon which the alarm device or alarm system is installed.
(2) The name, address and telephone number of the manager of the
property upon which the alarm device or alarm system is installed,
if applicable.
(3) A list of the names, addresses and telephone numbers of at least
three persons to be contacted in the event of an alarm or in an
emergency situation as determined by the Police Department or
Fire Department.
(4) The name, address and telephone number of the installer of the
alarm device or alarm system.
(5) The type of alarm device or alarm system.
(6) The name, address and telephone number of the person(s) or
company maintaining the alarm device or alarm system.
B. Subsequent to the annual registration period, if there is any material
change in the information previously provided during the annual
registration with respect to any alarm device or alarm system, it shall
be the duty of the property owner or manager to file an amended
registration form containing accurate current information within 10
days of the change.
C. The change in ownership of a property with an alarm system shall be
deemed a material change and shall require the filing of a new
registration form submitted to the Police Department along with the
annual fee.
D. An initial registration fee for an alarm system shall be $100.
§ 3A-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3A-2
1:39
§ 3A-3. False alarms.
§ 3A-4. Operation of alarm device or alarm system.
E. The annual fee in the amount of $25 shall accompany each annual
registration form.
F. In addition to the penalty noticed in § 3A-5 below, any alarm device or
alarm system installed prior to January 30 that is not registered with
the Police Department by January 30 may be subject to a late fee of $10
per month.
A. The Police Department shall cause a record to be made of all alarms,
inclusive of all false alarms, in any calendar year. The following
penalties shall apply to the person responsible for any alarm device:
(1) For the first through third false alarms and alarm malfunctions, a
written warning shall be issued.
(2) For the fourth and fifth false alarms and alarm malfunctions, there
shall be imposed a fine of $50 for each such false alarm or alarm
malfunction.
(3) For the sixth through ninth false alarms and alarm malfunctions,
there shall be imposed a fine of $150 for each such false alarm or
alarm malfunction.
(4) For the 10th and subsequent false alarms and alarm malfunctions,
there shall be imposed a fine of $250 for each such false alarm or
alarm malfunction.
(5) In addition to the penalty noted above, any owner or user of an
alarm system (other than a fire alarm system) which experiences
more than 12 false alarms in any calendar period may be required
to disconnect said alarm system for a period of 90 days, unless said
system is required by law, and provide a statement from those that
service the alarm system that the malfunction has been corrected.
B. Fire alarm systems. Any owner or user of an alarm device or alarm
system which experiences more than four fire false alarms within any
twelve-month period shall be required by the Fire Department to
modify or improve said system in such a way as to prevent accidental
activation and may be subject to penalty by the Fire Prevention Bureau
in accordance with the Uniform Fire Code (N.J.A.C. 5:70-1.1 et seq.) or
other applicable law. Prior to modifying any required system, the owner
shall submit a construction permit application showing the design and
nature of the proposed modifications.
A. All burglar alarm devices or alarm systems must be provided with a
device which will automatically shut off the audible alarm function only
after 15 minutes of activation.
§ 3A-2 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 3A-4
1:40
§ 3A-5. Violations and penalties.
§ 3A-6. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any alarm device or alarm
system installed on property occupied by any Borough, county, state or
B. All burglar alarm devices or alarm systems not fitted with an external
key switch shall be equipped with a time delay of at least 15 seconds,
which may include an audible signal of the same length of time, said
time delay to be designed to prevent accidental activation of the
system. The fifteen-second signal, if utilized, shall be audible only
within the structure and not externally.
C. In the event that an alarm device or alarm system other than a fire or
burglar alarm system is tied into and/or serviced by a central station or
answering service, upon activation of said alarm device or alarm
system, the central station or answering service shall verify the validity
of the alarm prior to notifying the Police Department of the same. Autodialing
systems calling E911 or any other public safety phone number
with a recorded message are prohibited.
D. The resetting of any transmitted fire alarm shall be done in the
presence of the Fire Department. In no case shall an alarm be reset
prior to the Fire Department's authorization. In the case of burglar
alarms, the Police Department shall not be responsible for resetting the
alarm device or alarm system.
A. Maximum penalty. For violation of any provision of this chapter,
including the failure to register an alarm device or alarm system, the
maximum penalty, upon conviction, shall be one or more of the
following: a fine not exceeding $1,000, or imprisonment for a period not
exceeding 90 days, or a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, at the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5, as
amended).
B. Separate violations. Except as otherwise provided, every day in which a
violation of any provision of this chapter exists shall constitute a
separate violation.
C. Application. The maximum penalty stated in this section is not intended
to state an appropriate penalty for every violation. Any less penalty,
including a nominal penalty or no penalty at all, may be appropriate for
a particular case or violation.
D. Additional remedies. The imposition of a penalty as provided in
Subsection A above shall be in addition to any injunctive or remedial
relief which is authorized under the laws of the state, with the same
force and effect as though provided for in this Code. Such penalty shall
not be deemed to be in lieu of any provision for revocation or
suspension of any license or permit.
§ 3A-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3A-6
1:41
federal government agency or office or to alarms used for medical
emergencies only.
§ 3A-7. Response to alarms.
§ 3A-8. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such
inconsistency.
§ 3A-9. Severability.
If any portion of this chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate
the remainder of this chapter, but shall be confined in its effect to the
provision directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall
have been rendered.
§ 3A-10. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect after final passage and publication as required
by law.
Chapter 4
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 4-1. Purpose.
This chapter is adopted for the purpose of regulating the time for the
sale of alcoholic beverages in the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, in the County
of Bergen, in accordance with the provisions of the Act of the legislature
entitled "Alcoholic Beverage Law," being Title 33, Chapter 1, of the Revised
Statutes of 1937,7 its supplements and amendments, and in accordance
A. In response to any alarm signal indicating panic or medical emergency,
as so authorized by the alarm system owner in the permit application,
the Police Department and/or Fire Department may enter the premises,
by force if necessary, to respond to such signal, and the Borough of Ho-
Ho-Kus and its various departments, agencies and officials shall be held
harmless from and on account of any and all damages arising out of
such entry.
B. Any panic or medical emergency alarm which has not been properly
registered with the Police Department in accordance with this chapter
will be considered a real emergency, and entry will be made to the
premises, by force if necessary, in response to such signal. In such
cases, the Borough and its various departments, agencies, and officials
shall be held harmless from and on account of any and all damages
arising out of such entry.
§ 3A-6 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 4-1
1:42
with the rules and regulations issued or to be promulgated by the State
Commissioner of Alcoholic Beverage Control, applicable thereto.
§ 4-2. Hours of sale.
No licensee shall sell, serve, deliver or allow, permit or suffer the sale,
service or delivery of any alcoholic beverage, nor allow the consumption of
any alcoholic beverage on the licensed premises, on New Year's Day when it
is a weekday, between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.; on New Year's
Day when it is a Sunday, between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon; on
other weekdays, between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.; nor on other
Sundays, between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon.
§ 4-3. Plenary retail consumption and distribution licenses.
[Amended 5-22-1951 by Ord. No. 284; 12-22-1970 by Ord. No. 459;
4-22-1975 by Ord. No. 486]
All licenses shall be for a term of one year, from July 1 in each year. The
respective fees for any such licenses shall be prorated according to the
effective date of such license and based on the respective annual fee, as
hereinafter provided. The annual license fee and the number of licenses
governing the sale and distribution of licensing privileges in the Borough of
Ho-Ho-Kus shall be as follows:
§ 4-4. Club licenses. [Added 1-28-1958 by Ord. No. 358]
A. Not more than one plenary retail consumption license, the annual fee
for which shall continue to be $1,000, and shall be increased annually
as follows:
(1) Commencing July 1, 1975, the sum of $1,200.
(2) Commencing July 1, 1976, the sum of $1,440.
(3) Commencing July 1, 1977, the sum of $1,725.
(4) Commencing July 1, 1978, and for every license year thereafter
unless this chapter is amended, the sum of $2,000.
B. Not more than five plenary retail distribution licenses, the annual fee
for each shall continue to be $400, and shall be increased annually as
follows:
(1) Commencing July 1, 1975, the sum of $480.
(2) Commencing July 1, 1976, the sum of $575.
(3) Commencing July 1, 1977, the sum of $690.
(4) Commencing July 1, 1978, the sum of $825.
7. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.
§ 4-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-4
1:43
§ 4-5. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect when passed and published as required by law.
Chapter 5
ANIMALS, PROHIBITED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cats — See Ch. 13.
Dogs — See Ch. 18.
Wildlife feeding — See Ch. 82.
§ 5-1. Purpose and intent.
This chapter is adopted in order to protect the health, safety and well-being
of persons and property by prohibiting certain animals within the Borough
of Ho-Ho-Kus. The Borough Council of Ho-Ho-Kus finds that the harboring
of certain animals within the Borough may be offensive to other residents
so as to constitute a public nuisance and may pose a threat to the safety of
its inhabitants and their property.
§ 5-2. Prohibited animals.
A. The annual fee for a club license [provided for in N.J.S.A. 33:1-12(5) and
State Regulation No. 7] is hereby fixed at $50.
B. Not more than one such license shall be issued in the Borough of Ho-
Ho-Kus.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or have in his or
her possession or under his or her control or to permit another to keep,
maintain or have under his or her control within the Borough limits of
the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus any poisonous or constricting reptile or any
other dangerous or carnivorous wild animal or reptile or any other
animal or reptile of wild, vicious or dangerous propensities.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or have in his or
her possession or under his or her control within the Borough limits of
the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus any of the following animals, including but
not limited to all dangerous mammals and avian; all poisonous and
constricting reptiles and animals, including vipers; boas; pythons; apes;
arachnids; chimpanzees; gibbons; gorillas; orangutans; siamangs;
baboons; bears; bison; bobcats; cheetahs; crocodilians; coyotes;
elephants; gamecocks and other fighting birds; hippopotami; hyenas;
jaguars; leopards; lions; lynx; monkeys (except those licensed for
handicapped assistance); pumas, also known as "cougars," "mountain
lions" and "panthers"; rhinoceroses; snow leopards; tigers; wolves;
cattle bulls; elk; moose; wolverines; and badgers.
§ 4-4 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 5-3
1:44
§ 5-3. Exemption.
Any of the animals set forth in this chapter which have been kept,
maintained, possessed or controlled by any person within the Borough
limits of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus prior to the effective date of this chapter
shall be grandfathered and exempt from the regulations herein. However,
the owner or any person keeping, maintaining or having possession or
control of such animal(s) must nevertheless register such animal(s) with
the Animal Control Officer within 60 days from the effective date hereof.
No offspring or replacement of such exempt animal(s) shall be entitled to a
continued exemption.
§ 5-4. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Animal Control
Officer or any police officer of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
§ 5-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
Chapter 6
AUTOMOBILE AND MOTORCYCLE RACING
§ 6-1. Racing prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to give or hold any public or private exhibitions of
the racing of automobiles, motorcycles or other motor vehicles within the
confines of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
§ 6-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, firm or corporation giving or taking part in or
permitting any grounds, buildings, vehicles or structures to be used for such
purposes shall be subject to a fine of not less than $500 or imprisonment
for 30 days, or both, as the committing Magistrate in his discretion may
determine.
§ 6-3. Repealer.
Any ordinance or parts of ordinances heretofore adopted, inconsistent with
any of the provisions of this chapter, are hereby repealed.
§ 5-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-4
1:45
§ 6-4. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect 10 days after the publication thereof as
required by law.
Chapter 7
BACKGROUND CHECKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Borough personnel — See Ch. 10.
Police Department — See Ch. 46.
Board of Recreation Commissioners — See
Ch. 51A.
§ 6-4 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 6-4
1:46
ARTICLE I
Criminal History Record Background Checks
[Adopted 2-26-2013 by Ord. No. 1015]
§ 7-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH-SPONSORED PROGRAM — Any program sponsored by the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus or any group or organization approved by the
Recreation Commission.
CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD BACKGROUND CHECK — A determination
of whether a person has a criminal record by cross-referencing that
person's name and/or fingerprints with those on file with the Federal
Bureau of Investigation, Identification Division, and/or the State Bureau of
Identification of the New Jersey State Police.
CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD INFORMATION or CHRI — Information
collected by criminal justice agencies concerning persons and stored in the
computerized databases of the New Jersey State Police SBI Criminal History
Information System, the National Law Enforcement Telecommunications
System or other states' computerized repositories containing criminal
history record information consisting of identifiable descriptions and
notations of arrests, indictments, or other formal criminal charges, and
any dispositions arising therefrom, including convictions, dismissals,
correctional supervision and release.
DEPARTMENT — The Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus Police Department.
NONCRIMINAL JUSTICE PURPOSE — Any purpose, other than
administration of criminal justice or criminal justice purpose, including
employment and licensing, for which applicant fingerprints or name search
requests are submitted by authorized requesters, as required or permitted
by a federal or state statute, rule or regulation, executive order,
administrative code provision, local ordinance or resolution or by this
article, to the State Bureau of Identification for the dissemination of
criminal history record information.
NONPROFIT YOUTH-SERVING ORGANIZATION or ORGANIZATION —
Any corporation, association or other organization established pursuant to
Title 15 of the Revised Statutes, Title 15A of the New Jersey Statutes, or
other law of this state, but excluding public and nonpublic schools, and
which provides recreational, cultural, charitable, social or other activities
or services for persons younger than 18 years of age and is exempt from
federal income taxes.
STATE BUREAU OF IDENTIFICATION or SBI — The New Jersey State
Bureau of Identification created by P.L. 1930, c.65 (N.J.S.A. 52:1-12 et seq.),
a bureau within the Division of State Police.
§ 7-2. Request for criminal background checks; costs.
§ 7-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-2
1:47
§ 7-3. Submissions; exchange of background check information.
§ 7-4. Conditions under which person is disqualified from service.
A. The Borough requires that all employees and volunteers, 18 years of
age and older, participating in any activity sponsored by the Borough of
Ho-Ho-Kus, the Ho-Ho-Kus Recreation Commission or any nonprofit
youth-serving organization approved by the Borough or its Recreation
Commission, undergo through the State Bureau of Identification a
criminal history record background check on each prospective and
current employee, volunteer or participant. Each employee, volunteer
and participant shall be required to undergo the background check not
less than once every three years, provided that the Borough reserves
the right to require more frequent testing.
B. The Division of State Police shall inform the Department and the
individual whether the person's criminal history record background
check reveals a conviction of a disqualifying crime or offense set forth
in § 7-4 of this article.
C. Prior to the conducting of a criminal history background check, the
employee, volunteer or participant shall provide written consent in
connection therewith.
D. Either the volunteer or participant or the respective recreation groups
and/or organizations and/or their volunteers shall bear the costs
associated with conducting the criminal history record background
checks.
A. Prospective or current employees, volunteers and participants of
nonprofit youth-serving organizations and/or employees and volunteers
of Borough-sponsored programs shall submit their name, address,
fingerprints, or other required information and written consent to the
Recreation Commission or such other person or entity designated by
the Borough for the criminal history record background check to be
performed. Upon receipt thereof, the Recreation Commission or the
person or entity designated by the Borough shall submit this
documentation to the State Bureau of Identification.
B. The Department shall act as a clearinghouse for the collection and
dissemination of information obtained as a result of conducting criminal
history record background checks pursuant to this article.
C. The Recreation Commission and/or the person designated by the
Borough may, in their discretion, engage the services of a third-party
independent agency or a volunteer group authorized by the Chief of
Police to conduct the criminal history record background checks
authorized under this article.
A. A person may be disqualified from serving as an employee or volunteer
of a nonprofit youth-serving organization if that person's criminal
§ 7-2 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 7-4
1:48
§ 7-5. Limitations on access and use of background checks.
history record background check reveals a record of conviction of any
of the following crimes or offenses:
(1) In New Jersey, any crime or disorderly persons offense:
(a) Involving danger to the person, meaning those crimes and
disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1 et seq.,
N.J.S.A. 2C:12-1 et seq., N.J.S.A. 2C:13-1 et seq., N.J.S.A.
2C:14-1 et seq., or N.J.S.A. 2C:15-1 et seq.
(b) Against the family, children or incompetents, meaning those
crimes and disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A.
2C:14-1 et seq.
(c) Involving theft as set forth in Chapter 20 of Title 2C of the New
Jersey Statutes.
(d) Involving any controlled dangerous substance or controlled
substance analog as set forth in Chapter 35 of Title 2C of the
New Jersey Statutes except paragraph (4) of Subdivision (a) of
N.J.S.A. 2C:35-10.
(2) In any other state or jurisdiction, conduct which, if committed in
New Jersey, would constitute any of the crimes or disorderly
persons offenses described in Subsection A(1) of this section.
B. For purposes of interpreting the information recorded in a criminal
history record to determine the qualifications of the employee or
volunteer of a nonprofit youth-serving organization and/or the
employee or volunteer involved with Borough-sponsored programs
involving minors, the Borough shall presume that the employee or
volunteer is innocent of any charges or arrests for which there are no
final dispositions on the record.
C. The determination of whether the information contained in the criminal
history record is sufficient to disqualify an employee or volunteer shall
be made by the State Police. Any employee or volunteer dissatisfied
with the determination shall be entitled to file an appeal with the
Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel created pursuant to this
article.
A. Access to criminal history record information for noncriminal justice
purposes, including licensing and employment, is restricted to the
Police Department and Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel, on a
need-to- know basis, as authorized by federal or state statute, rule or
regulation, executive order, administrative code, local ordinance or
resolution regarding obtaining and dissemination of criminal history
record information obtained under this article.
§ 7-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-5
1:49
§ 7-6. Challenge of accuracy of report.
If this criminal history record may disqualify an applicant or existing
employee or volunteer for any purpose, the disqualified person shall have
an opportunity to complete and challenge the accuracy of the information
contained in the criminal history record or request an exception. The
disqualified person shall be afforded a reasonable period of time to correct
and complete this record. A person is not presumed guilty of any charges or
arrests for which there are no final dispositions indicated on the record.
§ 7-7. Appeal process; Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel.
B. Such persons or organizations shall limit their use of criminal history
record information solely to the authorized purpose for which it was
obtained, and criminal history record information furnished shall not be
disseminated to persons or organizations not authorized to receive the
records for authorized purposes. Use of this record shall be limited
solely to the authorized purpose for which it was given, and it shall not
be disseminated to any unauthorized persons. This record shall be
destroyed immediately after it has served its intended and authorized
purpose. Any person violating federal or state regulations governing
access to criminal history record information may be subject to criminal
and/or civil penalties.
A. Criminal background check appeal process. If the State Police
disqualifies an employee or volunteer, the employee or volunteer may
appeal that disqualification by filing a written notice of appeal with the
Chief of Police no later than 20 days after receiving notice of the
disqualification from the State Police. Any appeal requested shall
proceed before the Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel.
B. Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel. In order to monitor and
supervise the enforcement of this article, the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus
hereby creates a Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel, which shall
consist of three members. The composition of the Criminal Background
Check Appeal Panel shall be as follows:
(1) One member of the Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel shall
be the Police Chief, or his/her designee.
(2) One member of the Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel shall
be the President or Chair of the Recreation Commission.
(3) One member of the Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel shall
be a member of the Ho-Ho-Kus Police Department selected by the
Chief of Police.
C. Powers. The Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel is granted and
shall have and exercise, in addition to other powers herein granted, all
the powers necessary and appropriate to carry out and execute the
purposes of this article, including but not limited to the following:
§ 7-5 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 7-7
1:50
§ 7-8. Severability.
If any section, sentence or any other part of this article is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair, or
invalidate the remainder of this article but shall be confined in its effect to
the section, sentence or other part of this article directly involved in the
controversy which such judgment shall be rendered.
§ 7-9. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this article are hereby repealed, but only to the extent of such
inconsistencies.
§ 7-10. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon final passage and publication
as provided by law.
(1) To hold hearings and adjudicate appeals by employees and
volunteers dissatisfied with the disqualification.
(2) To hold hearings and adjudicate appeals by employees and
volunteers dissatisfied with the determination concerning the
accuracy of the criminal history record.
(3) To grant exceptions where appropriate.
D. Findings. Not later than 45 days after the conclusion of the hearing, the
Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel shall issue its findings of fact
and the Panel's decision to the employee/volunteer involved in the
appeal and to the Recreation Commission, who shall act in accordance
with the Panel's decision.
§ 7-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-10
1:51
Chapter 8
BOARD OF HEALTH
GENERAL REFERENCES
Health Code — See Ch. 29.
Plumbing Code — See Ch. 44.
Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
55.
Sewers — See Ch. 56.
§ 8-1. Board of Health.
The Board of Health as heretofore established in the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus
in accordance with Title 26 of the Revised Statutes is hereby continued.8
§ 8-2. Members; terms; vacancies. [Amended 1-7-2019 by Ord. No.
2018-16]
The Board of Health shall consist of five members and shall be appointed by
the Mayor and confirmed by the Council to serve for three-year terms. The
terms of not more than three members shall expire in any one year, except
in the case of vacancies, which shall be filled for the unexpired term only.
§ 8-3. Rules and regulations; officers.
The Board of Health shall adopt rules and regulations for its own
government. It shall elect a President and Vice President from among its
own members.
§ 8-4. Employees.
The Board of Health shall appoint a Registrar of Vital Statistics, a Clerk or
Secretary, a Sanitary Inspector, and also may appoint such other officers or
assistants as it may deem necessary. All appointees shall be governed by the
Board, and they may be removed for cause by the said Board.
§ 8-5. Liabilities.
The Board of Health shall not contract liabilities of any kind beyond the
amount allowed by law, except on appropriation made for its use by the
Borough Council.
§ 8-6. Repealer.
All ordinances and parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of
this chapter be and the same are hereby repealed.
8. Editor's Note: The Board of Health was originally established 3-12-1906 by Ord. No. 11.
§ 7-10 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 8-7
1:52
§ 8-7. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon final passage and publication according
to law.
Chapter 10
BOROUGH PERSONNEL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 16A.
Defined contribution retirement
program — See Ch. 16B.
Personnel rules and regulations — See Ch. 42.
Salaries — See Ch. 53.
Education for government officials — See Ch.
95.
§ 8-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-7
1:53

ARTICLE I
Deputy Borough Clerk
[Adopted 7-26-1960 by Ord. No. 373]
§ 10-1. Office established.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:46-2.1,9 the office of Deputy Borough Clerk for the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus is hereby created and established.
§ 10-2. Appointment and designation.
The Mayor shall nominate and, with the advice and consent of the Council,
appoint a suitable person to the office of Deputy Borough Clerk, and such
person shall be known and designated as "Deputy Borough Clerk."
§ 10-3. Term of office.
The term of the person appointed to the office of Deputy Borough Clerk
shall be for one year commencing at 12:00 noon on the first day of January
of the year of appointment and terminating at 12:00 noon on the first day
of January of the year following, or until a successor has been appointed
and has qualified, except that, for the year 1960, the term of office shall
commence on the first day of the month following the date of appointment
and qualification, and terminate at 12:00 noon on January 1, 1961, or until
a successor has been appointed and has qualified.
§ 10-4. Powers and duties.
The Deputy Borough Clerk shall have all the powers and perform all the
duties of the Borough Clerk during such times and for such specific periods
as the Borough Clerk shall be absent and shall perform such other duties as
the Mayor and Council shall from time to time prescribe.
§ 10-5. Compensation.
The compensation to be paid the Deputy Borough Clerk shall be as the
Mayor and Council shall hereafter from time to time prescribe.10
§ 10-6. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed.
§ 10-7. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon final passage and publication as required
by law.
9. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:46-2.1 was repealed by P.L. 1971, c. 200, effective July 1, 1971.
See now N.J.S.A. 40A:9-135.
10.Editor's Note: See Ch. 53, Salaries.
§ 10-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-7
1:55

ARTICLE II
Administrative Assistant
[Adopted 12-28-1965]
§ 10-8. Office established; duties.
The position or office of Administrative Assistant is hereby created in the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, and the duties of such position or office shall be
those prescribed by statute or which the Council may from time to time
designate by ordinance or resolution.
§ 10-9. Appointment and term of office.
The Mayor shall nominate and, with the advice and consent of the Council,
appoint the Administrative Assistant for a term of one year commencing
January 1 and terminating December 31 in each year.
§ 10-10. Repealer.
The provisions of any ordinance or ordinances inconsistent with the
provisions hereof are hereby expressly repealed.
§ 10-11. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon passage and publication as provided by
law.
§ 10-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-11
1:57

ARTICLE III
Borough Administrator
[Adopted 12-22-1970 by Ord. No. 460]
§ 10-12. Creation of office.
Pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 40:87-15,11 there is hereby created the
office of Borough Administrator.
§ 10-13. Appointment; term of office; compensation.
The office of Borough Administrator shall be filled by nomination by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council for a term of one calendar
year, or the unexpired portion thereof, at a salary to be fixed annually by the
Salary Ordinance.12
§ 10-14. General powers and responsibilities.
The Administrator shall, under the supervision and control of the Mayor and
Council, to the extent not prohibited by law:
§ 10-15. General administration.
The Administrator, to the extent not prohibited by law, shall:
A. Serve as the principal administrative officer representing the Mayor
and Council.
B. Attend all meetings of the Mayor and Council as required.
C. Represent the Borough in its relation to the federal government, state,
county and other municipalities, and assert the Borough's interest in
contracts, franchises and other business transactions.
D. Keep the Mayor and Council informed of the financial condition of the
Borough and make such reports thereon as required and annually
prepare a comprehensive report on the condition of the Borough.
E. Study the administrative and other operations of the Borough and make
recommendations for plans and programs to meet the needs of the
Borough.
F. Receive and reply to inquiries concerning Borough business, and
provide information and assistance in respect thereto.
A. Supervise the business administration of all departments and offices, in
consultation with respective committee chairmen.
11.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:87-15 was repealed by L. 1987, c. 379. See now N.J.S.A.
40A:9-136.
12.Editor's Note: See Ch. 53, Salaries.
§ 10-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-15
1:59
§ 10-16. Budgeting.
The Administrator shall:
§ 10-17. Financial and accounting responsibilities.
The Administrator, to the extent not prohibited by law, shall:
B. Maintain close liaison with department heads and advise the governing
body of operations in progress.
C. Establish and maintain sound personnel practices and maintain
appropriate records of all employees.
D. Maintain a continuing review of all department and office operations
and their expenditures and report thereon to the governing body.
E. Recommend the nature, location and extent of public improvements
and coordinate the execution of same when authorized by the Mayor
and Council.
F. Implement the policy of the Mayor and Council with respect to the
compiling and release of public information.
G. Perform such other duties as may be assigned by the governing body.
A. Receive from each department, office or board their annual requests for
appropriations and prepare the tentative budget, transmitting same
with his recommendations and comments to the Mayor and Council not
later than December 15.
B. Consult with the Mayor and Council with respect to the tentative
budget, recording changes, additions and deletions thereto, and by
January 15 submit the tentative budget in the form required by law,
together with an analysis of the various items of expenditure and
revenue and such explanatory comments as may be required.
C. By the 15th of each month, provide the Mayor and Council with a yearto-
date summary of expenditures versus appropriations.
A. Supervise the collection of monies due the Borough and provide for the
custody and deposit of same and monthly reports on the cash balances
of the accounts.
B. Supervise the disbursement of all Borough funds and approve all
vouchers and bills before submitting same to the Mayor and Council for
final approval.
C. Analyze the cash needs of the Borough and recommend to the Finance
Commissioner the prudent investment of such funds as temporarily may
be in excess of the amounts needed to meet Borough obligations.
§ 10-15 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 10-18
1:60
§ 10-18. Purchasing.
The Administrator shall exercise the duties of Purchasing Agent and shall:
§ 10-19. Outside employment.
The Administrator shall devote full time to the interests of the Borough
and shall not hold any other employment, except that nothing herein shall
prevent the Administrator from being appointed as Borough Clerk, Borough
Treasurer and/or other official positions in the Borough.
§ 10-20. Repealer.
All ordinances of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus heretofore adopted in conflict
herewith be and the same hereby are repealed.
§ 10-21. When effective.
This article shall take effect after final passage and publication as required
by law.
A. Purchase or validate the authorized purchase of all material, supplies,
equipment, work and labor required by all departments, offices and
boards, and cause a purchase order to be issued for same, and, where
necessary, provide for competitive bidding.
B. Issue purchase orders only upon the authorization of a department
head and his committee chairman or board chairman, except as
provided by resolution of Mayor and Council and only to the extent that
funds have been provided for in the annual budget, or except as may be
specifically authorized in case of emergency.
C. Establish and enforce suitable price and quality standards for all
material, supplies or equipment and provide for the inspection of
deliveries and determination of adherence to specifications.
§ 10-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-21
1:61

ARTICLE IV
Municipal Attorney
[Adopted 3-28-1972 by Ord. No. 468]
§ 10-22. Creation of office.
Pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-139, there is hereby created the
office of Municipal Attorney.
§ 10-23. Appointment and term.
The Mayor shall appoint, with the advice and consent of the Council,
the Municipal Attorney, who shall be a person (meaning an individual,
partnership or professional corporation) licensed to practice law in the
State of New Jersey, for a term of one year commencing January 1 and
terminating December 31 in each year.
§ 10-24. Powers and duties.
The Municipal Attorney shall serve as legal advisor to the Mayor and
Council, represent the Borough in litigation, draft ordinances and
resolutions upon request of the Mayor and Council and render such other
professional legal services as may be required by statute or as requested by
the Mayor and Council from time to time, whether by ordinance, resolution
or otherwise.
§ 10-25. Compensation.
The compensation to be paid the Municipal Attorney shall be as the Mayor
and Council shall hereafter, from time to time, prescribe by the annual
Salary Ordinance.13
13.Editor's Note: See Ch. 53, Salaries.
§ 10-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-25
1:63

ARTICLE V
Municipal Engineer
[Adopted 3-28-1972 by Ord. No. 468]
§ 10-26. Creation of office.
Pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140, there is hereby created the
office of Municipal Engineer.
§ 10-27. Appointment and term.
The Mayor shall appoint, with the advice and consent of the Council,
a Municipal Engineer, who shall be a person (meaning an individual,
partnership or professional corporation) licensed as a professional engineer
in the State of New Jersey, for a term of one year commencing January 1
and terminating December 31 in each year.
§ 10-28. Powers and duties.
The Municipal Engineer shall provide professional engineering advice and
assistance to the Mayor and Council; provide engineering advice to the
Planning Board for the review of subdivision applications and plats, master
planning studies; maintain the Borough Official Map and Borough Zoning
Map; prepare plans and specifications for public works authorized by the
Mayor and Council and make such field surveys as may be required
therefor; make such inspections of the work of public contractors as may be
necessary or desirable; supervise the performance of public works contracts
and certify the amounts due and payable thereunder; and provide any and
all other professional engineering advice and assistance as may be required
of him by statute or as requested of him by the Mayor and Council, whether
by ordinance, resolution or otherwise.
§ 10-29. Compensation.
The compensation to be paid the Municipal Engineer shall be as the Mayor
and Council shall hereafter, from time to time, prescribe by the annual
Salary Ordinance.14
14.Editor's Note: See Ch. 53, Salaries.
§ 10-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-29
1:65

ARTICLE VI
Chief Financial Officer
[Adopted 2-28-1989 by Ord. No. 63515]
§ 10-30. Office created.
Pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.10, there is hereby created
the office of Chief Financial Officer for the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
§ 10-31. Appointment; term. [Amended 2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 945]
The Mayor shall appoint, with the advice and consent of the Council, the
Chief Financial Officer, who shall be a person holding a certificate issued by
the Division of Local Government Services as a Municipal Finance Officer,
for a term of four years, which shall run from January 1 in the year in which
the Chief Financial Officer is appointed.
§ 10-32. Powers and duties.
The Chief Financial Officer shall have, perform and exercise all of the
functions, powers and duties as provided by law and Borough ordinances.
Such person shall keep and maintain books and records of all financial
transactions of the Borough, in accordance with the standards and
requirements of the Division of Local Government Services in the
Department of Community Affairs of the State of New Jersey. Such person
shall have custody of all public moneys of the Borough and shall make
monthly reports to the Council of all receipts, expenditures, commitments
and unexpended appropriations. All moneys received from any source by or
on behalf of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus and any division, department, board,
office or agency thereof, except as otherwise provided by ordinance, will be
paid to the Chief Financial Officer, who shall, by the next ensuing bank day
after such receipt, deposit such funds in the authorized public depository
of the Borough to the credit of the proper account. Such person shall also
disperse funds in payment in bills.
§ 10-33. Compensation.
The compensation to be paid to the Chief Financial Officer shall be as the
Borough Council shall from time to time provide for in the annual Salary
Ordinance and implementing resolutions.16
15.Editor's Note: Pursuant to the Borough, the addition of this ordinance required the
renumbering of former Article VI, Personnel Exempt from Residency Requirements, as
Article VII.
16.Editor's Note: See Ch. 53, Salaries.
§ 10-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-33
1:67

ARTICLE VII
Personnel Exempt From Residency Requirements
[Adopted 3-22-1988 by Ord. No. 620]
§ 10-34. Officials exempt from statutory requirements.
The following officials are exempted from the residency requirements as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 40:87-15, as amended:17
§ 10-35. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this article are hereby repealed to the extent of such
inconsistency.
§ 10-36. When effective.
This article shall take effect after final passage and publication as required
by law.
A. Borough Attorney.
B. Borough Engineer.
C. Borough Building Inspector.
D. Borough Clerk.
17.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:87-15 was repealed by L. 1987, c. 379. See now N.J.S.A. 40A:60-1
et seq.
§ 10-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-36
1:69

ARTICLE VIII
Municipal Prosecutor
[Adopted 4-22-1997 by Ord. No. 777]
§ 10-37. Position established.
There is hereby created and established the office of Municipal Prosecutor.
Pursuant to Public Law 1996, Chapter 95, Section 14,18 the Borough may
employ an attorney at law as a prosecutor under the supervision of the
Attorney General or County Prosecutor, who may represent the state,
county or municipality in any matter within the jurisdiction of the Central
Municipal Court or any other municipal court.
§ 10-38. Qualifications.
The Borough Prosecutor shall be an attorney at law of the State of New
Jersey in good standing. The Municipal Prosecutor shall also have such
qualifications as set forth in the job description for Prosecuting Attorney as
part of Chapter 42 of this Code.
§ 10-39. Appointment.
The Mayor shall nominate and, with the advice and consent of the Council,
appoint a Municipal Prosecutor, including the filling of a vacancy in such
office, which shall be for the unexpired term only.
§ 10-40. Term of office.
The term of office of the Municipal Prosecutor shall be for one year,
commencing on January 1 and terminating on December 31 of the same
year until a successor shall have been appointed and qualified.
§ 10-41. Duties.
The duties of Municipal Prosecutor shall include but not be limited to
prosecution of cases to be tried before the Municipal Court alleging
violations of criminal laws of the State of New Jersey, the ordinances of the
Borough, the motor vehicle statutes of the State of New Jersey, and such
other cases as may be designated by the appropriate authority as within
the jurisdiction of the Municipal Court. The Municipal Prosecutor shall also
appear before the Borough Council upon its request to prosecute any matter
which may be within its jurisdiction.
§ 10-42. Compensation.
The compensation to be paid to the Municipal Prosecutor shall be as the
Borough Council shall from time to time provide for in the annual Salary
Ordinance19 and implementing resolutions.
18.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2B:12-27.
19.Editor's Note: See Ch. 53, Salaries.
§ 10-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-42.1
1:71
§ 10-42.1. Alternate Municipal Prosecutor. [Added 9-24-2002 by
Ord. No. 859]
Pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 2B:25-4, there is hereby created and
established the office of Alternate Municipal Prosecutor. The qualifications,
appointment, term of office and duties of the Alternate Municipal
Prosecutor shall be the same as the Municipal Prosecutor; provided,
however, that the Alternate Municipal Prosecutor shall serve only in such
circumstances where the Municipal Prosecutor is unavailable.
§ 10-42.1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 10-42.1
1:72
ARTICLE IX
Public Defender
[Adopted 12-16-1997 by Ord. No. 788]
§ 10-43. Office created.
There is hereby created the office of Municipal Public Defender in the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus. At least one Municipal Public Defender shall be
appointed; provided, however, that two or more Municipal Public Defenders
may be appointed. Where two or more Municipal Public Defenders are
appointed, the governing body shall appoint a Chief Municipal Public
Defender. The Chief Municipal Public Defender shall have authority over
other Municipal Public Defenders serving the Municipal Court with respect
to the performance of their duties. All provisions of this article shall apply
to each Municipal Public Defender appointed.
§ 10-44. Qualifications.
The Municipal Public Defender shall be an attorney at law of this state in
good standing and serve for a term of one year from the date of his or her
appointment and may continue to serve in office pending reappointment
or appointment of a successor. The Municipal Public Defender may be
appointed to that position in one or more municipal courts. The Municipal
Public Defender need not be a resident of the Borough.
§ 10-45. Appointment.
The Mayor shall nominate and, with the advice and consent of the Borough
Council, appoint one or more Municipal Public Defender(s), including the
filling of a vacancy in the office, which shall be for the unexpired term only.
§ 10-46. Term of office.
The term of office of the Municipal Public Defender shall be for one year,
commencing on January 1 and terminating on December 31 of the same
year and until a successor shall have been appointed and qualified.
Appointment of additional Municipal Public Defenders shall be made in
accordance with the provisions hereof.
§ 10-47. Duties.
A. It shall be the duty of the Municipal Public Defender to represent,
except in the case of temporary unavailability or conflict of interest, any
defendant charged with an offense in Municipal Court who is an
indigent municipal defendant entitled to representation pursuant to
law. The Municipal Public Defender shall be responsible for handling all
phases of the defense, including but not limited to discovery, pretrial
and posttrial hearings, motions, removals to Federal District Court and
other collateral functions reasonably related to the defense. As used
herein, "posttrial hearing" shall not include denovo appeals in Superior
§ 10-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-47
1:73
§ 10-48. Compensation.
Compensation of the Municipal Public Defender or court-approved counsel
shall be on a per-case basis in such amounts as shall be determined and
fixed from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council.
§ 10-49. Application fee.
Court. The Municipal Public Defender shall represent an indigent
defendant charged in Municipal Court with a crime as specified in
N.J.S.A. 2B:12-18, or, if in the opinion of the Municipal Court there is
a likelihood that the defendant, if convicted of any other offense, will
be subject to imprisonment or other consequences of magnitude, the
Municipal Public Defender shall represent an indigent defendant.
B. If there is a vacancy in the office of Municipal Public Defender, if the
Municipal Public Defender is temporarily unavailable or if a finding of
conflict of interest precludes the Municipal Public Defender from
representing an indigent defendant, the Municipal Prosecutor may
prosecute the offense if the Municipal Court appoints a qualified
attorney (court-approved counsel) to represent the indigent defendant.
A. Any person applying for representation by a Municipal Public Defender
or court-approved counsel shall pay an application fee of $200. In
accordance with guidelines promulgated by the Supreme Court, the
Municipal Court may waive the application fee, in whole or in part, only
if the Court determines, in its discretion, upon a clear and convincing
showing by the applicant that the application fee represents an
unreasonable burden on the person seeking representation. The
Municipal Court may permit a person to pay the application fee over a
specific period of time, not to exceed four months.
B. Funds collected pursuant to Subsection A herein shall be deposited in a
dedicated fund administered by the Chief Financial Officer of the
Borough. Such funds shall be used exclusively to meet the costs
incurred in providing the services of a Municipal Public Defender,
including, when required, expert and lay investigation and testimony.
§ 10-47 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 10-49
1:74
ARTICLE X
Animal Cruelty Investigator
[Adopted 11-27-2001 by Ord. No. 844]
§ 10-50. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Animal Cruelty Investigator.
§ 10-51. Appointment and term of office.
The Animal Cruelty Investigator shall be appointed by the Mayor, with
the advice and consent of the Borough Council, and shall serve a term of
office of three years, commencing January 1 of the year of appointment
and ending on December 31 of the third year, or until a successor shall be
appointed and qualified.
§ 10-52. Duties.
The duties of the Animal Cruelty Investigator shall include but not be
limited to the following:
§ 10-53. Qualifications.
To be appointed to the position of Animal Cruelty Investigator, a person
must hold a certified animal control officer certificate from the State of
New Jersey and have and maintain the New Jersey State Animal Cruelty
Investigators Certification pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16a.
A. Enforce all laws and ordinances enacted for the protection of animals,
including, but not limited to, animal control, animal welfare and animal
cruelty laws of the state and local ordinances.
B. Conduct investigations and initiate and prosecute complaints and/or
violations of animal cruelty control, animal welfare or animal cruelty
laws of the State of New Jersey, as well as local ordinances.
C. Engage in the apprehension and arrest and detection of offenders who
have violated animal control, animal welfare and animal cruelty laws of
the state, as well as local ordinances.
D. Working in consultation and cooperation with the Ho-Ho-Kus Police
Department, the Animal Control Officer and other animal cruelty
investigators under the discretion of the Animal Control Officer, as well
as the Borough Administrator, when applicable, and, when necessary,
cooperatively determining whether probable cause exists for the
application and issuance of a search or arrest warrant and
implementing same.
§ 10-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-53
1:75

ARTICLE XI
Property Maintenance Officer
[Adopted 10-28-2003 by Ord. No. 880]
§ 10-54. Office established.
There is hereby created the office of Property Maintenance Officer of the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
§ 10-55. Appointment and term.
The Mayor shall appoint, with the advice and consent of the Council, a
Property Maintenance Officer for a term of one year commencing January 1
and terminating December 31 or the unexpired portion thereof.
§ 10-56. Powers and duties.
The Property Maintenance Officer shall enforce the Property Maintenance
Code of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus (Chapter 47 of the Code).
§ 10-57. Compensation.
The compensation to be paid to the Property Maintenance Officer shall be
fixed by the Borough Council from time to time as provided for in the annual
Salary Ordinance and implementing resolutions.20
20.Editor's Note: See Ch. 53, Salaries.
§ 10-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-57
1:77

ARTICLE XII
(Reserved)21
§ 10-58. through § 10-63. (Reserved)
21.Editor's Note: Former Art. XII, Municipal Liaison, adopted 5-22-2007 by Ord. No. 927, was
repealed 7-25-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-09. See now Ch. 2, Affordable Housing, Art. III,
Administration, § 2-25, Municipal Housing Liaison.
§ 10-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-58
1:79

ARTICLE XIII
Treasurer
[Adopted 2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 945]
§ 10-64. Office created.
There is hereby created the office of Borough Treasurer for the Borough of
Ho-Ho-Kus.
§ 10-65. Appointment and term.
The Mayor shall appoint, with the advice and consent of the Council, the
Borough Treasurer for a term of one year commencing January 1 and
terminating December 31 in each year.
§ 10-66. Powers and duties.
The Treasurer shall have, perform and exercise all of the functions, powers
and duties provided by general law and Borough ordinances. Such person
shall keep and maintain books and records of all financial transactions of
the Borough in accordance with the standards and requirements of the
Division of Local Government Services and the Department of Community
Affairs of the State of New Jersey. Such person shall have custody of
all public monies of the Borough and shall make monthly reports to the
Council and Administrator of all receipts, expenditures, commitments and
unexpended appropriations. All monies received from any source by or on
behalf of the Borough or any department, board, officer or agency thereof,
except as otherwise provided by Borough ordinance, shall be paid to the
Treasurer, who shall, by the next ensuing bank day after their receipt,
deposit them in the authorized public depository of the Borough to the
credit of the proper account.
§ 10-67. Compensation.
The compensation to be paid the Borough Treasurer shall be as the Mayor
and Council shall, from time to time, prescribe by the annual Salary
Ordinance22 and implementing resolution.
22.Editor's Note: See Ch. 53, Salaries.
§ 10-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-67
1:81

ARTICLE XIV
Zoning Officer
[Adopted 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 979]
§ 10-68. Office established.
There is hereby created the office of Zoning Officer for the Borough of Ho-
Ho-Kus.
§ 10-69. Appointment and term.
The Mayor shall appoint, with the advice and consent of the Council,
the Zoning Officer for a term of one year commencing January 1 and
terminating December 31 in each year or the unexpired portion thereof.
§ 10-70. Powers and duties.
The Zoning Officer shall exercise the following powers and duties,
including, but not limited to:
§ 10-71. Compensation.
The Zoning Officer shall receive such compensation as may be fixed and
determined by the governing body in the annual Salary Ordinance23 and
implementing resolutions.
A. Inspect properties, as required, for possible violations of Chapter 85,
Zoning.
B. Enforce Chapter 85, Zoning.
C. Review and process applications for zoning permits.
D. Review and issue nonconforming use and structure certifications
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-68.
E. Receive appeals filed to the Zoning Board of Adjustment pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-72.
F. Such other powers and duties required under ordinance or at law.
23.Editor's Note: See Ch. 53, Salaries.
§ 10-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-71
1:83

ARTICLE XV
Municipal Humane Law Enforcement Officer
[Adopted 5-22-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-06]
§ 10-72. Office established.
There is hereby created the Office of Municipal Humane Law Enforcement
Officer for the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
§ 10-73. Appointment and term.
The Mayor, upon recommendation of the Chief of Police, shall appoint,
with the advice and consent of the Council, a Municipal Humane Law
Enforcement Officer for a term of one year commencing January 1 and
terminating December 31 in each year or the unexpired portion thereof.
§ 10-74. Powers and duties.
The Municipal Humane Law Enforcement Officer shall exercise the
following powers and duties, including but not limited to:
§ 10-75. Firearm authority.
The Municipal Humane Law Enforcement Officer shall be authorized to
possess, carry and use a firearm while enforcing the laws and ordinances
enacted for the protection of animals, provided that such officer qualifies
and maintains all certification and training requirements pursuant to law.
§ 10-76. Compensation.
The Municipal Humane Law Enforcement Officer shall receive such
compensation as may be fixed and determined by the governing body either
in the annual salary ordinance and implementing resolutions or by contract,
as the case may be.
A. Enforcement of all animal welfare or animal cruelty laws of the state
and ordinances of the municipality;
B. Investigate and sign complaints concerning any violation of an animal
welfare or animal cruelty law of the state or ordinance of the
municipality;
C. Act as an officer for the detection, apprehension and arrest of offenders
against the animal welfare and animal cruelty laws of the state and
ordinances of the municipality;
D. Comply with the provisions of Chapter 22 of Title 4 of the New Jersey
Revised Statutes; and
E. Such other powers and duties required under ordinance or at law;
§ 10-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-77
1:85
§ 10-77. Repealer.
All other provisions of this chapter which are not affected by this
amendatory ordinance are hereby ratified and confirmed and shall remain
in full force and effect. However, all ordinances or parts of ordinances,
which are inconsistent with the provisions of this amendatory ordinance
are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency, including Article X,
Animal Cruelty Investigator, §§ 10-50 to 10-53.
§ 10-78. Severability.
If any portion of this article is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate
the remainder of this article, but shall be confined in its effect to the
provision directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall
have been rendered.
§ 10-79. Effective date.
This article shall take effect after final passage and publication as required
by law.
§ 10-77 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 10-79
1:86
Chapter 12
CABLE TELEVISION
§ 12-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms defined above24 shall have the
meanings there indicated, and the following additional terms shall have the
following meanings:
ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT — That statute of the State of New Jersey
relating to cable television, known as the "Cable Television Act," N.J.S.A.
48:5A-1 et seq.
APPLICATION — Cablevision's application for renewal of municipal
consent, which application is on file in the Borough Clerk's office and
is incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof, except as
modified, changed, limited or altered by this chapter.
BOARD — The Board of Public Utilities of the State of New Jersey or its
successor agency.
BOROUGH — The governing body of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, in the
County of Bergen and the State of New Jersey.
COMPANY — Cablevision of Oakland, LLC ("Cablevision"), the grantee of
rights under this chapter.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
FEDERAL ACT — That federal statute relating to cable communications
commonly known as the "Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984," 47
U.S.C. § 521 et seq., and the "Telecommunications Act of 1996," or as those
statutes may be amended.
FEDERAL REGULATIONS — Those federal regulations relating to cable
television services, 47 CFR 76.1 et seq. (and, to the extent applicable, any
other federal rules and regulations relating to cable television, including but
not limited to those described in 47 CFR 76.3), or as such regulations may
be amended.
STANDARD INSTALLATION — The installation of drop cable to a customer's
premises where the distance from the point of entry into the building being
served is less than 150 feet from the active cable television system plant.
STATE — The State of New Jersey.
STATE REGULATIONS — Those regulations of the State of New Jersey
Board of Public Utilities relating to cable television, N.J.A.C. 14:17-1.1 et
seq. and N.J.A.C. 14:18-1.1 et seq., or as such regulations may be amended.
24.Editor's Note: Refers to the introductory provisions in Ord. No. 969. A complete copy of
Ord. No. 969 is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 10-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-2
1:87
§ 12-2. Statement of findings.
A public hearing concerning the consent herein granted to Cablevision was
held after proper public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of the
Act. Said hearing having been held and fully open to the public, and the
municipality having received all comments regarding the qualifications of
Cablevision to receive this consent, the Borough hereby finds Cablevision
possesses the necessary legal, technical, character, financial and other
qualifications to support municipal consent, and that Cablevision's
operating and construction arrangements are adequate and feasible.
§ 12-3. Grant of franchise.
The Borough hereby grants to Cablevision its nonexclusive consent to place
in, upon, along, across, above, over, and under its highways, streets, alleys,
sidewalks, public ways, and public places in the municipality poles, wires,
cables, and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in the
Borough of a cable television system or other communications facility and
for the provision of any communications service over such facilities.
Operation and construction, pursuant to said consent, is conditioned upon
prior approval of the Board of Public Utilities.
§ 12-4. Duration of franchise.
This consent granted herein shall be nonexclusive and shall be for a term
of 10 years from the date of issuance of a certificate of approval as issued
by the Board; provided, however, that at the end of the first five years after
issuance of the certificate of approval, a review shall be conducted by the
Borough to review whether the company has substantially complied with all
material obligations under this chapter, in which event the Borough consent
granted hereunder shall continue for the remaining period of the ten-year
term. In the event that the Borough believes, as a result of said review, that
the company has not substantially complied with all material obligations
under this chapter, the Borough shall provide the company with written
notice of all alleged instances of noncompliance and an opportunity to cure
same within six months. If the Borough believes that the company has not,
after such notice, brought itself into compliance, then the Borough shall
have the right to request that the Board take appropriate action. Nothing
herein shall be deemed a waiver by the company of any rights which it may
possess as a matter of law.
§ 12-5. Expiration and subsequent renewal.
If Cablevision seeks successive consent, it shall, prior to the expiration of
this consent, apply for a municipal consent and certificate of approval in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-16 and applicable state and federal rules
and regulations. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-25.1, both the Borough
and Cablevision shall be bound by the terms of this municipal consent until
such time as Cablevision converts the municipal consent (and any certificate
of approval) into a system-wide franchise.
§ 12-2 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 12-6
1:88
§ 12-6. Franchise territory.
The consent granted under this chapter to Cablevision shall apply to the
entirety of the Borough and any property hereafter annexed.
§ 12-7. Service area.
Cablevision shall be required to proffer video programming service along
any public right-of-way to any person's residence located in the franchise
territory at Cablevision's schedule of rates for standard and nonstandard
installation, in accordance with applicable law and regulations.
§ 12-8. Franchise fee.
Cablevision shall pay to the Borough an annual franchise fee calculated in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-30d. In the event applicable law hereinafter
permits a larger franchise fee to be collected, but does not fix the amount
thereof, the Borough and Cablevision shall negotiate in good faith with
respect to the amount thereof; provided, however, that nothing herein shall
be construed to permit the Borough to require payment of a franchise fee
by Cablevision that is higher than the fee paid by all other cable television
service providers offering service in the municipality.
§ 12-9. Free service.
Cablevision shall, upon written request, provide, free of charge, one
standard installation and monthly cable television reception service to all
state or locally accredited public schools and all municipal public libraries,
as well as municipal buildings located within the Borough.
§ 12-10. Construction requirements.
Cablevision shall perform construction and installation of its plant and
facilities in accordance with applicable state and federal law. The company
shall be subject to the following additional construction requirements with
respect to the installation of its cable plant and facilities in the Borough:
A. In the event that the company or its agents shall disturb any pavement,
street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways or other surfaces, the company
shall, at its sole expense, restore and replace such disturbances in as
good a condition as existed prior to the commencement of said work.
B. If at any time during the period of this consent, the municipality shall
alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other way or place, the
company, upon reasonable notice by the Borough, shall remove or
relocate its equipment, at its own expense.
C. Upon request of a person holding a building or moving permit issued by
the Borough, the company shall temporarily move or remove
appropriate parts of its facilities so as to permit the moving or erection
of buildings or for the performance of other work. The expense of any
such temporary removal or relocation shall be paid in advance to the
§ 12-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-10
1:89
§ 12-11. Technical and customer service standards.
Cablevision shall comply with the technical and customer service standards
established for the cable industry under applicable federal and state laws,
rules and regulations.
§ 12-12. Local office or agent.
Cablevision shall establish and maintain during the entire term of this
consent a local area business office or agent for the purpose of receiving,
investigating and resolving complaints regarding the quality of service,
equipment malfunctions and similar matters. Said office shall be open daily
during normal business hours, and in no event less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday through Friday, with the exception of holidays.
§ 12-13. Designation of complaint officer.
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designated as the complaint officer
for the Borough pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26. All
complaints shall be reviewed and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C.
14:17-6.5.
§ 12-14. Liability insurance.
Cablevision agrees to maintain and keep in force and effect, at its sole cost,
at all times during the term of this consent, sufficient liability insurance
naming the Borough as an additional insured and insuring against loss
by any such claim, suit, judgment, execution or demand in the minimum
amounts of $500,000 for bodily injury or death to one person and
$1,000,000 for bodily injury or death resulting from any one accident or
occurrence stemming from or arising out of the company's exercise of its
rights hereunder.
§ 12-15. Performance bond.
Cablevision shall obtain and maintain, at its sole cost and expense, during
the entire term of this agreement, a bond to the municipality in the amount
of $25,000. Such bond shall be to insure the faithful performance of its
obligations as provided in this franchise.
company by the person requesting the same. In such cases, the
company shall be given not less than 14 days' prior written notice in
order to arrange for the changes required.
D. During the exercise of its rights and privileges under this consent, the
company shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging
streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the Borough so as to
prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the
wires, cables, conduits and fixtures of the company. Such trimming
shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper clearance for
the company's facilities.
§ 12-10 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 12-16
1:90
§ 12-16. Rates.
The rates of the company for cable television services shall be subject to
regulation to the extent permitted by federal and state law.
§ 12-17. Emergency uses.
Cablevision shall be required to have the capability to override the audio
portion of the system in order to permit the broadcasting of emergency
messages by the Borough pursuant to state and federal requirements.
The company shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by
the Borough or any other person during an emergency if, for any reason,
the municipality is unable to make full use of the cable television system
as contemplated herein. The Borough shall utilize the state-approved
procedures for such emergency uses.
§ 12-18. Amendments to franchise.
A. In the event that the service of another multichannel video program
provider not subject to the Borough's regulatory authority within the
Borough creates a significant competitive disadvantage to Cablevision,
the company shall have the right to request from the Borough lawful
amendments to its franchise that relieve it of burdens which create the
unfair competitive situation. Should the company seek such
amendments to its franchise, the parties agree to negotiate, in good
faith, appropriate changes to the franchise in order to relieve the
company of such competitive disadvantages. If the parties can reach an
agreement on such terms, the Borough agrees to support the
company's petition to the Board for modification of the consent in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47 and N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
B. If the parties are unable to reach an agreement on appropriate
amendments to the franchise, the Borough acknowledges that the
company shall have the right to petition the Board directly for such
amendments in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47 and N.J.A.C.
14:17-6.7; provided, however, the Borough shall be under no obligation
to support Cablevision's request for such relief from the Board.
C. In any subsequent municipal consent, the Borough shall require, at a
minimum, the same terms and conditions of any other provider of
multichannel video programming subject to the Borough's regulatory
authority as those contained in the instant consent. In the event such
subsequent consent does not contain the same terms and conditions as
the instant consent, the Borough agrees to support the company's
petition to the Board for modification of the consent in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47 and N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7 to relieve the company of
competitive disadvantages identified in the company's petition.
§ 12-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-19
1:91
§ 12-19. Removal of facilities.
Upon expiration, termination or revocation of this chapter, Cablevision, at
its sole cost and expense and upon direction of the Board, shall remove the
cables and appurtenant devices constructed or maintained in connection
with the cable services authorized herein, unless Cablevision, its affiliated
entities or assignees should, within six months after such expiration,
termination or revocation obtain certification from the FCC to operate an
open video system or any other federal or state certification to provide
telecommunications.
§ 12-20. Public, educational and governmental access.
A. Cablevision shall continue to make available noncommercial public,
educational and governmental (PEG) access services available to the
residents of the Borough as described in the application for municipal
consent. All Cablevision support for PEG access shall be for the
exclusive benefit of Cablevision's subscribers.
B. The Borough agrees that Cablevision shall retain the right to use the
PEG access channel, or portion thereof, for non-PEG access
programming, during times when the Borough is not utilizing the
channel for purposes of providing PEG access programming. In the
event that the company uses said PEG access channel for the
presentation of such other programming, the PEG programming shall
remain the priority use, and the company's rights with respect to using
the channel for non-PEG programming shall be subordinate to the
Borough's provision of PEG access programming on such channel.
C. Cablevision shall have discretion to determine the format and method
of transmission of the PEG access programming provided for in this
§ 12-20.
D. Upon written request from the Borough, Cablevision will install a fiber
access return feed to a municipally designated building, provided it is a
standard installation, to allow for the origination of PEG access
programming from the Borough.
E. In consideration for the rights granted in this chapter, the company
shall provide the Borough with a grant in the amount of $5,000.
Cablevision shall provide an initial grant payment of $1,400 within the
first year of the new franchise agreement. The remaining grant of
$3,600 shall be provided in annual installments of $400, upon written
request by the Borough (the "annual grant"). Cablevision shall not be
obligated to make any additional payments beyond year 10 of the
franchise. The annual grant shall be payable to the Borough within 60
days from receipt of the Borough's written request.
F. The Borough agrees that all amounts provided pursuant to Subsection
E shall be used for the exclusive support of PEG access programming,
such as the purchase and/or rental of PEG access equipment and
§ 12-19 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 12-20
1:92
§ 12-21. Incorporation of application.
All of the commitments contained in the application and any amendment
thereto submitted in writing to the Borough by the company, except as
modified herein, are binding upon Cablevision as terms and conditions of
this consent. The application and any other written amendments thereto
submitted by Cablevision in connection with this consent are incorporated
in this chapter by reference and made a part hereof, except as specifically
modified, changed, limited, or altered by this chapter, or to the extent that
they conflict with state or federal law.
§ 12-22. Construal of provisions.
This consent shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable
federal, state and local laws, as such laws, rules and regulations may be
amended from time to time.
§ 12-23. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions thereof.
§ 12-24. Notices.
Notices required under this chapter shall be in writing and shall be mailed,
first class, postage prepaid, to the addresses below. Either party may
change the place where notice is to be given by providing such change in
writing at least 30 days prior to the time such change becomes effective.
The time to respond to notices under this chapter shall run from receipt of
such written notice.
facilities. On request, the Borough shall provide Cablevision with a
certification of compliance with this Subsection F.
G. The company shall have no further obligation to provide any PEG grant
payments due and payable after the date upon which the company
converts the municipal consent granted herein to a system-wide
franchise in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-25.1.
A. Notices to the company shall be mailed to:
Cablevision Systems Corporation
638 Route 10
Randolph, New Jersey 07869
Attention: Vice President for Government/Public Affairs, New Jersey
§ 12-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-24
1:93
§ 12-25. When effective; right to seek modification of provisions.
This chapter shall take effect upon issuance of a certificate of approval
as issued by the Board of Public Utilities that incorporates the material
terms of this chapter. Nothing herein shall alter the right of the company to
seek modification of this chapter in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47 and
N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
Chapter 13
CATS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Prohibited animals — See Ch. 5.
Dogs — See Ch. 18.
Excessive number of dogs and cats — See Ch.
18A.
Pet waste — See Ch. 43.
§ 13-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALTERED — Rendered permanently incapable of reproduction as certified
by a licensed veterinarian.
ANIMAL — A dog or cat.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — Any person or agency designated or
certified by the State of New Jersey to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
CAT — Any member of the domestic feline species, male, female or altered.
With a copy to:
Cablevision of Oakland, LLC
1111 Stewart Avenue
Bethpage, New York 11714
Attention: Legal Department
B. Notices to the Borough shall be mailed to:
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus
333 Warren Avenue
Ho-Ho-Kus, New Jersey 07423
Attention: Borough Administrator
§ 12-24 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 13-1
1:94
CAT OF LICENSING AGE — Any cat which has attained the age of six
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
LICENSING AUTHORITY — The agency or department of the Borough
of Ho-Ho-Kus or any designated representative thereof charged with
administering the issuance and/or revocation of permits and licenses under
the provisions of this chapter.
MULTIOWNER — One who owns more than two cats.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a cat, includes every
person having a right of property (or custody) in such cat and every person
who has such cat in his/her keeping or who harbors or maintains a cat or
knowingly permits a cat to remain on or about any premises occupied by
that person.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, organization or
institution commonly recognized by law as a unit.
§ 13-2. Vaccination and licensing; certificate; exemptions.
§ 13-3. Licensing requirements; interference with authorized
persons; disposition of fees; sick cats.
A. Vaccination and license requirements. No person shall own, keep,
harbor or maintain any cat over six months of age within the Borough of
Ho-Ho-Kus unless such cat is vaccinated and licensed. The Clerk shall
not grant any such license and official registration tag for any cat unless
the owner thereof provides evidence that the cat to be licensed and
registered has been inoculated with a rabies vaccine in a manner
required by law by a duly licensed veterinarian. The duration of
immunity against rabies must cover the duration of the licensing
period. If the duration of immunity expires during the period of
licensure, it shall be the obligation of the cat owner to have the cat
revaccinated prior to the issuance of the license. The provisions of this
section do not apply to cats held in a veterinary establishment where
cats are received or kept for diagnostic, medical, surgical or other
treatments. [Amended 11-24-1992 by Ord. No. 710]
B. Vaccination. All cats shall be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed
veterinarian of the State of New Jersey in accordance with the latest
"Compendium of Animal Rabies Vaccines and Recommendations for
Immunization," published by the National Association of the Public
Health Veterinarians, except as provided for in Subsection D.
C. Vaccination certificate. A certificate of vaccination shall be issued to the
owner of each animal vaccinated on a form recommended by the state.
D. Exemptions. Any cat may be exempted from the requirements of such
vaccination for a specified period of time by the Ho-Ho-Kus Board of
Health upon presentation of a veterinarian's certificate stating that
because of an infirmity or other physical condition, or regimen of
therapy, the vaccination of such cat shall be deemed inadvisable.
§ 13-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-3
1:95
A. Cats must have license number displayed. Any person who shall own,
keep or harbor a cat of licensing age shall annually apply for and
procure from the Borough Clerk, or other official designated by the
governing body thereof, a license and official registration tag with
license number or a registration sleeve for each cat so owned, kept or
harbored. Acceptable methods of displaying the license number shall
include, but are not limited to, an official license tag or sleeve securely
affixed to a breakaway or elastic collar, an ear tattoo or earmarking tag.
License tags or sleeves are not transferable.
B. Time for applying for license. The owner of any newly acquired cat of
licensing age or of any cat which attains licensing age shall make
application for a license for such cat within 10 days after such
acquisition or age attainment. The requirement will not apply to a
nonresident keeping a cat within the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus for no
longer than 90 days.
C. Cats brought into jurisdiction.
(1) Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Borough
of Ho-Ho-Kus any cat licensed in another state for the current year
and displaying such license as required by this chapter and shall
keep the same or permit the same to be kept within the Borough of
Ho-Ho-Kus for a period of more than 90 days shall immediately
apply for a license for each such cat.
(2) Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Borough
of Ho-Ho-Kus any unlicensed cat and shall keep the same or permit
the same to be kept within the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus for a period
of more than 10 days shall immediately apply for a license for each
cat unless otherwise exempted under this chapter.
D. Application; contents; preservation of information. The application shall
state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of the cat for which
license is sought and whether it is of a long- or shorthaired variety; the
date on which such cat was vaccinated against rabies and also the
name, street, post office address and phone number of the owner; and
the person who shall keep or harbor such cat. The information on said
application and the registration number issued for the cat shall be
preserved for a period of one year by the Borough Clerk or other
designated official.
E. License forms and tags. License forms and official tags or sleeves shall
be furnished by the Borough and shall be numbered serially and shall
bear the year of issuance and the name of the Borough. If the owner
shall elect to have the license number displayed by ear tattoo or ear tag,
the same number shall be issued each year starting with the letter "H."
F. Evidence of rabies vaccination or certification of exemption;
requirement for license. The Borough Clerk or other official designated
by the governing body to license cats shall not grant any such license
for any cat unless the owner thereof provides evidence that the cat to
§ 13-3 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 13-3
1:96
be licensed and registered has been vaccinated or has been certified
exempt as provided by § 13-2 of this chapter.
G. License fee schedule. [Amended 11-26-2010 by Ord. No. 975;
11-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-14]
(1) The cat license annual fee shall be $20 for each nonaltered or
altered cat. There will be a $5 renewal fee for each additional cat
after three. The cat license shall expire on the last day of January in
each year. Persons who fail to obtain a license and registration tag,
as required, prior to February 28 in each year, will be subject to a
late fee based upon the following schedule:
Late Fee Schedule (after 2/28):
Date Fee
3/1 through 3/31 $10 plus license fee
4/1 through 4/30 $15 plus license fee
5/1 through 5/31 $20 plus license fee
6/1 through 6/30 $25 plus license fee
7/1 through 7/31 $30 plus license fee
8/1 through 8/31 $35 plus license fee
9/1 through 9/30 $40 plus license fee
10/1 through 10/31 $45 plus license fee
11/1 through 11/30 $50 plus license fee
12/1 through 12/31 $55 plus license fee
(2) No license fee shall be prorated for any portion of the licensing
year. Volunteers serving the Borough shall be exempt from the
foregoing fees.
H. Fees; renewals; expiration date of license.
(1) A license from another municipality shall be accepted. The fee for
the renewal of a license shall be the same as for the original.
(2) Licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year. Any valid New
Jersey license tag or sleeve issued by a New Jersey municipality
shall be accepted by this Borough as evidence of compliance.
I. Loss of license. If a license tag or sleeve has been misplaced or lost, the
Borough Clerk may issue a duplicate license and/or registration sleeve
for that particular cat.
J. Proof of licensing. Proof of licensing shall be produced by any person
owning, keeping, maintaining or harboring a cat upon the request of
any health official, police officer or animal control officer.
§ 13-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-3
1:97
§ 13-4. Annual canvass.
The Chief of Police of the Borough shall annually cause a canvass of all cats
owned, kept or harbored within the limits of the Borough and shall report
on or before May 31 of each year to the Borough Clerk, Borough Board
of Health and to the State Department of Health (if required by law) the
result thereof, setting forth the names and addresses of persons owning,
keeping or harboring such cats; the number of licensed cats owned, kept
or harbored by each of said persons, together with the license numbers of
each of said cats; and also setting forth the names and addresses of persons
owning, keeping or harboring unlicensed cats and the number of unlicensed
cats owned, kept or harbored by each said person, together with a complete
description of each unlicensed cat.
§ 13-5. Violations and penalties.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person who violates or
who fails or refuses to comply with this chapter shall be liable to a penalty
K. Interfering with persons performing duties under this chapter. No
person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized and
empowered to perform any duty under this chapter.
L. Disposition of fees collected. License fees and other moneys collected
or received under the provisions of this chapter shall be forwarded to
the Borough Treasurer and shall be placed in the Dog License Account
of the Borough and shall be used for the following purposes only:
collecting, keeping and disposing of cats liable to seizure, for local
prevention and control of rabies, for providing antirabies treatment
under the direction of the Local Board of Health for any person known
or suspected to be exposed to rabies and for administering the
provisions of this chapter. Any unexpended balance remaining in such
special account shall be retained until the end of the third fiscal year
following and may be used for any of the purposes set forth in this
section. At the end of said third fiscal year following and at the end of
the fiscal year thereafter, there shall be transferred from such special
account to the general funds of the Borough any amount then in such
account which is in excess of the total amount paid into the special
account during the last two fiscal years next preceding.
M. Sick or diseased cats. Any cat showing a change in disposition or illness
suggesting it might have rabies or any cat that bites another animal or
human may be required by the Health Officer, Animal Control Officer or
designated agent to be quarantined for a period of 10 days. Owners or
those harboring cats evidencing a change in disposition or illness
suggesting that it may be rabies may be required to have such animal
examined by an approved veterinarian. Any cost incurred in
quarantining such animal or veterinary service examination shall be
paid for by the owner or harborer of such cat or cats.
§ 13-3 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 13-5
1:98
of no more than $50 for each offense, to be recovered by and in the name of
the Ho-Ho-Kus Board of Health or by and in the name of the Borough.
§ 13-6. Repealer.
All other ordinances of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus which are in conflict with
this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
§ 13-7. Severability.
If any part of this chapter shall be invalid, such parts shall be deemed
severable, and the invalidity thereof shall not affect the remaining parts of
this chapter.
§ 13-8. When effective.
This chapter shall be in full force and effect 90 days after final passage and
publication according to law.
Chapter 14
CLAIMS PROCEDURE
§ 14-1. Presentation of detailed statement.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:5-17, all claims shall be submitted
for the furnishing of supplies or rendering of services, in writing, under
oath or certification in lieu of oath, upon voucher forms provided by the
governing body for that purpose. The said voucher form shall include a
detailed statement of the goods furnished or services rendered as to dates,
quantities, if appropriate, or scope of the services, and if sufficient space
is not provided on said voucher form, shall be continued by rider attached
thereto and signed by the claimant.
§ 14-2. Certification of claims.
The said voucher form shall be certified by the department chief, his
assistant, or the employee having personal knowledge employed by the
Borough, under whose department the furnishing of said goods or services
were required and evidenced by his signature upon said voucher, which
certification shall state that the said goods or services were actually
received by or furnished to the municipality in accordance with the claim
therein presented.
§ 14-3. Certification by Borough Clerk.
A further certification shall appear upon the said voucher by the Borough
Clerk, or another municipal employee designated by resolution to so act,
and evidenced by the signature of said person that the receiving slip,
or other documentation supporting said claim, has been examined and
§ 13-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-3
1:99
corroborates the voucher and that funds have been appropriated and an
unexpended balance therefrom is available for payment thereof.
§ 14-4. Review of claims; approval or disapproval.
All such vouchers shall be reviewed by two members of the governing body,
who shall be the Chairman of the Finance Committee, or his assistant,
and the Chairman of the committee under whose jurisdiction the claim for
materials or services fall, or by his assistant, and shall be either approved or
disapproved by the signature appearing on said voucher by said persons. In
the event of disapproval, a notation shall be made on a separate writing and
attached to said voucher stating the reason or reasons for such disapproval.
§ 14-5. Presentation of vouchers; notice of disapproval; hearing.
The said vouchers shall be presented to the governing body by the Borough
Clerk at the regular monthly meeting next succeeding 10 days of receipt
of the voucher from the claimant. In the event that any such voucher has
been disapproved, as aforesaid, the reasons therefor shall be stated in the
record, and the governing body shall thereupon approve or disapprove, by
resolution, of all vouchers before it. In the event that said governing body
shall disapprove of any such claim as presented by voucher, the claimant
shall be notified thereof by the Borough Clerk by certified mail within five
days thereafter. A public hearing shall be afforded any claimant whose
voucher has been so disapproved by action of the governing body, and
no suit shall lie against the Borough until the claimant has exhausted his
remedies as herein provided.
§ 14-6. Repealer.
Any ordinance or ordinances inconsistent herewith, in full or in part, are
hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
§ 14-7. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately after adoption and publication as
provided by law.
Chapter 15
COOPERATIVE AND CONDOMINIUM ASSOCIATION
REGISTRATION
§ 15-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
§ 14-3 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 15-1
1:100
CONDOMINIUM — The form of ownership of real property under a master
deed providing for ownership by one or more owners of units of
improvements, together with an undivided interest in common elements
appurtenant to each such unit.
CONDOMINIUM ASSOCIATION — The entity responsible for the
administration of a condominium, which entity shall be incorporated or
unincorporated.
CONDOMINIUM PROPERTY — The land covered by the master deed,
whether or not contiguous, and all improvements thereon, all owned either
in fee simple or under lease, and all easements, rights and appurtenances
belonging thereto or intended for the benefit thereof.
COOPERATIVE — Any system of land ownership and possession in which
the fee title to the land and structure is owned by a corporation or other
legal entity in which the shareholders or other co-owners each also have
a long-term propriety lease or other long-term arrangement of exclusive
possession for a specific unit of occupancy space located within the same
structure.
COOPERATIVE ASSOCIATION — The entity responsible for the
administration of a cooperative, which entity may be incorporated or
unincorporated, profit or nonprofit.
PERSON — An individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, trust
or other legal entity, or any combination thereof.
§ 15-2. Registration required.
Every condominium and/or cooperative association established to
administer property within the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus shall register on
an annual basis with the Borough Clerk on forms to be furnished by the
Borough. Registration shall be made annually during the month of October.
§ 15-3. Registration information.
Each registration shall state the following information:
A. The address of the subject property.
B. The name, address and telephone number (day and evening) of the
person designated by the association to serve as agent for said
association.
C. The names, addresses and telephone numbers (day and evening) of the
current association officers.
D. The number of units being a part of the condominium or cooperative
property designated or intended for occupancy.
E. The names, addresses and telephone numbers (day and evening) of
persons currently authorized to service the heating, electric and
plumbing systems within the condominium and/or cooperative property.
§ 15-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-4
1:101
§ 15-4. Notification of changes to registration information.
It shall be the obligation of every condominium and/or cooperative
association, or designated agent in lieu thereof, to notify the Borough Clerk,
in writing, within 14 days from the date of any change relating to the
information required to be provided under § 15-3 herein.
§ 15-5. Fee.
A fee of $25 shall be imposed for the filing of the annual registration form
with the Borough Clerk.
§ 15-6. Construal of provisions.
This chapter, being necessary for the welfare of the Borough and its
inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes thereof.
§ 15-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not exceeding $200.
Chapter 16
COUNTY SERVICES, CONTRACTS FOR
§ 16-1. Borough authorized to enter into contracts.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:23-6.26 to 40:23-6.29 and
40:23-6.34 to 40:23-6.37,25 The Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus is hereby authorized
to enter into contracts with the County of Bergen for the joint use by the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus and other municipalities in the County of Bergen of
administrative services and facilities of the office of Purchasing Agent of
the County of Bergen appropriate to the procurement of certain materials,
supplies and equipment which may be determined to be required from time
to time by the Borough, and which the Borough may otherwise lawfully
purchase for itself. The services and facilities of said office of County
Purchasing Agent shall be provided without cost to the Borough.
§ 16-2. Officials authorized to execute contracts.
The proper municipal officials of the Borough are hereby authorized and
empowered to execute, on behalf of the Borough, all such contracts with the
County of Bergen as may be authorized and approved by resolution of the
Mayor and Council of the Borough.
25.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:23-6.34 to 40:23-6.37 were repealed by L. 1971, c. 198.
§ 15-4 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 16-3
1:102
§ 16-3. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with this chapter be and
the same are hereby repealed.
§ 16-4. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon final passage and publication as provided
by law.
Chapter 16A
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Borough personnel — See Ch. 10. Personnel rules and regulations — See Ch. 42.
§ 16A-1. Findings; statutory authority.
The Borough hereby finds that it is appropriate to provide for the
indemnification and defense of Borough employees, appointees and officials
in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 59:10-4, and applicable law,
which empowers local public entities to provide for such indemnification.
§ 16A-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMPLOYEE — Any official, officer or member of the Borough's agencies,
commissions or Council of the Borough, or employee or servant, whether or
not compensated, full- or part-time, elected, appointed or employed, who is
authorized to perform any act or service; provided, however, that the term
does not include an independent contractor. The term shall also include
persons formerly holding office or employment. The term "employee" is to
be construed liberally in order to effectuate the purposes of this chapter.
§ 16A-3. Indemnification authorized.
A. Pursuant to the authority granted by provisions of the New Jersey Tort
Claims Act, N.J.S.A. 59:10-4, and applicable law, the Borough of Ho-Ho-
Kus does hereby authorize and provide to its employees indemnification
in accordance with the indemnification provisions applicable to all state
employees under the New Jersey Tort Claims Act.
B. The Borough does also hereby authorize indemnification of any person
formerly or presently holding any office, position or employment,
elected or appointed, hereafter referred to as an "employee," in
accordance with the provisions herein.
§ 16-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16A-4
1:103
§ 16A-4. Provisions for indemnification of employees.
§ 16A-5. Notification by employee of pending action.
An employee shall not be entitled to indemnification or the cost of defense
under this chapter unless, within 10 days of the time such employee is
served with any summons, order to show cause, complaint, process, notice,
demand or pleading, he/she delivers the same, or a copy thereof, to the
Borough Clerk, who shall then forthwith notify the Mayor and Council of the
pending action; provided, however, that this time period may be extended
for good cause by the affirmative vote of a majority of the full membership
of the governing body.
§ 16A-6. Choice of counsel.
The Borough may provide any defense required of it under this chapter
through the Borough Attorney or by employing other counsel as it deems
appropriate. Where a conflict of interest may exist, the public employee
may engage his or her own counsel, which counsel shall be subject to the
reasonable satisfaction of the governing body. Such engagement shall be
A. Except as otherwise provided herein, the Borough shall indemnify and
save harmless any employee from financial loss resulting from any civil
action, suit or proceeding, including a cross action, counterclaim or a
cross complaint, against such employee on account of any act or
omission done in the scope of his/her employment; provided, however,
that the act or failure to act does not arise out of actual fraud, willful
misconduct, actual malice or an intentional wrong.
B. The Borough shall defray all costs of defending a legal action against
said employee, including attorneys' fees, court costs and expert or
technical witness fees, and any amount paid in settlement thereof and
actually and reasonably incurred in connection therewith, to the extent
permitted by general law. Expenses thus incurred may be paid in
advance of final disposition of the action, but the Borough may, in its
discretion, wait for a final determination before being obligated to make
any payments.
C. Nothing herein shall authorize the Borough to pay for damages
resulting from the commission of a crime; however, the Borough shall
indemnify and save harmless each employee from financial loss
resulting from any action described above, including punitive or
exemplary damages, if, in the opinion of the governing body, the acts
committed by the employee upon which the damages are based do not
constitute actual fraud, actual malice, willful misconduct or an
intentional wrong.
D. If the Borough employee files a counter action or counterclaim in the
legal proceeding, the Borough shall not be obligated to reimburse such
employee for any attorneys' fees or court costs attributable to such
counter action or counterclaim.
§ 16A-4 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 16A-6
1:104
further subject to an appropriate agreement between the Borough and the
public employee.
§ 16A-7. Borough to control representation.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, whenever the Borough
provides any defense required of it under this chapter, the Borough, through
counsel, may assume exclusive control over the representation of the public
employee, and such employee shall cooperate fully with the defense.
§ 16A-8. Proceedings beyond trial court level.
In the event that a judgment is entered in favor of the public employee
at the trial court level and the adverse party files an appeal therefrom,
the governing body shall be obligated to pay the costs of counsel beyond
the trial court level. In the event that an adverse judgment is entered
against the public employee at the trial court level and the public employee
or adverse party seeks to appeal therefrom, it shall be within the sole
discretion of the governing body to decide whether to pay for the costs of
counsel beyond the trial court level.
§ 16A-9. Disclaimer of coverage.
A. The governing body may disclaim liability for coverage or defense costs
if any of the following conditions shall occur:
(1) The employee is covered by insurance for the cost of his/her
defense and indemnification.
(2) The legal proceeding is instigated or brought by the employee.
(3) The legal proceeding is instigated or brought by the municipality
against the employee.
(4) Any of the acts or omissions complained of were, in the opinion of
the governing body, the product of actual fraud, actual malice,
willful misconduct or an intentional wrong.
(5) The legal proceeding involves a question concerning the election
laws.
(6) The legal proceeding involves a claim for misfeasance or
malfeasance in office or a claim of fraud, theft or misappropriation
of public funds, and the employee is found liable for the charge.
(7) The legal proceeding is a criminal or disciplinary action.
(8) The legal proceeding involves an act or omission of the employee
which was not within the scope of employment.
B. The Borough may not disclaim coverage under this chapter if there
shall have been a specific determination by the trier of fact that the
employee's actions or omissions complained of were within the
§ 16A-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16A-9
1:105
§ 16A-10. Forfeiture of indemnification.
An employee claiming indemnification under this chapter shall cooperate
fully and in good faith with the Borough and with attorneys, adjusters,
investigators or experts, or technical personnel engaged by the Borough
for the preparation and presentation of a defense to such action, or the
settlement or other disposition thereof, and if the employee neglects, fails or
refuses to cooperate, as herein required, the governing body, after a hearing
on 10 days' written notice to the employee, and for cause, may declare all
rights created under this chapter for the benefit of such employee to be
forfeited and terminated by the affirmative vote of a majority of the full
membership of the Borough Council.
Chapter 16B
DEFINED CONTRIBUTION RETIREMENT PROGRAM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Borough personnel — See Ch. 10.
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 16A.
Personnel rules and regulations — See Ch. 42.
Salaries — See Ch. 53.
§ 16B-1. Positions eligible for participation.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and shall participate in the defined contribution retirement
program:
§ 16B-2. Exempt positions.
Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from defined
contribution retirement program membership, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
43:15C-2:
employee's scope of employment, duties and responsibilities and,
further, that the employee's actions or omissions complained of did not
involve actual fraud, actual malice or willful misconduct.
A. Borough Administrator.
B. Municipal Prosecutor.
C. Municipal Court Judge.
A. Certified Health Officer.
B. Tax Collector.
C. Chief Financial Officer.
§ 16A-9 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 16B-2
1:106
§ 16B-3. Implementation and construal.
This chapter shall be implemented, construed and subject to the aforesaid
Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S.A. 43: 15C-1 et seq.), as amended
from time to time, and any regulations or guidance documents from the
Local Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
§ 16B-4. Filing of copies.
A copy of this chapter shall be filed with the Director of the Division of
Pensions and Benefits of the New Jersey Department of the Treasury.
Chapter 17
DEVELOPMENT FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Affordable Housing — See Ch. 2.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 32A.
Land subdivision and site plan review — See
Ch. 32B.
Zoning — See Ch. 85.
§ 17-1. Purpose.
D. Construction Code Official.
E. Building Subcode Official.
F. Plumbing Subcode Official.
G. Fire Subcode Official.
H. Zoning/Property Maintenance Official.
I. Electrical Subcode Official.
J. Fire Prevention Official.
K. Qualified Purchasing Agent.
L. Tax Assessor.
M. Municipal Planner.
N. Registered Municipal Clerk.
O. Principal Public Works Manager.
P. Superintendent of Water and Sewer Department.
Q. Licensed Uniform Subcode Inspector.
§ 16B-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-1
1:107
§ 17-2. Basic requirements. [Amended 3-27-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-02]
A. In Holmdel Builder's Association v. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550
(1990), the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory
development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985 (the
Act), N.J.S.A. 52:27d-301 et seq., and the State Constitution, subject to
the Council on Affordable Housing's (COAH's) adoption of rules.
B. COAH was authorized by P.L. 2008, c. 46, Section 8 (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-329.2), and the Statewide Nonresidential Development Fee Act
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1 through 40:55D-8.7) to adopt and promulgate
regulations necessary for the establishment, implementation, review,
monitoring and enforcement of municipal Affordable Housing Trust
Funds and corresponding spending plans. Municipalities that are under
the jurisdiction of COAH or a court of competent jurisdiction and have a
COAH or Court-approved spending plan may retain fees collected from
nonresidential development. [Amended 3-27-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-02]
C. In re: adoption of N.J.A.C. 5:96 and 5:9726 by the New Jersey Council on
Affordable Housing, 221 N.J. 1 (2015), also known as the Mount Laurel
IV decision, the Supreme Court remanded COAH's duties to the
Superior Court. As a result, affordable housing development fee
collections and expenditures from the municipal Affordable Housing
Trust Funds to implement municipal Third Round Fair Share Plans
through July 1, 2025, are under the Court's jurisdiction and are subject
to approval by the Court. [Added 3-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-0227]
D. This chapter establishes standards for the collection, maintenance, and
expenditure of development fees pursuant to COAH's regulations and in
accordance with P.L. 2008, c. 46, Sections 8 and 32 through 38.28 Fees
collected pursuant to this chapter shall be used for the sole purpose of
providing low- and moderate-income housing. This chapter shall be
interpreted within the framework of COAH's rules on development fees,
codified at N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.29 [Amended 3-27-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-02]
A. This chapter became effective when COAH approved the Borough's
development fee ordinance and remains effective pursuant to the
Superior Court's jurisdiction in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.
B. COAH approved the Borough's initial Spending Plan on July 7, 1998.
Subsequently, in an Order of December 18, 2017, the Superior Court
conditionally approved the Borough's Amended Third Round Spending
26.Editor's Note: The regulations in N.J.A.C. 5:96 and 5:97 expired 6-2-2015.
27.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection C as Subsection D.
28.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.2 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1 through 40:55D-8.7,
respectively.
29.Editor's Note: The regulations in N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired October 16, 2016.
§ 17-1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 17-2
1:108
§ 17-3. Definitions.
The following terms, as used in this chapter, shall have the following
meanings:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included in the
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes, but is not limited to,
an inclusionary development, a municipal construction project or a onehundred-
percent affordable development.
COAH or THE COUNCIL — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing
established under the Fair Housing Act.[Amended 3-27-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-02]
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Money paid by a developer for the improvement of
property as permitted in N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.31[Amended 3-27-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-02]
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The assessed value of a property divided
by the current average ratio of assessed to true value for the municipality in
which the property is situated, as determined in accordance with Sections
1, 5, and 6 of P.L. 1973, c. 123 (N.J.S.A. 54:1-35a through 54:1-35c).
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES — Those strategies that minimize the
impact of development on the environment and enhance the health, safety
and well-being of residents by producing durable, low-maintenance,
resource-efficient housing while making optimum use of existing
infrastructure and community services.
§ 17-4. Residential development fees.
Plan. Consequently, upon the entry of an order granting an
unconditional Final Judgment of Compliance and Repose to Ho-Ho-Kus,
Ho-Ho-Kus may spend development fees in conformance with N.J.A.C.
5:93-8.30
A. Imposed fees.
(1) Within the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5 Zoning Districts, residential
developers, except for developers of the types of development
specifically exempted below, shall pay a fee of 1.5% of the equalized
assessed value for residential development, provided no increased
density is permitted.
(2) When an increase in residential density pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(5) (known as a "d" variance) has been permitted,
30.Editor's Note: The regulations in N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired October 16, 2016.
31.Editor's Note: The regulations in N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired October 16, 2016.
§ 17-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-4
1:109
§ 17-5. Nonresidential development fees.
developers may be required to pay a development fee of 6% of
the equalized assessed value for each additional unit that may be
realized. However, if the zoning on a site has changed during the
two-year period preceding the filing of such a variance application,
the base density for the purposes of calculating the bonus
development fee shall be the highest density permitted by right
during the two-year period preceding the filing of the variance
application. Example: If an approval allows four units to be
constructed on a site that was zoned for two units, the fees could
equal 1.5% of the equalized assessed value on the first two units;
and the specified higher percentage up to six percent of the
equalized assessed value for the two additional units, provided
zoning on the site has not changed during the two-year period
preceding the filing of such a variance application.
B. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for residential
development.
(1) Affordable housing developments, developments where the
developer is providing for the construction of affordable units
elsewhere in the municipality, and developments where the
developer has made a payment in lieu of on-site construction of
affordable units shall be exempt from development fees.
(2) Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan
approval prior to the adoption of a municipal development fee
ordinance shall be exempt from development fees, unless the
developer seeks a substantial change in the approval. Where a site
plan approval does not apply, a zoning and/or building permit shall
be synonymous with preliminary or final site plan approval for this
purpose. The fee percentage shall be vested on the date that the
building permit is issued.
(3) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure undergoes a change to a more intense use, is demolished
and replaced, or is expanded, if the expansion is not otherwise
exempt from the development fee requirement. The development
fee shall be calculated on the increase in the equalized assessed
value of the improved structure.
(4) Developers of one or two owner-occupied dwelling units,
residential structures demolished and replaced as a result of a
natural disaster, green buildings, etc., shall be exempt from paying
a development fee.
A. Imposed fees.
(1) Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except for
developers of the types of development specifically exempted, shall
§ 17-4 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 17-5
1:110
pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the equalized assessed value of the land
and improvements for all new nonresidential construction on an
unimproved lot or lots.
(2) Nonresidential developers, except for developers of the types of
development specifically exempted, shall also pay a fee equal to
2.5% of the increase in equalized assessed value resulting from any
additions to existing structures to be used for nonresidential
purposes.
(3) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure is demolished and replaced. The development fee of 2.5%
shall be calculated on the difference between the equalized
assessed value of the preexisting land and improvement and the
equalized assessed value of the newly improved structure, i.e., land
and improvement, at the time final certificate of occupancy is
issued. If the calculation required under this section results in a
negative number, the nonresidential development fee shall be zero.
B. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for
nonresidential development.
(1) The nonresidential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or market
rate development shall be subject to the two-and-one-half-percent
development fee, unless otherwise exempted below.
(2) The two-and-one-half-percent fee shall not apply to an increase in
equalized assessed value resulting from alterations, change in use
within existing footprint, reconstruction, renovations and repairs.
(3) Nonresidential developments shall be exempt from the payment of
nonresidential development fees in accordance with the
exemptions required pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, as specified in the
Form N-RDF, "State of New Jersey Nonresidential Development
Certification/Exemption" form. Any exemption claimed by a
developer shall be substantiated by that developer.
(4) A developer of a nonresidential development exempted from the
nonresidential development fee pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, shall
be subject to it at such time the basis for the exemption no longer
applies and shall make the payment of the nonresidential
development fee, in that event, within three years after that event
or after the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy of the
nonresidential development, whichever is later.
(5) If a property which was exempted from the collection of a
nonresidential development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt
from property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit the
fees required pursuant to this section within 45 days of the
termination of the property tax exemption. Unpaid nonresidential
development fees under these circumstances may be enforceable
by Ho-Ho-Kus as a lien against the real property of the owner.
§ 17-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-6
1:111
§ 17-6. Collection procedures.
A. Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable approval
for a development, the applicable approving authority shall direct its
staff to notify the Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a
building permit.
B. For nonresidential developments only, the developer shall also be
provided with a copy of Form N-RDF, "State of New Jersey
Nonresidential Development Certification/Exemption," to be completed
as per the instructions provided. The developer of a nonresidential
development shall complete Form N-RDF as per the instructions
provided. The Construction Official shall verify the information
submitted by the nonresidential developer as per the instructions
provided in the Form N-RDF. The Tax Assessor shall verify exemptions
and prepare estimated and final assessments as per the instructions
provided in Form N-RDF.
C. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a building
permit shall notify the local Tax Assessor of the issuance of the first
building permit for a development which is subject to a development
fee.
D. Within 90 days of receipt of that notice, the Municipal Tax Assessor,
based on the plans filed, shall provide an estimate of the equalized
assessed value of the development.
E. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy notifies the local Assessor of any and all
requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on property which is
subject to a development fee.
F. Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the Municipal Assessor shall confirm or modify the
previously estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements of
the development; calculate the development fee; and thereafter notify
the developer of the amount of the fee.
G. Should Ho-Ho-Kus fail to determine or notify the developer of the
amount of the development fee within 10 business days of the request
for final inspection, the developer may estimate the amount due and
pay that estimated amount consistent with the dispute process set forth
in Subsection b of Section 37 of P.L. 2008, c. 46 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.6).
H. Fifty percent of the development fee shall be collected at the time of
issuance of the building permit. The remaining portion shall be
collected at the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The developer
shall be responsible for paying the difference between the fee
calculated at building permit and that determined at issuance of
certificate of occupancy.
I. Appeal of development fees.
§ 17-6 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 17-6
1:112
§ 17-7. Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
(1) A developer may challenge residential development fees imposed
by filing a challenge with the County Board of Taxation. Pending a
review and determination by the Board, collected fees shall be
placed in an interest-bearing escrow account by Ho-Ho-Kus.
Appeals from a determination of the Board may be made to the Tax
Court in accordance with the provisions of the State Uniform Tax
Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after the
date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts escrowed
shall be credited to the prevailing party.
(2) A developer may challenge nonresidential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the Director of the Division of
Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the Director,
which shall be made within 45 days of receipt of the challenge,
collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing escrow account
by Ho-Ho-Kus. Appeals from a determination of the Director may be
made to the Tax Court in accordance with the provisions of the
State Uniform Tax Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within
90 days after the date of such determination. Interest earned on
amounts escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
A. There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing Housing Trust
Fund to be maintained by the Chief Financial Officer for the purpose of
depositing development fees collected from residential and
nonresidential developers and proceeds from the sale of units with
extinguished controls.
B. The following additional funds shall be deposited in the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source and
amount:
(1) Payments in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units;
(2) Developer-contributed funds to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached
development accessible;
(3) Rental income from municipally operated units;
(4) Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
(5) Recapture funds;
(6) Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
(7) Any other funds collected in connection with Ho-Ho-Kus's
affordable housing program.
C. Within seven days from the opening of the trust fund account, Ho-Ho-
Kus previously provided COAH with written authorization, in the form
of a three-party escrow agreement between the municipality, Bank of
§ 17-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-7
1:113
§ 17-8. Use of funds.
America and COAH, to permit COAH to direct the disbursement of the
funds as provided for in N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.32 The Superior Court shall now
have such jurisdiction to direct the disbursement of the Borough's trust
funds per N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.
D. All interest accrued in the Housing Trust Fund shall only be used on
eligible affordable housing activities approved by the Court.
A. The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan approved
by the Court. Funds deposited in the Housing Trust Fund may be used
for any activity approved by the Court to address the Borough's fair
share obligation and may be set up as a grant or revolving loan
program. Such activities include, but are not limited to, preservation or
purchase of housing for the purpose of maintaining or implementing
affordability controls, rehabilitation, new construction of affordable
housing units and related costs, accessory apartment, market to
affordable, or regional housing partnership programs, conversion of
existing nonresidential buildings to create new affordable units, green
building strategies designed to be cost saving and in accordance with
accepted national or state standards, purchase of land for affordable
housing, improvement of land to be used for affordable housing,
extensions or improvements of roads and infrastructure to affordable
housing sites, financial assistance designed to increase affordability,
administration necessary for implementation of the Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan, or any other activity as permitted pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.16 and specified in the approved spending plan.33
B. Funds shall not be expended to reimburse Ho-Ho-Kus for past housing
activities.
C. At least 30% of all development fees collected and interest earned shall
be used to provide affordability assistance to low- and moderate-income
households in affordable units included in the municipal Fair Share
Plan. One-third of the affordability assistance portion of development
fees collected shall be used to provide affordability assistance to those
households earning 30% or less of median income by region.
(1) Affordability assistance programs may include down payment
assistance, security deposit assistance, low-interest loans, rental
assistance, assistance with homeowners' association or
condominium fees and special assessments, and assistance with
emergency repairs.
(2) Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low- or
moderate-income units in the municipal Fair Share Plan to make
32.Editor's Note: The regulations in N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired October 16, 2016.
33.Editor's Note: The regulations in N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired October 16, 2016.
§ 17-7 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 17-8
1:114
§ 17-9. Monitoring. [Amended 3-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-02]
On or about January 12 of each year through 2025, Ho-Ho-Kus shall provide
annual reporting of trust fund activity to the New Jersey Department of
Community Affairs (DCA), COAH, or Local Government Services (LGS), or
other entity designated by the State of New Jersey, with a copy provided
to Fair Share Housing Center and Intervenors and posted on the municipal
website, using forms developed for this purpose by the DCA, COAH, or
LGS. This reporting shall include an accounting of all Housing Trust Fund
activity, including the collection of development fees from residential and
nonresidential developers, payments in lieu of constructing affordable units
on site, funds from the sale of units with extinguished controls, barrier-free
escrow funds, rental income, repayments from affordable housing program
loans, and any other funds collected in connection with Ho-Ho-Kus's
housing program, as well as to the expenditure of revenues and
implementation of the plan approved by the Court.
§ 17-10. Ongoing collection of fees. [Amended 3-27-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-02]
The ability for Ho-Ho-Kus to impose, collect and expend development fees
shall expire with its Court-issued Judgment of Compliance and Repose
unless Ho-Ho-Kus has filed an adopted Housing Element and Fair Share
them affordable to households earning 30% or less of median
income.
(3) Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and funds
from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be exempt
from the affordability assistance requirement.
D. Ho-Ho-Kus may contract with a private or public entity to administer
any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, including the
requirement for affordability assistance, in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:93-8.16. [Amended 3-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-02]
E. No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development fees may
be expended on administration, including, but not limited to, salaries
and benefits for municipal employees or consultant fees necessary to
develop or implement a new construction program, a Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan, and/or an affirmative marketing program. In the
case of a rehabilitation program, no more than 20% of the revenues
collected from development fees shall be expended for such
administrative expenses. Administrative funds may be used for income
qualification of households, monitoring the turnover of sale and rental
units, and compliance with the monitoring requirements set forth in the
Court-approved January 12, 2017, executed settlement agreement with
Fair Share Housing Center. Legal or other fees related to litigation
opposing affordable housing sites or objecting to the Council's
regulations and/or action are not eligible uses of the Affordable Housing
Trust Fund. [Amended 3-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-02]
§ 17-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 17-10
1:115
Plan with the Court or other appropriate jurisdiction, has filed a Declaratory
Judgment Action, and has received the Court's approval of its development
fee ordinance. If Ho-Ho-Kus fails to renew its ability to impose and collect
development fees prior to the expiration of its Judgment of Compliance and
Repose, it may be subject to forfeiture of any or all funds remaining within
its municipal trust fund. Any funds so forfeited shall be deposited into the
New Jersey Affordable Housing Trust Fund established pursuant to Section
20 of P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-320). Ho-Ho-Kus shall not impose a
residential development fee on a development that receives preliminary or
final site plan approval after the expiration of its Judgment of Compliance
and Repose, nor shall Ho-Ho-Kus retroactively impose a development fee on
such a development. Ho-Ho-Kus shall not expend development fees after the
expiration of its Judgment of Compliance and Repose.
Chapter 18
DOGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Prohibited animals — See Ch. 5.
Cats — See Ch. 13.
Excessive number of dogs and cats — See Ch.
18A.
Pet waste — See Ch. 43.
§ 18-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AT LARGE — Off the property of the owner and not on a leash.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, in the County of Bergen and State
of New Jersey.
DOG — Any dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Any dog which has attained the age of seven
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.[Added 8-23-1983 by
Ord. No. 570]
OWNER — When applied to a proprietorship of a dog, means and includes
every person having a right of propriety of such dog and every person who
has such dog or other animal in his keeping or under his control. A person
shall be deemed to have a dog or other animal in his keeping whenever the
ownership or custody of any dog or other animal is in an unemancipated
infant or other member of his household.
VICIOUS DOG — Any dog, as defined in this section, which attacks and bites
or attempts to attack or bite persons or dogs or other animals without being
incited to do so, or which has shown such savagery, fierceness or ferocity as
to indicate that it is a threat to the safety of persons.
§ 17-10 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 18-2
1:116
§ 18-2. Licensing requirements. [Amended 11-24-1992 by Ord. No.
709]
Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog of licensing age, as defined
in N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.1 through 4:19-15.29, as amended and supplemented,
shall, in the month of January or within 10 days of acquisition thereof,
and annually thereafter, apply to the Clerk of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus
for a license and registration tag for each such dog. Such licenses and
registration tags shall be issued pursuant to and in accordance with the
provisions of said statute, and all dogs shall be kept and controlled in
the manner provided for in said statute and shall be subject to all of the
provisions thereof. The Clerk shall not grant any such license and official
registration tag for any dog unless the owner thereof provides evidence that
the dog to be licensed and registered has been inoculated with a rabies
vaccine in a manner required by law by a duly licensed veterinarian. The
duration of immunity against rabies must cover the duration of the licensing
period. If the duration of immunity expires during the period of licensure, it
shall be the obligation of the dog owner to have the dog revaccinated prior
to issuance of the license.
§ 18-3. Fees; expiration of tags. [Amended 12-17-1974 by Ord. No.
481; 9-25-1979 by Ord. No. 539; 11-24-1981 by Ord. No. 561;
8-23-1983 by Ord. No. 570; 9-25-1990 by Ord. No. 666; 3-24-1992 by
Ord. No. 698; 3-25-1997 by Ord. No. 773; 11-26-2010 by Ord. No.
973]
A. Annual and late fees. [Amended 11-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-15]
(1) The person applying for the license and registration tag of a dog
shall pay the annual fee for such license of $20 whether or not the
dog is neutered/spayed. For each annual renewal, the fee for the
license and registration tag shall be the same as for the original
license and tag, and said licenses, registration tags and renewals
thereof shall expire on the last day of January in each year. Persons,
who fail to obtain a license and registration tag, as required, prior
to February 28 in each year, will be subject to a late fee based upon
the following schedule:
Late Fee Schedule (after 2/28):
Date Fee
3/1 through 3/31 $10 plus license fee
4/1 through 4/30 $15 plus license fee
5/1 through 5/31 $20 plus license fee
6/1 through 6/30 $25 plus license fee
7/1 through 7/31 $30 plus license fee
8/1 through 8/31 $35 plus license fee
9/1 through 9/30 $40 plus license fee
§ 18-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-3
1:117
§ 18-4. Receipt and disposition of fees; fee exemption. [Amended
12-17-1974 by Ord. No. 481; 4-22-1975 by Ord. No. 487]
All license fees and other moneys collected shall be received and disposed
of in accordance with said statute. Dogs used as guides for blind persons
and commonly known as "Seeing Eye" dogs shall be licensed and registered
as other dogs hereinbefore provided for, except that the owner or keeper
thereof shall not be required to pay any fee therefor.
§ 18-5. Application for license; record of registrations.
The license shall be issued by the Clerk of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, upon
application to him. The application shall state the breed, sex, age, color
and markings of the dog for which license and registration is sought, and
whether it is of a long- or shorthaired variety; also, the name, street and
post office address of the owner and the person who shall keep or harbor
such dog. The information on said application and the registration number
issued for the dog shall be preserved for a period of three years by the
Clerk. In addition, he shall forward to the State Department of Health, each
month, on forms furnished by the State Department, an accurate account of
registration numbers issued or otherwise disposed of. He shall issue to the
owner a metal tag, numbered serially, issued in the order of the applications
and bearing the year of issuance and the name of the Borough.
§ 18-6. Regulations. [Amended 4-22-1975 by Ord. No. 487]
10/1 through 10/31 $45 plus license fee
11/1 through 11/30 $50 plus license fee
12/1 through 12/31 $55 plus license fee
(2) No license fee shall be prorated for any portion of the licensing
year. Volunteers serving the Borough shall be exempt from the
foregoing fees.
B. (Reserved)34
C. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 4:19-31, the fee for a potentially dangerous
dog license and each renewal thereof shall be $700.
A. Dogs running at large. No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog
shall permit it to run at large, but said person shall keep the dog
confined to the premises designated in the application, unless on a
leash, as prescribed by Subsection B, and any dog running at large may
be impounded, and the owner of any such dog shall be liable for the
penalty as provided for in § 18-9 and the forfeiture of the dog as
provided in § 18-11.
34.Editor’s Note: Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B, regarding an additional fee, was
repealed 11-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-15.
§ 18-3 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 18-6
1:118
§ 18-7. Removal and disposition of dead dogs and other animals.
The Borough may remove and dispose of the carcass of any dog or other
animal found dead therein, and the reasonable cost of removal and
disposition shall be charged to the owner, if known, or, if unknown, to the
Borough.
§ 18-8. Vicious, potentially dangerous and rabid dogs; statutory
authority on file. [Amended 9-25-1990 by Ord. No. 666]
B. Leashing of dogs. No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog
shall permit it to be upon the public streets or in any of the public
places of the Borough unless such dog is accompanied by a person and
is securely confined and controlled by an adequate leash not more than
six feet long.
C. Curbing dogs. No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall
permit it to defecate, soil, defile or commit any nuisance on any
common thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bypath, safety island or
any place where people congregate or walk, or upon any public
property whatsoever. These restrictions shall not apply to that portion
of the street lying between the curblines, or the paved portion of the
street if there are no curbs, which shall be used to curb such dog, but
shall apply to all public and privately owned property in the Borough,
except the property of the owner of the dog and the property of persons
who have invited the owner of any dog to bring the dog onto their
property.
D. Owner to remedy nuisance. In the event that any dog shall, through
inadvertence or otherwise, soil, defile, defecate on or commit any
nuisance in any place, including the portion of the public street, if there
are no curbs, the person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of
such dog or in custody of such dog shall immediately remove all feces
and/or all dog soil deposited by such dog by any sanitary method and
remove such waste material to the pet owner's property to be disposed
of in a proper receptacle. In no event shall any person dispose of any
feces, dog soil or any type of receptacle containing same into any public
trash receptacle, stormwater drain or sewage system. [Added
12-18-1984 by Ord. No. 577; amended 7-27-2010 by Ord. No.
966; 3-22-2011 by Ord. No. 983]
A. The Animal Control Officer appointed by the governing body or any
police officer shall seize and impound a dog when there is reasonable
cause to believe that the dog is vicious, potentially dangerous or shows
signs of rabies in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-17
through 4:19-37.
B. New Jersey Statutes Annotated 4:19-17 through 4:19-37, all
amendments and supplements thereto and rules and regulations
promulgated pursuant to the authority thereof are incorporated herein
and made a part hereof as though set forth at length.
§ 18-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-8
1:119
§ 18-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-17-1974 by Ord. No.
481; 9-25-1990 by Ord. No. 666]
§ 18-10. Enforcement. [Amended 9-25-1990 by Ord. No. 666]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 through 4:19-37, it
shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer of the Borough, the Chief of
Police, each police officer of the Borough and the Municipal Health Officer
to assist in carrying out the provisions of this chapter and the provisions for
the control of dogs contained in N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.1 through 4:19-15.29 and
N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 through 4:19-37, as amended and supplemented.
§ 18-11. Responsibility for care of impounded animals; designation
of holding place. [Amended 9-25-1990 by Ord. No. 666; 5-28-1996
by Ord. No. 762]
C. A complete copy of the aforesaid legislation shall be on file in the office
of the Borough Clerk and will remain on file there for the use and
examination of the public.
A. Any owner of a dog within the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus who shall fail to
take out a license as directed herein or who shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter not related to vicious or potentially dangerous
dogs shall be subject to a penalty not to exceed $50 for each offense, to
be imposed by the Judge before whom any violator of this chapter is
convicted. [Amended 3-28-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-02]
B. Any owner of a vicious or potentially dangerous dog who is found to
have violated this chapter, the statutes incorporated herein and/or any
rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto shall be subject to a fine of
not more than $1,000 per day of the violation, and each day's
continuance of the violation shall constitute a separate and distinct
violation. The Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction to enforce this
section.
A. The Animal Control Officer of the Borough shall be responsible for all
dogs and other animals impounded and taken into custody under the
terms of this chapter and statutes incorporated herein, as amended and
supplemented. The Animal Control Officer and/or Municipal Health
Officer of the Borough shall designate the place where such dogs and
animals are to be impounded or held in custody, subject to the approval
of the Mayor and Council.
B. Subject to the terms of this chapter and statutes incorporated herein,
an owner may obtain the release of his animal impounded due to
emergency calls upon payment of a recovery fee in the sum of $60.
Payment of the above charge shall be made to the Police Department.
No owner or person keeping or harboring a dog shall be permitted to
claim an impounded dog unless a license and registration tag can be
produced for the dog. The hours of emergency calls are set forth in the
contract between the Borough and Animal Control Officer, which is on
§ 18-8 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 18-11
1:120
§ 18-12. Licenses issued under previous ordinances.
All licenses for dogs issued under former ordinances are hereby validated
and continued in force until December 31, 1966.
§ 18-13. Repealer.
Ordinance Nos. 182 and 40 are hereby repealed, and any other ordinances
licensing and regulating dogs heretofore enacted which are inconsistent
with this chapter are hereby repealed.
§ 18-14. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon final passage and
publication thereof as provided by law, with the exception of the provisions
of § 18-3, relating to license and registration tag fees, which will be effective
January 1, 1967.
Chapter 18A
DOGS AND CATS, EXCESSIVE NUMBER OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Prohibited animals — See Ch. 5.
Cats — See Ch. 13.
Dogs — See Ch. 18.
Pet waste — See Ch. 43.
Wildlife feeding — See Ch. 82.
§ 18A-1. Single-family residences.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall keep more
than a total of four cats and/or dogs over the age of six months per
household in any single-family residence, including any and all accessory
structure(s), in the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus. These restrictions permit a total
of four animals per property (for example, three dogs and one cat, or two
cats and two dogs), but in no event shall the number exceed a total of four
animals per household.
§ 18A-2. Multifamily residences.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall keep more
than a total of three cats and/or dogs over the age of six months per
household in any multifamily residence, including any and all accessory
structure(s), in the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus. These restrictions permit a total
of three animals (for example, two dogs and one cat, or two cats and one
file with the Borough Clerk. [Amended 2-22-2000 by Ord. No. 823;
3-27-2007 by Ord. No. 923; 3-24-2009 by Ord. No. 949]
§ 18-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18A-2
1:121
dog), but in no event shall the number exceed a total of three animals per
household.
§ 18A-3. Exceptions.
A. Proper commercial license. Licensed kennels, pet shops, shelters and
pounds shall be exempt from the limitations in this chapter.
B. Recent litter. Individuals who exceed the allowable number of pets due
to a recent litter of cats and/or dogs shall be exempt; provided,
however, that any waiver of the allowable number of pets under this
section shall be granted for no more than 90 days from the date of birth
of said cats and/or dogs. Upon the expiration of this ninety-day waiver
period, the owner shall be required to comply with the limitations
stated in this chapter. Only one litter of offspring may be kept on the
premises at any one time.
C. Temporary waiver after enactment of chapter. Individuals exceeding
the allowable number of cats and/or dogs at the time of the enactment
of this chapter may be permitted, in the discretion of the Board of
Health, to retain said cats and/or dogs for a period of no longer than 90
days from the date of enactment of this chapter in order to provide an
opportunity to find alternative placement for said animals. Any
individual granted a waiver of the allowable number of pets under this
section shall be required to show diligent efforts to find alternative
placement for the excess animals. Upon the expiration of any temporary
waiver granted pursuant to this section, the owner shall be required to
comply with the limitations stated in this chapter.
D. Pet limit waiver.
(1) In extraordinary circumstances, if the strict enforcement of the pet
limit may constitute a hardship upon a pet owner, the owner may
apply to the Board of Health for a pet limit waiver, not to exceed
two additional animals. The Board of Health shall consider the
number of additional animals sought to be kept as pets and,
consistent with the requirements for the keeping of all pets within
the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, may consider whether the following
conditions exist:
(a) The dogs and cats are kept in the primary residence on the
property and are not permitted to run freely outside said
residence.
(b) The cats and/or dogs are not being kept for any commercial
purpose.
(c) The additional dogs and/or cats do not create a health risk for
the humans or other animals which occupy the residence.
(d) The additional dogs and/or cats do not degrade the
environment for the surrounding residences.
§ 18A-2 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 18A-3
1:122
§ 18A-4. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of any section of this chapter shall subject the offender to a
penalty of $250 for each offense. Each day the violation shall continue shall
constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 18B
DONATION CLOTHING BINS
§ 18B-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SOLICITATION or SOLICIT — The request, directly or indirectly, for money,
credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of any kind or value.
Solicitation shall include, but not be limited to, the use or employment of
canisters, cards, receptacles or similar devices for the collection of money
or other thing of value. A solicitation shall take place whether or not the
person making the solicitation receives any contribution.
§ 18B-2. Requirements for placement or use for solicitation
purposes.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no person shall
place, use, or employ a donation clothing bin, for solicitation purposes,
unless all of the following requirements are met:
(e) All cats and/or dogs on the property have been properly
vaccinated.
(f) There is an adequate tick, flea or vermin control program.
(g) The animals are not being kept for breeding purposes.
(h) The applicant is in compliance with all other provisions of this
chapter.
(2) All holders of a pet limit waiver shall submit to inspection by the
Borough Health Officer or designated representative periodically,
but in no event less than once per year. Repeated refusal to permit
inspection by the Health Officer shall result in the immediate
revocation of the waiver.
A. The person has obtained a permit, valid for a twelve-month period of
time, from the Borough's Zoning Officer, in accordance with the
following:
(1) In applying for such a permit, the person shall include:
§ 18A-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18B-2
1:123
(a) The location where the bin would be situated, as precisely as
possible;
(b) The manner in which the person anticipates any clothing or
other donations collected via the bin would be used, sold or
dispersed, and the method by which the proceeds of collected
donations would be allocated or spent;
(c) The name and telephone number of the bona fide office of any
entity which may share or profit from any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin; and
(d) Written consent from the property owner to place the bin on
his property.
B. The Zoning Officer shall not grant an application for a permit to place,
use or employ a donation clothing bin if he determines that the
placement of the bin could constitute a safety hazard. Such hazards
shall include, but not be limited to, the placement of a donation clothing
bin within 100 yards of any place which stores large amounts of, or
sells, fuel or other flammable liquids or gases.
C. The Zoning Officer shall impose a fee for such application, not to exceed
$25, to offset the costs involved in enforcing this chapter.
D. An expiring permit for a donation clothing bin may be renewed upon
application for renewal and payment of any fee imposed by the Zoning
Officer for such renewal, not to exceed $25 annually, to offset the costs
involved in enforcing this chapter. Such application shall include:
(1) The location where the bin is situated, as precisely as possible, and,
if the person intends to move it, the new location where the bin
would be situated after the renewal is granted and written consent
from the property owner to place the bin on his property;
(2) The manner in which the person has used, sold, or dispersed any
clothing or other donations collected via the bin, the method by
which the proceeds of collected donations have been allocated or
spent, and any changes the person anticipates it may make in these
processes during the period covered by the renewal; and
(3) The name and telephone number of the bona fide office required
pursuant to Subsection A(1)(c) of this section, of any entity which
shared or profited from any clothing or other donations collected
via the bin, and of any entities which may do so during the period
covered by the renewal.
E. The permit number and its date of expiration shall be clearly and
conspicuously displayed on the exterior of the donation clothing bin in
addition to the information required pursuant to Subsection G of this
section.
§ 18B-2 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 18B-2
1:124
§ 18B-3. Receipt and investigation of complaints; correction of
violations.
The Zoning Officer shall receive and investigate, within 30 days, any
complaints from the public about the bin. Whenever it appears to the Zoning
Officer that a person has engaged in or is engaging in any act or practice
in violation of this chapter, the person who placed the bin shall be issued
a warning stating that if the violation is not rectified or a hearing with the
Zoning Officer is not requested within 45 days, the bin will be seized or
removed at the expense of the person who placed the bin, and any clothing
or other donations collected via the bin will be sold at public auction or
otherwise disposed of. In addition to any other means used to notify the
person who placed the bin, such warning shall be affixed to the exterior
of the bin itself. In the event that the person who placed the bin does not
rectify the violations or request a hearing within 45 days of the posting of
the warning, the Zoning Officer may seize the bin, remove it, or have it
F. The person and any other entity which may share or profit from any
clothing or other donations collected via the bin maintains a bona fide
office where a representative of the person or other entity, respectively,
can be reached at a telephone information line during normal business
hours for the purpose of offering information concerning the person or
other entity. For the purposes of this subsection, an answering machine
or service unrelated to the person does not constitute a bona fide office.
G. The following information is clearly and conspicuously displayed on the
exterior of the donation clothing bin:
(1) The name and address of the registered person that owns the bin
and of any other entity which may share or profit from any clothing
or other donations collected via the bin;
(2) The telephone number of the person's bona fide office and, if
applicable, the telephone number of the bona fide office of any
other entity which may share or profit from any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin;
(3) In cases when any entity other than the person who owns the bin
may share or profit from any clothing or other donations collected
via the bin, a notice, written in a clear and easily understandable
manner, indicating that clothing or other donations collected via
the bin, their proceeds, or both, may be shared or given entirely to
an entity other than the person who owns the bin, and identifying
all such entities which may share or profit from such donations; and
(4) A statement, consistent with the information provided to the
Zoning Officer in the most recent permit or renewal application,
indicating the manner in which the person anticipates any clothing
or other donations collected via the bin would be used, sold or
dispersed, and the method by which the proceeds of collected
donations would be allocated or spent.
§ 18B-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18B-3
1:125
removed, at the expense of the person who placed the bin, and sell at public
auction or otherwise dispose of any clothing or other donations collected via
the bin. Any proceeds from the sale of the donations collected via the bin
shall be paid to the Chief Financial Officer of the Borough.
§ 18B-4. Violations and penalties.
In addition to any other penalties or remedies authorized by the laws of this
state, any person who violates any provision of this chapter which results in
seizure of the donation clothing bin shall be:
§ 18B-5. Severability.
Each section of this chapter and every subsection hereof shall be deemed
independent, separate and distinct form all other sections, and the holding
of any section or a part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for
any cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of
any section or part hereof.
§ 18B-6. Repealer.
All ordinances, codes or parts thereof that are inconsistent with this chapter
are repealed or otherwise modified.
§ 18B-7. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon passage and publication as required by
law.
A. Subject to a penalty of up to $20,000 for each violation. The Zoning
Officer may bring this action in the Municipal Court or Superior Court
as a summary proceeding under the Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999,
P.L. 1999, c. 274 (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq.), and any penalty monies
collected shall be paid to the Chief Financial Officer of the Borough;
and
B. Deemed ineligible to place, use or employ a donation clothing bin for
solicitation purposes pursuant to § 18B-2 hereof. A person disqualified
from placing, using or employing a donation clothing bin by violating
the provisions of this chapter may apply to the Zoning Officer to have
that person's eligibility restored. The Zoning Officer may restore the
eligibility of a person who:
(1) Acts within the public interest; and
(2) Demonstrates that he or she made a good faith effort to comply
with the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable laws and
regulations or had no fraudulent intentions.
§ 18B-3 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 18B-7
1:126
Chapter 19
DRUG-FREE ZONE MAP
GENERAL REFERENCES
School Zone Map — See Ch. 54.
§ 19-1. Approval of map.
The map entitled "Drug-Free Zone Map, Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, Bergen
County, New Jersey," prepared by David A. Hals, P.E., L.S., P.P., revised to
October 18, 2001, be and is hereby approved as an official finding and
record of the location and boundaries of the areas noted thereon.35
§ 19-2. Filing of map.
The original of said map, or true copy thereof, shall be filed with the
Municipal Clerk and be maintained as an official record of the Borough.
Chapter 20
ENTERTAINMENT, LICENSED
35.Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 18B-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-2
1:127

ARTICLE I
Circuses, Exhibitions and Other Shows
[Adopted 5-7-1919 by Ord. No. 45]
§ 20-1. License required for shows.
It shall be unlawful to give or hold any circus, play, exhibition, common
show or theatrical performance within the limits of the Borough of Ho-Ho-
Kus without having first obtained a license for that purpose.
§ 20-2. Licensing of certain buildings, tents, structures or grounds.
It shall be unlawful to give or hold any circus, play, exhibition, common
show or theatrical performance or any public amusement where the speed
of horses, speed or kinds of automobiles or airplanes are exhibited and
where an admission fee is charged in any building, tent or structure or
grounds, without such building, tent, structure or grounds being licensed
for that purpose.
§ 20-3. License fees.
The license fees shall be as follows:
A. Concert hall: $5 per day or $100 per year.
B. Common show: $5 per day.
C. Theater for the exhibition of moving pictures: $5 per day or $50 per
year.
D. Open-air moving pictures: $5 per day or $50 per year.
E. Public dance hall: $5 per day or $100 per year.
F. Theaters for exhibitions or shows other than moving pictures: $5 per
day or $100 per year.
G. Traveling or other street shows: $5 per day or $100 per year.
H. Places where speed of horses, etc., is shown:
(1) Any place of public amusement where the speed of horses or breed
of horses or speed or kinds of automobiles or airplanes are
exhibited and an admission fee is charged: $50 per day or $500 per
year.
(2) The owner of any racetrack, grounds or place of public amusement
where the speed of horses or breed of horses or speed or kinds of
automobiles or airplanes are exhibited for which an admission fee
is charged shall not be required to take out a license for each of
such shows or exhibitions as provided for in this article, provided
that the receipts of the admission to such shows or exhibitions shall
be for the sole benefit of the owners of the ground or place where
§ 20-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-3
1:129
§ 20-4. Application for license; issuance.
Licenses shall be issued by the Borough Clerk on application in writing
stating the time and place when and where such circus, play, exhibition,
theatrical performance, common show or public amusement shall be given,
and the owner or person in charge thereof, which application shall be
accompanied by the license fee herein provided.
§ 20-5. Purpose of fees.
The license fees fixed in this article are imposed for revenue.
§ 20-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons giving or taking part in or permitting any grounds,
building or structure of any kind to be used for any circus, play, exhibition,
theatrical performance, common show or traveling show or public
amusement, without having first obtained a license for that purpose as
herein provided, or any corporation or corporations, person or persons
permitting to be used any building, structure or grounds for any such
purpose without a license having been first obtained as herein provided
shall forfeit and pay a penalty not exceeding $100 for each offense.
§ 20-7. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon its publication as required by law.
such show or exhibition is given, and provided further that the
owner has taken out a yearly license for such grounds or place.
Said license fee is hereby fixed at $50 per year, all licenses to
expire on the 31st day of December in each year. [Added
6-19-1929 by Ord. No. 122]
§ 20-3 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 20-7
1:130
ARTICLE II
Billiards, Bowling and Other Games
[Adopted 6-16-1927]
§ 20-8. License required.
No person shall keep a billiard table or pool table, bowling alley or
shuffleboard for public use or hire within the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus without
first obtaining a license.
§ 20-9. Application for license.
Application for such license shall state the location of the building and room
where such billiard table, pool table, bowling alley or shuffleboard are to
be used, the name of the applicant, the number of tables, bowling alleys or
shuffleboards, and the name of the owner of the building.
§ 20-10. Issuance of license.
All licenses granted under the provisions of this article shall be issued by
the Borough Clerk at the direction of the Borough Council.
§ 20-11. Revocation or suspension of license; expiration.
The Council shall have power to revoke or suspend any such license, in its
discretion, in case gambling or disorderly conduct is permitted or any of the
provisions of this article violated, and, after hearing before said Council, the
licensee should be determined to be a person unfit for the conduct of such
business. Unless sooner revoked, all licenses shall expire on the 31st day of
December next ensuing the date of issuing the same.
§ 20-12. License fees.
The annual license fee for keeping a billiard parlor, pool parlor, bowling
alley or shuffleboard shall be $5 for each table or shuffleboard and $10 for
each bowling alley. The minimum fee, however, for any such place, shall be
the sum of $25.
§ 20-13. Purpose of fees.
The license fee herein fixed is for revenue.
§ 20-14. Restriction as to certain minors.
No minor under the age of 18 years shall be permitted to play billiards, pool,
bowling or shuffleboard in any place licensed under the provisions of this
article, except under the consent of his parent or guardian.
§ 20-15. Hours; loitering by minors; inspections.
§ 20-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-15
1:131
§ 20-16. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall be
liable to a penalty either by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not
exceeding 10 days or a fine not exceeding $100, or both, for each offense, as
the Magistrate before whom conviction is had shall determine, who shall fix
the amount of said penalty not in excess of the maximum herein provided.
§ 20-17. When effective.
This article shall take effect 10 days after the publication thereof as
required by law.
A. All places licensed under the provisions of this article shall close every
night at 12:00 midnight and remain closed until 7:00 a.m. each day. The
time herein specified shall be standard or daylight saving time when
and as used in the Borough.
B. No loitering by minors under the age of 18 shall be permitted. Such
places, while open, shall have an unobstructed view from the street. No
curtains, shades or other obstructions to view shall be permitted on any
windows.
C. All places licensed under the provisions of this article shall be subject at
all times to police inspection and shall be closed on the first day of the
week, commonly known as Sunday.
§ 20-15 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 20-17
1:132
ARTICLE III
Miniature Golf Courses
[Adopted 8-20-1930]
§ 20-18. License required.
No person or persons, corporation or corporations shall set up or operate
any miniature golf course, miniature driving and putting course, practice
court or other device for profit or where a fee is charged within the limits of
the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus without first taking out a license therefor before
opening to the public or operating any such miniature golf course, driving
and putting course, practice court or any other such amusement device.
§ 20-19. Application for license; issuance; expiration.
§ 20-20. Revocation or suspension of license.
The Council of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus shall have power to revoke or
suspend any such license, in its discretion, in case gambling or disorderly
conduct is permitted or any of the provisions of this article violated or, if
in the judgment of the Borough Council, the operation of such course shall
constitute a nuisance.
§ 20-21. License fees; purpose.
§ 20-22. Hours.
All places licensed under the provisions of this article shall close every night
at 12:00 midnight.
§ 20-23. Zoning requirements.
All licenses granted under the provisions of this article shall be subject
to the provisions of Chapter 85, Zoning, if any, affecting such use of the
premises for which the license is applied and shall obtain a permit for
occupancy before such court or course is operated.
A. All licenses granted under the provisions of this article shall be issued
by the Borough Clerk on application in writing signed by the person or
persons, corporation or corporations applying for such license,
describing the location where such course, court or other device is to be
operated, accompanied by the license fee hereinafter specified.
B. All licenses shall expire on the 31st day of December next ensuing the
date of issuing the same.
A. The annual license fee for the keeping of a miniature golf course,
practice court or other such device for profit or where a fee is charged
shall be $50.
B. The license fee herein fixed is for revenue.
§ 20-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-24
1:133
§ 20-24. Parking accommodations.
Every application for a license shall be accompanied by a plan showing
sufficient provisions for parking to accommodate the patrons of such course
or court. The Council reserves the right to reject any application for license
where sufficient parking facilities are not provided or where in the
judgment of the Council such course or court is not in a suitable location.
§ 20-25. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, corporation or corporations violating any of the
provisions of this article shall be subject to a penalty by imprisonment in
the county jail for five days or a fine of $200, or both, for each offense.
The Magistrate before whom conviction is had shall fix the amount of said
penalty not in excess of the maximum herein provided.
§ 20-26. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately.
§ 20-24 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 20-26
1:134
ARTICLE IV
Coin-Operated Amusement Devices
[Adopted 2-27-1973 by Ord. No. 472]
§ 20-27. Maintenance and use prohibited.
It is hereby unlawful for any person to own, maintain, control, operate, use
or play or permit to be owned, maintained, controlled, operated, used or
played, either as operator, user or player or as owner, proprietor, lessee,
employee or agent, any coin-in-the-slot-operated mechanical game or device
such as pinball, bagatelle, baseball, bowling, mechanical grab machines,
Skee-ball or pokerino machines, or other devices of like character,
regardless of whether such game or device be operated or played for a
profit or prize or for further operation or play, or for the display or exercise
of skill or for amusement, and whether or not any element of skill is involved
in any way in said operation, use or play. This section shall not be deemed
to apply to music devices, commonly known as "jukeboxes," or merchandise
vending machines.
§ 20-28. Violations and penalties.
Any individual, corporation or partnership which shall violate the foregoing
section of the Code shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a fine in an amount
not to exceed $500 or imprisonment in the county jail for a term not to
exceed 90 days, or both, within the discretion of the Borough Judge.
§ 20-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-28
1:135

ARTICLE V
Bingo and Raffles
[Adopted 4-22-2008 by Ord. No. 934]
§ 20-29. Licensing.
The Borough Clerk is hereby authorized to approve the granting of raffle
and bingo licenses to be held in the Borough.
§ 20-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-29
1:137
Chapter 21
EXCAVATIONS AND DREDGING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land subdivision and site plan review — See
Ch. 32B.
Street openings and excavations — See Ch.
58, Art. II.
Soil movement — See Ch. 63.
Soil importation — See Ch. 63A.
§ 20-29 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 20-29
1:138
ARTICLE I
Watercourses
[Adopted 2-23-1988 by Ord. No. 618]
§ 21-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DREDGE — Includes digging, excavating, bulldozing and removal of any
kind.
MATERIAL — Includes soil, sand, gravel, clay, bog and mud.
OPERATION — Removal or disposition operations or a combination of both.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, work organization or legal entity of any kind.
§ 21-2. Permit required.
No person shall remove, dredge or excavate from or deposit in the bed
of any watercourse, stream, pond or lake any material without obtaining
from the Construction Code Official a written permit therefor. Prior to the
issuance of a permit, the application shall be reviewed and approved by an
appropriate writing by the Borough Engineer.
§ 21-3. Permit application; fees.
A permit may be issued upon the written verified application of the person
proposing to remove, dredge or excavate or to cause the removal, dredging
or excavation or proposing to deposit or to cause the deposition of material
in the bed of any watercourse, stream, pond or lake. The application shall
set forth the following:
A. The name and address of the applicant and source of the applicant's
right to dredge or deposit (owner, lessee, licensee, etc.). In all cases
where the applicant is not the owner, the consent of the owner, in
writing, must be annexed to the application.
B. The purpose of the proposed removal, dredging or excavation.
C. The amount of material proposed to be removed, dredged or excavated.
D. A description of the area from which removal, dredging or excavation is
proposed.
E. The manner in which the material will be removed, dredged or
excavated or deposited. The application shall be accompanied by an
application fee in the amount of $500. The applicant shall deposit with
the Borough in escrow an amount recommended by the Borough
Engineer, not to exceed $2,000, to cover the cost of engineering
inspections and approvals.
§ 21-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-4
1:139
§ 21-4. Operations procedures.
§ 21-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject
to a fine not exceeding $500 or imprisonment in the county jail for a term
not exceeding 90 days, in the discretion of the Judge of the Municipal Court
before whom such conviction shall be had. Each and every violation and
nonconformance with this article or each day that any provision of this
article shall have been violated shall be construed as a separate and distinct
violation thereof.
§ 21-6. Repealer.
Any ordinance or the provisions of any ordinance inconsistent with the
provisions hereof are repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
§ 21-7. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon final passage and publication
as required by law.
A. All operations under permit issued pursuant to this article shall be done
in a manner that the removal, dredging, excavation and disposition of
material and the redepositing and storage thereof will not undermine,
weaken or deprive of support other lands in the vicinity or otherwise
adversely affect the watercourse, stream, pond or lake or substantially
change the course of any channel or natural movement or flow of
waters or cause or accelerate the drift of soil, shale, mud or bog nor
adversely affect wildlife or other natural resources.
B. Any removal, dredging or excavating operation shall be commenced
and completed, including the redepositing of materials dredged or
excavated, within a period of 60 days. No dredge materials shall be
stored on the premises for a period in excess of 60 days.
C. Upon completion of any removal, dredging or excavating operations,
including the redisposition of materials dredged or excavated, the
operation shall be subject to inspection and approval by the Borough
Engineer and the Construction Code Official, who shall issue a
certificate of final approval.
§ 21-4 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 21-7
1:140
Chapter 22
(RESERVED)
Chapter 23
FILMING
§ 23-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FILMING — The taking of still or motion pictures, either on film, videotape,
or similar recording medium, for commercial or educational purposes
intended for viewing on video receivers, television or in theaters or for
institutional use.
MAJOR MOTION PICTURE/TELEVISION SERIES — Any film which is
financed and/or distributed by a major motion picture studio, including but
not limited to the following:
PUBLIC LANDS — Any and every public street, highway, sidewalk, square,
public park, playground or any other public place within the Borough which
is within the jurisdiction and control of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
§ 23-2. Permit requirements.
A. Universal Pictures.
B. Warner Brothers, including New Line Cinema, Castle Rock Cinema.
C. Paramount, including MTV Films and Nickelodeon Movie.
D. 20th Century Fox, including Fox Searchlight.
E. Sony/Columbia.
F. Disney/Miramax.
G. MGM/United Artists.
H. Dreamworks.
I. Any film for which the budget is at least $5,000,000.
J. Recurrent weekly television series programming.
A. No person shall film or permit filming within the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus
without first obtaining a permit therefor, which permit shall set forth
the location of such filming and the date or dates when filming shall
take place. A permit is required to be applied for at least five days prior
to the first date that filming is to take place.
§ 21-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-2
1:141
B. Permits shall be obtained in the office of the Borough Administrator
during normal business hours. Applications for such permits shall be in
a form approved by the Borough Administrator and shall be
accompanied by a permit fee in the amount established herein.
C. One permit shall be required for each location. Said permit must be
readily available for inspection by Borough officials at all times at the
site of the filming.
D. No permit shall authorize filming for more than three consecutive days
in any one location, and in no event shall filming at one location within
the Borough exceed a total of six days in any one calendar year,
regardless of the number of permits utilized in reaching the six-day
maximum. This six-day limitation may be extended only if the filming
requested constitutes a major motion picture as defined herein. When
filming is requested with respect to a major motion picture, the
approved location of such filming and approved duration of such filming
by specific reference to day or dates shall not exceed six days in
duration. Any days necessary to be used for set up in preparation for a
major motion picture filming may, in the discretion of the Borough
Administrator, be counted as a filming day where such set up is
anticipated to involve the following: traffic congestion at the location
caused by vehicles to be parked on the public street; applicant's ability
to remove film-related vehicles off the public street; when the applicant
is requesting restrictions on the use of public streets or public parking
during the course of the filming; nature of the film shoot itself, e.g.,
indoor or outdoor, day or night; prior experience of the film company/
applicant with the Borough, if any; and consultation with the
appropriate Council representative as designated by the Mayor. The
Borough Administrator in his or her discretion may extend the six-day
filming location limitation provided for herein where such filming
occurs entirely upon public lands following a favorable review of the
factors set forth herein.
E. If a permit is issued and, due to inclement weather or other good cause,
filming does not in fact take place on the dates specified, the Borough
Administrator may, at the request of the applicant, issue a new permit
for filming on other dates, subject to full compliance with all other
provisions of this chapter. No additional fee shall be paid for this
permit.
F. The Borough Administrator may refuse to issue a permit whenever the
Administrator determines, on the basis of objective facts and after a
review of the application and a report thereon by the Police Department
and by other Borough agencies involved with the proposed filming site,
that filming at the location and/or the time set forth in the application
would violate any law or ordinance or would unreasonably interfere
with the use and enjoyment of adjoining properties, unreasonably
impede the free flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or otherwise
endanger the public's health, safety or welfare.
§ 23-2 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 23-2
1:142
§ 23-3. Rules and regulations.
G. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Borough Administrator
denying or revoking a permit or person requesting relief pursuant to
Subsection F may appeal to the Mayor and Council. A written notice of
appeal setting forth the reasons for the appeal shall be filed with the
Borough Administrator. An appeal from the decision of the Borough
Administrator shall be filed within 10 days of the Borough
Administrator's decision. The Mayor and Council shall set the matter
down for a hearing within 30 days of the day on which the notice of
appeal was filed. The decision of the Mayor and Council shall be in the
form of a resolution supporting or reversing the decision of the Borough
Administrator at the first regularly scheduled public meeting of the
Mayor and Council after the hearing on the appeal, unless the appellant
agrees in writing to a later date for the decision.
A. No permit shall be issued for filming upon public lands within the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus unless the applicant for such permit:
(1) Provides proof of insurance coverage for bodily injury for any one
person in the amount of $1,000,000, for any aggregate occurrence
in the amount of $3,000,000 and for property damage for each
occurrence in the aggregate amount of $500,000. The Borough of
Ho-Ho-Kus shall be named as an additional insured on the policy,
and a certificate of insurance shall be delivered to the Borough at
the time that the permit is issued.
(2) Agrees in writing to indemnify and save harmless the Borough of
Ho-Ho-Kus from any and all liability or damages resulting from the
use of such public lands.
(3) Posts a cash or maintenance bond of $1,000 in favor of the Borough
and protecting and insuring that the location utilized will be left,
after filming, in a satisfactory condition, free of debris, rubbish and
equipment, and that due observation of all Borough ordinances,
laws and regulations will be followed. If no claim is made upon the
bond, the bond shall be returned to the permittee within 30 days of
the completion of the filming.
B. The holder of a permit shall take all reasonable steps to minimize
interference with the free passage of pedestrians and traffic over public
lands and shall comply with all lawful directives issued by the Borough
Police Department with respect thereto.
C. The holder of a permit shall conduct filming in such a manner as to
minimize the inconvenience or discomfort to adjoining property owners
attributable to such filming and shall, to the extent practicable, abate
noise and park vehicles associated with such filming off the public
streets. The holder shall avoid any interference with previously
scheduled activities upon public lands and limit to the extent possible
any interference with normal public activity on such public lands.
§ 23-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-3
1:143
D. The holder of a permit shall take all reasonable steps to minimize the
creation and spread of debris and rubbish during filming and shall be
responsible for removing all equipment, debris and other rubbish from
the filming location upon the completion of filming or the expiration of
the permit, whichever comes first.
E. Filming shall be permitted only Monday through Friday between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., or sundown, whichever is earlier,
provided that all requests for night scenes shall be approved in the
permit to be granted in accordance with these regulations. The setup,
production and breakdown required by all filming shall be included in
the hours as set forth herein.
F. Where the applicant(s) production activity, by reason of location or
otherwise, will directly involve and/or affect any businesses, merchants
or residents, these parties shall be given written notice of the filming at
least three days prior to the requested shooting date and be informed,
and any objections may be filed with the Borough Administrator, said
objections to form a part of applicant's application and be considered in
the review of the same. Proof of service of notification to adjacent
owners shall be submitted to the Borough Administrator no later than
two days prior to the requested shooting date.
G. The Borough reserves the right to require one or more on-site
patrolmen in situations where the proposed production may impede the
proper flow of traffic, the cost of said patrolmen to be borne by the
applicant as a cost of production. Where existing electrical power lines
are to be utilized by the production, an on-site licensed electrician may
be similarly required if the production company does not have a
licensed electrician on staff.
H. The Borough Administrator may authorize a waiver of any of the
requirements or limitations of this chapter and may authorize filming
on other public property not defined as "public lands" and may
authorize filming other than during the hours herein described or may
extend the duration of a permit beyond six days or may waive any other
limitation or requirement of this chapter whenever the Borough
Administrator determines that strict compliance with such limitations
will pose an unreasonable burden upon the applicant and that such a
permit may be issued without endangering the public's health, safety
and welfare. The Borough Administrator may authorize filming other
than during the hours herein described. In determining whether to
allow an extension of time under this subsection, the Borough
Administrator shall consider the following factors:
(1) Traffic congestion of the location caused by vehicles to be parked
on a public street;
(2) Applicant's ability to remove film-related vehicles off the public
street;
§ 23-3 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 23-3
1:144
§ 23-4. Fees.
The schedule of fees for the issuance of permits authorized herein are as
follows:
§ 23-5. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the filming of news stories
within the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
§ 23-6. Violations and penalties.
Where the owner of the premises is not the applicant for a permit required
by this chapter, both the owner and the applicant shall each be liable for
violations hereof. Any person, firm or corporation violating this chapter or
these rules and regulations, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by
a fine not exceeding $1,000 per day or by imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 25
(3) When the applicant is requesting restrictions on the use of public
streets or public parking during the course of the filming;
(4) Nature of the filming shoot itself, e.g., indoor or outdoor, day or
night; and
(5) Prior experience of the film company/applicant with the Borough, if
any.
I. Copies of the approved permit will be sent to the Police and Fire
Departments before filming takes place and to the New Jersey Film
Commission. The applicant shall notify the Fire Department and the
Police Department 24 hours before filming takes place and permit the
Fire Department and the Police Department to inspect the site and the
equipment to be used. The applicant shall comply with all fire and
safety instructions issued by the Fire Department and the Police
Department.
A. Basic filming permit: $100. Where an applicant requests a waiver of the
provisions of § 23-2A requiring expedited processing of the permit
application, the basic filming fee shall be $125.
B. Daily filming fee in addition to the basic filming permit: $500 per day.
C. Daily filming fee payable for major motion picture: $1,500 per day,
except that recurrent weekly television programming fees shall be
charged in accordance with Subsections A and B above.
D. Filming permit for nonprofit applicants filming for educational
purposes (no daily rate required): $25.
§ 23-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-6
1:145
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 26.
Police Department — See Ch. 46.
Uniform Construction Code
Department — See Ch. 77.
§ 23-6 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 23-6
1:146
ARTICLE I
Department Established
§ 25-1. Fire Department established.
There shall be appointed by the Mayor of the Borough two members of the
Council to be the Fire Commissioner and Deputy Fire Commissioner and
who, together with the officers, as shall be elected, and members, shall
constitute the Fire Department of the Borough.
§ 25-2. Membership qualifications.
The membership of the said Department shall not exceed 60 in number.
Any person of at least 18 years of age, of good moral character, who is
a resident of or gainfully employed within the Borough or, upon approval
of the Borough Council, a resident of or gainfully employed person in a
contiguous municipality shall be eligible for acceptance to membership in
the Department. Each eligible member, as well as all existing active member
firefighters, must be physically fit to perform the duties of a firefighter
and shall annually have a physical examination and produce evidence in
the form of a certificate to that effect made by a practicing physician after
having been examined by the said physician. Applicants must be able to
read, write, and speak the English language. Applicants must not have been
convicted of a criminal offense. Every person accepted to membership in the
Department shall sign the membership roll, which shall be kept on file by
the Borough Clerk, and such member shall promise to perform all the duties
of a firefighter as prescribed by the bylaws and rules of the Department and
the ordinances of the Borough.
§ 25-2.1. Additional qualifications; antidiscrimination policy.
Membership shall be in accordance with the bylaws of the Department, as
well as the New Jersey Administrative Code. Membership in the Ho-Ho-Kus
Volunteer Fire Department shall be open to all persons who are physically
fit and able to perform the duties of volunteer firefighters, without
discrimination on the basis of an applicant's race, creed, color, sex, age,
national origin, ancestry, or marital status. Any person who is rejected
or dismissed from membership by the Department shall have the right to
challenge such action in accordance with the procedures set forth in the
Law Against Discrimination.36
§ 25-3. Bylaws and rules.
The Bylaws and Rules Committee of the Fire Department shall each year
review, amend and/or accept the bylaws and rules for the Department. The
bylaws shall become effective immediately after approval and adoption by a
vote of 2/3 of the eligible membership present. After approval and adoption
by the membership, the bylaws shall be forwarded by the Department to
36.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:5-1 et seq.
§ 25-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-3
1:147
the Fire Commissioner, a copy of which shall also be filed with the Borough
Clerk.
§ 25-4. Officers.
The line officers of the Fire Department shall be the Chief, Assistant Chief,
Captain, First Lieutenant and Second Lieutenant, as well as other line
officers, as recommended by the Fire Chief, all of whom shall be elected
by the members of the Department. The line officers of the Department are
responsible to the Mayor and Council. The Chief, Assistant Chief, Captain,
First Lieutenant and Second Lieutenant must be approved by the Borough
Council before taking office. In all cases where the approval of the line
officer so elected is refused by the Borough Council, the existing line
officers shall assume those responsibilities until an officer elected by the
members of the Department has been approved by the Borough Council.
§ 25-4.1. National Incident Management System training
requirements.
By Homeland Security Presidential Directive No. 5, "Management of
Domestic Incidents," dated February 28, 2003, issued by the Department
of Homeland Security on March 1, 2004, to provide a comprehensive and
consistent national approach to all hazard incident management at all
jurisdictional levels and across functional disciplines, and by New Jersey
Executive Order No. 50, adopted by the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus by NIMS
resolution on January 23, 2007, line officers will have, as a minimum, the
currently required perquisite ICS training. As of December 31, 2008, the
ICS training requirements are listed below:
§ 25-5. Suspension or expulsion of members or line officers.
The Borough Council shall have the right to expel or suspend any firefighter
or line officer upon charges proffered and a trial by the Council.
A. ICS-100: all first responders, the Chief, Assistant Chief, Captain, First
Lieutenant and Second Lieutenant.
B. ICS-200: all first line supervisors, the Chief, Assistant Chief and
Captain. Classroom delivery of ICS-200 is required for the Division of
Fire Safety Incident Management System.
C. ICS-300: all incident commanders, the Fire Chief, Assistant Chief and
Captain (i.e., all those individuals with overall responsibility or who may
assume overall responsibility for commanding operations on an incident
scene or coordinating the resources at an EOC).
D. ICS-400: advanced ICS command and general staff, agency
administrators with incident command responsibility, Department
heads, emergency managers, areas commander and Multi-Agency
Coordination System/Emergency Operations Center managers.
§ 25-3 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 25-5.1
1:148
§ 25-5.1. Temporary suspension from active duty.
When the Fire Chief "red tags" a firefighter for noncompliance with
firematic regulations, he or she is not eligible to participate in any
firefighter activities until the "red tag" status has been removed by the
Fire Chief. When a firefighter is not eligible to participate in activities that
would normally yield VIP credit, he or she cannot be given credit for those
activities until eligibility has been reinstated by the removal of the "red tag"
status.
§ 25-6. Monthly report by Fire Chief.
It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief to report to the Fire Commissioner and
Borough Council at the first meeting in each month the overall condition of
the Department, including the fire apparatus and all other matters the Fire
Chief or the Borough shall deem advisable.
§ 25-7. Badge and certificate of membership.
Each member of the Department shall, on signing the roll, be entitled to
receive a badge and certificate of membership signed by the Mayor, Fire
Commissioner, and President of the Department. The firefighter badge shall
remain the property of the Department and shall be surrendered upon the
resignation, suspension or expulsion of any member.
§ 25-8. Compensation.
The services of the members of the Fire Department shall be voluntary and
without formal compensation, other than clothing allowances and volunteer
incentive programs (VIP) administered by the Borough to all eligible
members.
§ 25-9. Amendments.
The Borough Council shall have the right to alter or amend this article at
any time, as it shall deem advisable.
§ 25-10. Junior Firefighters Auxiliary. [Amended 10-23-2012 by Ord.
No. 1011]
There is hereby established as part of the Fire Department of the Borough
a Junior Firefighters Auxiliary in accordance with all the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-95 through 40A:14-98, inclusive, and the qualifications for
membership in the auxiliary shall be as follows:
A. Any person between the ages of 16 and 21 being a resident of the
Borough in good standing and of good moral character or a child of any
senior member shall be eligible for membership in the Junior
Firefighters Auxiliary. [Amended 11-24-2015 by Ord. No. 1043]
B. Membership shall be conditioned upon acceptance by the Fire
Department, subject to the approval of the Borough Council, and, upon
§ 25-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-10
1:149
such approval, the member shall sign the membership roll, which shall
be kept by the Borough Clerk, and the member shall promise to perform
all the duties of a junior firefighter as prescribed by the Department
bylaws, the rules of the Fire Department and the ordinances of the
Borough. Every member of the Junior Firefighters Auxiliary shall be
required to obtain permission to join the Auxiliary from their parents
or guardians, and such permission shall be in writing, acknowledged or
proved in the manner provided by law for deeds to real estate.
§ 25-10 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 25-10
1:150
ARTICLE II
Death Benefit
§ 25-11. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ELIGIBLE MEMBER — Any individual whose name is carried on the active
roster of the Ho-Ho-Kus Volunteer Fire Department, was over the age of 45
when joining the Fire Department and is an active or life member.
§ 25-12. Death benefit established.
In the event of the death of a member of the Ho-Ho-Kus Volunteer Fire
Department who is not entitled to and who has previously waived the death
benefit of the New Jersey State Firemen's Association, the widow, or in
lieu thereof, the estate of such deceased firefighter shall be entitled to
receive from the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus an amount equal to the amount of
the prorated death benefit which would have been provided by the New
Jersey State Firemen's Association at the time of the demise of an otherwise
eligible member of the Ho-Ho-Kus Volunteer Fire Department.
§ 25-13. Investigation of claims; report and recommendations.
Any claim for payment of a death benefit shall be investigated by the
Ho-Ho-Kus Fire Department Relief Fund Rules Committee. A report and
recommendations, including the amount of the death benefit to be paid, will
be presented to the Mayor and Council for its final determination.
§ 25-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-13
1:151

ARTICLE III
Severability; Repealer; When Effective
§ 25-14. Severability.
If any article, section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or provision of
this chapter shall for any reason be held unconstitutional or invalid, such
adjudication shall apply only to the article, section, paragraph, sentence,
clause, phrase or provision so adjudged, and the remainder of this chapter
shall be deemed valid and effective.
§ 25-15. Repealer.
Any and all ordinances, or parts thereof, inconsistent with the provisions of
this chapter are hereby repealed to such extent as they are so deemed in
conflict or inconsistent.
§ 25-16. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon publication in the manner
provided by law.
§ 25-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-16
1:153
Chapter 26
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 25. Uniform Construction Code
Department — See Ch. 77.
§ 26-1. Local enforcement.
Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c. 383),37
the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code shall be locally enforced in the Borough
of Ho-Ho-Kus.
§ 26-2. Designation of local enforcing agency.
The local enforcing agency shall be the Bureau of Fire Prevention in the Ho-
Ho-Kus Fire Department.
§ 26-3. Duties of local enforcing agency.
The local enforcement agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act38
and the codes and regulations adopted under it in all buildings, structures
and premises within the established boundaries of the Borough of Ho-Ho-
Kus, other than owner-occupied one- and two-family dwellings, and shall
faithfully comply with the requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act and
the Uniform Fire Code.
§ 26-4. Life-hazard uses.
The local enforcing agency established by § 26-2 hereof shall carry out the
periodic inspections of life-hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire Code
on behalf of the Commissioner of Community Affairs.
§ 26-5. Organization of local enforcing agency.
The local enforcing agency established by § 26-2 hereof shall be a part of
Ho-Ho-Kus Fire Department and shall be under the direct supervision and
control of the Fire Official.
§ 26-6. Fire Official; inspectors and other employees.
A. Appointment of Fire Official. The local enforcing agency shall be under
the direct supervision of a Fire Official who shall be appointed by the
Mayor and Council of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus with advice and
recommendation of the Chief of the Fire Department. The Fire Official
37.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-202.
38.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.
§ 25-16 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 26-6
1:154
§ 26-7. Appeals.
Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act,39 any person
aggrieved by any order of the local enforcement agency shall have the right
to appeal to the Construction Board of Appeals of Bergen County.
§ 26-8. Additional required inspections and fees. [Amended
4-24-1990 by Ord. No. 656]
In addition to the inspection and fees required pursuant to the Act and
the regulations of the Department of Community Affairs, the following
additional inspections, fees and registration shall be required annually:
shall be subject to removal by the Mayor and Council, upon
recommendation of the Fire Chief, for inefficiency or misconduct in
office after a hearing conducted by the appointing authority.
B. Term of office. The Fire Official shall serve a term of four years. Any
vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term.
C. Inspectors and employees. Such inspectors and other employees as may
be necessary in the local enforcing agency shall be appointed by the
Mayor and Council with the advice and recommendation of the Fire
Official for terms of two years. Inspectors and other employees of the
enforcing agency shall be subject to removal by the Fire Official for
inefficiency or misconduct after a hearing by the appointing authority.
A. All industrial and commercial buildings and structures within the
boundaries of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus not covered under the Uniform
Fire Safety Act as a life-hazard use shall be registered with the Bureau
and inspected annually.
B. Eating establishments with a maximum permitted occupancy of fewer
than 50 in which no alcoholic beverages are served shall be registered
with the Bureau and inspected annually.
C. Annual registration fees. [Amended 10-28-1997 by Ord. No. 785]
(1) Each annual registration required herein shall have a fee paid
annually to the enforcing agency to be used in the enforcement of
the New Jersey Fire Code. The following fees shall be applicable:
[Amended 5-24-2011 by Ord. No. 989]
Use Group Fee Amount
Assembly $100
Business (gross floor area of the building or
part of the building used for business):
Up to 4,000 square feet $50
4,001 to 8,000 square feet $55
39.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-206 and 52:27D-208.
§ 26-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-8
1:155
Use Group Fee Amount
8,001 to 11,999 square feet $60
12,000 to 17,999 square feet $65
18,000 square feet and up $70
Factory and industrial $150
Mercantile:
Up to 4,000 square feet $50
4,001 to 8,000 square feet $55
8,001 to 11,999 square feet $60
Mercantile establishments in excess of
12,000 square feet are regulated by the
state.
Residential (multifamily):
3 to 10 units $75
11 to 20 units $85
21 to 30 units $100
31 or more units $125
Storage buildings $150
(2) The Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus may amend the foregoing fee schedule
from time to time by resolution.
D. A hazardous material registration permit is hereby established and
required on an annual basis. The fee for this permit shall be $100, paid
to the enforcement agency, to be used in the enforcement of the New
Jersey Uniform Fire Code. "Hazardous materials" are hereby defined as
follows: [Amended 5-24-2011 by Ord. No. 989]
(1) Oxy-acetylene torch.
(2) Storage of five gallons or more of a combustible liquid.
(3) Storage of any flammable liquid in any quantity.
(4) Vehicles stored within a structure.
(5) Flammable gas or high-pressure tanks of any kind.
E. The owner or user of any building or structure, lot or land or part
thereof where anything in violation of this chapter shall be placed or
shall exist or who shall fail to comply with the orders of the Fire Official
or his designee shall each be guilty of a separate misdemeanor and,
upon conviction thereof, shall each be liable to a fine of not less than
$500 and not more than $1,000 or to imprisonment for not more than
90 days, or both. Each and every day such violation continues after the
§ 26-8 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 26-8
1:156
§ 26-9. Smoke detectors; carbon monoxide detectors. [Added
8-27-1991 by Ord. No. 684]
expiration of an abatement notice shall be deemed a separate and
distinct violation. [Amended 5-24-2011 by Ord. No. 989]
A. Installation. Smoke detectors and carbon monoxide detectors shall be
installed in each dwelling, as defined in N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.3, upon a sale,
rental, transfer, lease or change of occupancy of any dwelling in the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus. Each dwelling that is sold, rented, leased or
transferred shall have smoke-sensitive and carbon-monoxide-sensitive
alarms on each level of the structure and outside each separate
sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms and located on
or near the ceiling in accordance with the National Fire Protection
Association standard for the installation, maintenance and use of
household fire and carbon monoxide warning equipment. The
installation of battery-operated smoke and carbon monoxide alarm
devices shall be accepted as meeting the requirements of this section.
Smoke and carbon monoxide devices shall be tested and listed by a
product certification agency recognized by the State Division of Fire
Safety. [Amended 5-27-2008 by Ord. No. 936]
B. Maintenance responsibility.
(1) Sellers, transferors, lessors, buyers, transferees and tenants of all
dwelling units subject to this chapter shall be responsible for the
correct installation and maintenance of smoke detectors as
described herein. The owner of a rental unit shall, at the time of
installation of smoke detectors and thereafter at the
commencement of each tenancy, provide to the tenant at least one
copy of written instructions on the operation, maintenance and
testing of the smoke detector, including the replacement of
batteries in the battery-operated unit.
(2) The owner and tenant of each rental unit shall be responsible for
the proper maintenance of the smoke detectors, including the
replacing of batteries and the repair or replacement of the unit in
accordance with the standards herein set forth.
C. Inspection and records. Upon the sale of a dwelling unit or the rental,
lease or transfer of any dwelling unit, the seller, landlord, transferor,
buyer, transferee or tenant is required to obtain from the Ho-Ho-Kus
Bureau of Fire Prevention a certificate of inspection stating that the
property is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
D. Fee. The fee for the certificate of inspection shall be $50 for the first
inspection visit and $25 for each inspection visit required thereafter to
obtain compliance. Applications for certificates of inspection shall be
submitted to the Fire Official of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus with the
application fee prepaid. Within 10 to 15 days of the receipt of the
application and fee, the designated inspector of the Ho-Ho-Kus Bureau
§ 26-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-9
1:157
Chapter 27
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use procedures — See Ch. 32A.
Land subdivision and site plan review — See
Ch. 32B.
Zoning — See Ch. 85.
§ 27-1. Findings.
of Fire Prevention shall inspect the premises to determine whether the
same complies with the provisions of this chapter.
E. Violations and penalties. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 26-8E of
the Code of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, any person or corporation,
including an officer, director or employee of a corporation, who or
which violates any of the provisions of this § 26-9 shall commit a
violation of the Uniform Fire Safety Act of New Jersey40 and shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 for a first offense and for each
and every subsequent and separate offense which shall be enforceable
by civil action in a summary manner under the Penalty Enforcement
Law, N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1 et seq.,41 with further provisions that a violator
who fails to pay may be imprisoned for up to six months. In case of
continuing violations, each day that the violation persists shall be
deemed a separate violation. In addition, the violator shall become
liable to the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus for the cost of suppressing any fire
directly or indirectly resulting from the violation pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 52:27D-210.
A. The flood hazard areas of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and velocities
and, when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses
that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected
from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
40.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.
41.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1 et seq. was repealed by L. 1999, c. 274. See now N.J.S.A.
2A:58-10 et seq., entitled "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999."
§ 26-9 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 27-2
1:158
§ 27-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
§ 27-3. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
A. Protect human life and health.
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control projects.
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public.
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions.
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood control.
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood-blight areas.
G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard.
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety
and property due to water or erosion hazards or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities.
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction.
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters.
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage.
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 27-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-4
1:159
§ 27-4. Word usage; definitions. [Amended 4-28-1987 by Ord. No.
603]
A. Word usage. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in
this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they
have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
B. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Planning Board's interpretation
of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO Zone on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one
foot to three feet, a clearly defined channel does not exist, the path of
flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and velocity flow may be
evident.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain
within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support
of the building and is intended, through its design and construction, to
collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage
to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations or storage of equipment or materials located within the
areas of special flood hazard.[Amended 9-19-1995 by Ord. No. 750]
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built, in the case of
a building in an area of special flood hazard, to have the top of the
elevated floor or, in the case of a building in a coastal high-hazard
area, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member
of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of
piling, columns (posts and piers) or shear walls parallel to the flow of
the water and adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural
integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of
the base flood. In an area of special flood hazard, "elevated building"
also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation
perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movement of floodwaters. In areas of coastal high hazard, "elevated
building" also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of
§ 27-4 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 27-4
1:160
"elevated building," even though the lower area is enclosed by means
of breakaway walls.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which
the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — The official report in which the Federal
Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the
Flood Boundary/Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the
base flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of the
partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special
purposes ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance
and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power.
The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination
thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage
prevention and reduction.[Added 9-19-1995 by Ord. No. 750]
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than 0.2 foot.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:[Added 9-19-1995 by
Ord. No. 750]
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
(2)
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
§ 27-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-4
1:161
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area,
including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an
area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor,
provided that such enclosure is not built so to render the structure in
violation of other applicable nonelevation design requirements.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of this chapter.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act
(P.L. 97-348),42 includes substantial improvement and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided that the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The "actual start" means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure
on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footing, the installation of
piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of
excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of
streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor
does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part
of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the "actual start
of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.[Amended 9-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 750]
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building or a gas or liquid storage
tank that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of
the structure before the damage occurred.[Added 9-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 750]
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
(a)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
(b)
(4)
42.Editor's Note: See 16 U.S.C. § 3501 et seq.
§ 27-4 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 27-4
1:162
§ 27-5. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
§ 27-6. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
[Amended 9-19-1995 by Ord. No. 750; 11-24-1998 by Ord. No. 811;
8-23-2005 by Ord. No. 901]
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50%
of the market value of the structure either before the improvement or
repair is started or, if the structure has been damaged and is being
restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this
definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of
the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however,
include either:[Amended 9-19-1995 by Ord. No. 750]
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter
which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structures continued designation as an
historic structure.
(2)
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus,
Community No. 340044, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) A scientific and engineering report entitled "Flood Insurance Study
of Bergen County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)," dated September
30, 2005, and all subsequent revisions.
(2) The Flood Insurance Rate Map for Bergen County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions), as shown on Index No. 34003C0000 and Panels
0088, 0089, 0176 and 0177, dated September 30, 2005, and all
subsequent revisions.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted by reference and declared to
be part of this chapter. The flood insurance study and/or maps are on
file at Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, 333 Warren Avenue, Ho-Ho-Kus, New
Jersey 07423.
§ 27-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-7
1:163
§ 27-7. Violations and penalties.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions, shall
constitute an offense. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined
not more than $200 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both, for
each violation and, in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in
the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy
any violation.
§ 27-8. Effect on other provisions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and other ordinances, easements, covenants or deed restrictions conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 27-9. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 27-10. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood
hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of Borough
of Ho-Ho-Kus, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 27-11. Development permits.
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins within any area of special flood hazard established in § 27-6.
Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by
the administrator and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate,
A. Considered as minimum requirements.
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body.
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
§ 27-7 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 27-11
1:164
drawn to scale, showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations
of the area in question, existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of
materials, drainage facilities and the location of the foregoing. Specifically,
the following information is required:
§ 27-12. Designation of administrator.
The Construction Code Official is hereby appointed to administer and
implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit
applications in accordance with its provisions.
§ 27-13. Duties and responsibilities of administrator.
The duties of the administrator shall include but not be limited to:
§ 27-14. Use of other base flood data. [Amended 4-28-1987 by Ord.
No. 603]
When base flood elevation and floodway data has not been provided in
accordance with § 27-6, Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard,
the local administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base
flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other
source in order to administer § 27-20B(1), Residential construction, and
§ 27-20B(2), Nonresidential construction.
§ 27-15. Information to be obtained and maintained.
The administrator shall:
A. Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor, including
basement, of all structures.
B. Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any structure has been
floodproofed.
C. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 27-20B(2).
D. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
A. The review of all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
B. The review of all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
C. The review of all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway; if located in the floodway,
assurance that the encroachment provisions of § 27-20C(1) are met.
§ 27-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-15
1:165
§ 27-16. Alteration of watercourses.
The administrator shall:
§ 27-17. Boundary interpretations.
The administrator shall make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact
location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example,
where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as
provided in § 27-18.
§ 27-18. Appeals; variances.
A. Obtain and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of
the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially
improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a
basement.
B. For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(1) Verify and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level.
(2) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in § 27-11C.
C. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of
this chapter.
A. Notify adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency, the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
B. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not
diminished.
A. The Board of Adjustment as established by the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus
shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
B. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination
made by the administrator in the enforcement or administration of this
chapter.
C. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Adjustment, or any
taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Superior Court, as provided
by law.
§ 27-15 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 27-18
1:166
§ 27-19. Conditions for variances.
D. In passing upon such applications, the Board of Adjustment shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others.
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community.
(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable.
(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage.
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development.
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan
and floodplain management program of that area.
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles.
(10) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site.
(11) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems and streets and bridges.
E. Upon consideration of the factors of § 27-19 and the purposes of this
chapter, the Planning Board/Board of Adjustment may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further
the purposes of this chapter.
F. The Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any variances to
the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, provided that Subsection D(1)
§ 27-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-19
1:167
§ 27-20. Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
through (11) in § 27-18 have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for
issuing the variance increases. [Amended 9-19-1995 by Ord. No.
750]
B. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as
an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure. [Amended
9-19-1995 by Ord. No. 750]
C. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
D. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
E. Variances shall only be issued upon:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause.
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant.
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety or
extraordinary public expense or create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public as identified in § 27-18 or conflict with
existing local laws or ordinances.
F. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from
the reduced lowest floor elevation.
A. General standards. In all areas of special flood hazard, the following
standards are required:
(1) Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements
shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement
of the structure.
(2) Construction materials and methods.
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage.
§ 27-19 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 27-20
1:168
(b) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
(3) Utilities.
(a) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the system.
(b) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems and discharge from the systems into
floodwaters.
(c) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding.
(d) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding. [Added
2-27-1990 by Ord. No. 652]
(4) Subdivision proposals. [Amended 4-28-1987 by Ord. No. 603]
(a) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
(b) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems,
located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
(c) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.
(d) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development which contain at
least 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less.
(e) For all new construction and substantial improvements, fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to
flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
[1] A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding shall be provided.
§ 27-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-20
1:169
[2] The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
[3] Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
B. Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood
elevation data have been provided as set forth in § 27-6, Basis for
establishing areas of special flood hazard, or in § 27-14, Use of other
base flood data, the following standards are required:
(1) Residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated to or above base flood
elevation.
(2) Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential
structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to the level of the base flood elevation, together with
attendant utility and sanitary facilities, or shall: [Amended
4-28-1987 by Ord. No. 603]
(a) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure
is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water.
(b) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(c) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth in § 27-15B.
C. Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in
§ 27-6 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an
extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry
debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following
provisions apply:
(1) Encroachments shall be prohibited, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements and other development
unless a technical evaluation demonstrates that encroachments
shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence
of the base flood discharge.
(2) If § 27-20C(1) is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
§ 27-20 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 27-20
1:170
§ 27-21. Repealer.
The provisions of all ordinances inconsistent with the provisions hereof are
hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
§ 27-22. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective upon passage and publication in
accordance with law.
Chapter 27A
CURFEW
§ 27A-1. Findings; purpose.
§ 27A-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CULTURAL, EDUCATIONAL AND SOCIAL EVENTS SPONSORED BY
RELIGIOUS OR COMMUNITY-BASED ORGANIZATIONS — Any and all
activities, without limitation, to which the juvenile and others have been
specifically invited or in which they participate, provided the activity is
sponsored by the religious or community-based organization.
ERRANDS INVOLVING MEDICAL EMERGENCIES — Seeking medical
treatment from a health care provider for an emergent medical condition
relating to the juvenile or to the juvenile's "immediate family," which is
reduction provisions of § 27-20, Provisions for flood hazard
reduction.
(3) In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation
data has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined
with all other existing and anticipated development, shall not
increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than
0.2 foot at any point.
A. The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, in conjunction
with the Ho-Ho-Kus Police Department, has determined that there is
increased damage to real and personal property on the evenings of
October 30, which is commonly called "mischief night" or "cabbage
night," and on October 31, which is designated as Halloween.
B. In order to add a measure of protection for the residents of the Borough
of Ho-Ho-Kus and for parents and children who celebrate this holiday,
and in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.52, the Borough hereby
imposes the following restrictions.
§ 27-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27A-2
1:171
defined as parents, siblings, grandparents, aunts, uncles and cousins of the
first degree.
EXTRACURRICULAR SCHOOL ACTIVITIES — Any activity or event that is
sponsored by any public or private school geographically located within
the confines of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus to which the juvenile and other
students are specifically invited and which is scheduled to occur during the
hours of curfew.
GUARDIAN — A person, other than a parent, to whom legal custody of the
juvenile has been given by court order or who is acting in the place of the
parent or is responsible for the care and welfare of the juvenile.
JUVENILE — An individual who is under the age of 18 years.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access, including
but not limited to a public street, road, thoroughfare, sidewalk, bridge,
alley, plaza, park, recreation or shopping area, public transportation facility,
vehicles used for public transportation, parking lot or any other public
building structure or area.
RELIGIOUS OR COMMUNITY-BASED ORGANIZATION — Any house of
worship or affiliate thereof or any social, business, scholastic or recreational
entity located within the geographic confines of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
TIME OF CURFEW — From 7:30 p.m. on October 30 until 6:00 a.m. on
October 31 and from 8:00 p.m. on October 31 to 6:00 a.m. on November 1.
§ 27A-3. Curfew established.
§ 27A-4. Exceptions.
Notwithstanding the preceding, a juvenile, during the curfew hours
aforesaid, may, without limitation, engage in errands involving medical
emergencies, attend extracurricular school activities, and participate in
other cultural, educational and social events sponsored by a religious or
community-based organization.
§ 27A-5. Prohibited conduct.
A. No juvenile under the age of 18 years shall be on any public street or in
any public place between the hours from 7:30 p.m. on October 30 until
6:00 a.m. on October 31 and from 8:00 p.m. on October 31 to 6:00 a.m.
on November 1 unless accompanied by the juvenile's parents or
guardian or unless engaged in or traveling to or from a business or
occupation which the laws of the State of New Jersey authorize a
juvenile to perform.
B. No parent or guardian shall allow an unaccompanied juvenile to be on
any public street or in any public place between the hours from 7:30
p.m. on October 30 until 6:00 a.m. on October 31 and from 8:00 p.m. on
October 31 to 6:00 a.m. on November 1.
§ 27A-2 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 27A-5
1:172
§ 27A-6. Violations and penalties.
Any parent, guardian or juvenile who violates the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction, be fined, in the discretion of the Municipal Judge,
in accordance with § 1-16, General penalty, for each offense, or such may
be dealt with in accordance with juvenile court law and procedure. Each
violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 28
HAZARDOUS WASTE MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Improper disposal of waste — See Ch. 32.
Littering — See Ch. 34.
Pet waste — See Ch. 43.
Solid waste — See Ch. 64.
§ 28-1. Purpose.
A. No juvenile shall knowingly be in a public place during curfew hours
unless the juvenile is engaging, attending, or participating in an
exception stated hereinabove.
B. No parent or guardian shall knowingly allow an unaccompanied
juvenile for which he is responsible to be on any public street or in any
public place during curfew hours unless the juvenile is engaging,
attending or participating in an exception stated hereinabove.
A. This chapter provides for the reimbursement for, or the replacement of,
any and all equipment utilized by the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, for costs
expended, without regard to ownership, for the purpose of mitigating,
controlling, or containing any incident in which a hazardous material is
involved in fire, leak, release or spill, or where the potential thereof
exists, or for the prevention of same.
B. This chapter also provides for the reimbursement for the expenses
incurred by the Borough for the overtime wages paid to its employees,
agents or servants and the costs of medical or hospital treatment for
injuries sustained by any employee, agent or servant of the Borough
resulting from an incident involving a hazardous material, and any
miscellaneous expenses incurred by the Borough from an incident
involving a hazardous material.
C. This chapter mandates, in the discretion of the Borough, the
reimbursement to the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus for any expendable items
used by the Borough or any of its employees, agents, servants, officers,
or officials in extinguishing any hazardous material fire, stopping or
containing or controlling or mitigating any spill, release or leak of any
hazardous material.
§ 27A-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-2
1:173
§ 28-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EXPENDABLE ITEMS — Any items used to extinguish any fire and/or stop
or control or contain any leak or spill involving any hazardous material
which cannot be reused or cannot be replenished without cost after that
particular fire, leak or spill. These include but are not restricted to firefighting
foam, chemical extinguishing agents, absorbent material, sand,
recovery drums, and specialized protective equipment, to include, but not
be restricted to, acid suits, acid gloves, goggles, and protective clothing.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, solid, liquid or gas, listed as a
hazardous substance or material, including, but not necessarily limited to,
such substances and materials listed under the NFPA Guide of Hazardous
Material, the Department of Transportation Guide Book, and the list of
hazardous substances and toxic pollutants designated by the Federal
Environmental Protection Agency and the New Jersey State Department of
Environmental Protection.
PERSON/RESPONSIBLE PARTY — Any natural person or individual or any
firm, partnership, association, limited partnership, proprietorship,
corporation or any other business entity or any government agency or
entity.
VEHICLE — Any motorized equipment, registered or unregistered,
including, but not limited to, a passenger car, motorcycle, truck, tractortrailer,
construction equipment, farm machinery, watercraft, aircraft, and
trains.
VESSEL — Any container, drum, box, cylinder, bottle, or tank used to hold,
contain, carry or store any hazardous material.
§ 28-3. Discharge regulations.
A. The discharge of hazardous materials is prohibited, unless the
responsible party is in compliance with the conditions of a federal or
state permit.
B. Any person who may be subject to liability for a discharge, or becomes
aware of a discharge which has occurred, shall immediately notify the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus Police Department.
C. Whenever a hazardous material is discharged, the Borough of Ho-Ho-
Kus may, in its discretion, act to remove or arrange for the removal of
such discharge.
D. Any person who has discharged a hazardous material which has been or
shall be removed by the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus may, in the discretion of
the Borough, be liable, jointly and severally, without regard to fault, for
all cleanup and removal costs.
§ 28-2 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 28-4
1:174
§ 28-4. Reimbursable items.
Costs incurred by the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus and/or other mutual aid
responding units for the following items in connection with the suppressing,
control, or cleanup of a fire, leakage or spillage involving any hazardous
substance or hazardous material shall, in the discretion of the Borough,
be reimbursed to the aforesaid respective organizations by the responsible
parties as set forth in § 28-5 below:
§ 28-5. Parties responsible for reimbursement.
In the discretion of the Borough, reimbursement to the Borough of Ho-Ho-
Kus for any reimbursable item, as set forth above, shall be made by the
following parties:
A. The cost of replacement of expendable items.
B. The expenses incurred by the Borough for the wages (regular and/or
overtime) paid to its employees/agents as a result of a hazardous
material incident.
C. Any and all medical costs incurred by responding personnel.
D. Any and all environmental tests required to insure a hazard-free
environment (soil/water/air).
E. A fixed hourly rate for the use of apparatus at incidents, computed at
the rate of $200 per hour for the use of specialized and $150 per hour
for the use of any other vehicles, to the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
F. All expenses incurred by other mutual aid responding units.
G. Services rendered by any recovery company, towing company or other
technical assistance called for by the Fire Department or Emergency
Management Coordinator to handle such incidents.
A. The owner or operator of any vehicle responsible for any fire, leak or
spill or hazardous material, whether accidental or through negligence.
B. The owner or person responsible for any vessel containing hazardous
material involved in any fire, leak or spill on public or private property,
whether stationary or in transit, whether accidental or through
negligence.
C. The owner or person responsible for any property from which any leak
or spill of hazardous material emanates, whether accidental or through
negligence.
D. Any person responsible for any fire, leak or spill of hazardous material
on public or private property, whether accidental or through
negligence.
§ 28-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-6
1:175
§ 28-6. Period of payment; billing; administrative fee.
In the discretion of the Borough, any responsible party, as set forth in § 28-5
hereof, shall reimburse the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus for the full price of any
reimbursable items used to extinguish such a fire, stop or contain such a
leak, or control and clean up such a spill within 45 days after receipt of a
bill for such items from the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus. Billing is to include an
administrative fee of 20%.
§ 28-7. Violations and penalties.
Any responsible party, as set forth in § 28-5 hereof, who fails to reimburse
the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus for reimbursable items within the time limit set
forth in § 28-6 hereof shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor
more than $500 or imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days,
or both. Upon the failure to reimburse the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus for the
cost of such items within said forty-five-day period, and in addition to any
penalty provided for in this section, the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus may take
such action, as may be provided by law, to recover such costs from the
responsible party.
Chapter 29
HEALTH CODE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health — See Ch. 8.
Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
55.
Snow, ice, grass and weeds — See Ch. 61.
§ 28-6 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 28-7
1:176
ARTICLE I
Communicable Diseases
§ 29-1. Adoption of standards; copies on file; interpretation.
§ 29-2. Communicable diseases designated.
A. For the purposes of this article, all regulations concerning
communicable diseases as set forth in Chapter II of the New Jersey
State Sanitary Code, entitled "Reportable Diseases," and all
amendments thereof and supplements thereto are incorporated herein
and made a part hereof as though set forth herein at length except as
hereinafter modified.
B. Three copies of said Chapter II of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code,
entitled "Reportable Diseases," have been placed on file in the office of
the Secretary of the Board of Health upon the introduction of this
chapter and will remain on file there for the use and examination of the
public.
C. The interpretation of this article of this chapter shall be held to be the
minimum requirements adopted for the protection of the public health,
and whenever the requirements of Chapter II of the New Jersey State
Sanitary Code are at variance with the requirements of this chapter, the
more restrictive or that imposing the higher standard shall govern.
A. For the purpose of controlling the spread of illness and disease in the
Borough, the following diseases, together with such others as may from
time to time be added by the State Department of Health, are hereby
declared as contagious, communicable or infectious and are especially
dangerous to the public health. All diseases are reportable, but the
capitalized diseases are not communicable.
Amebiasis
Anthrax
Botulism
Brucellosis (undulant fever)
CEREBRAL PALSY
Chicken pox (varicella)
Cholera
Dengue
Diarrhea of newborn
Diphtheria
Dysentery, amoebic and bacillary
EPILEPSY
FOOD POISONING (staphylococcal, etc.)
§ 29-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-2
1:177
Glanders
Hepatitis:
Infectious
Serum
Influenza
LEPROSY
Leptospirosis
Malaria
Measles (rubeola)
Measles, German (rubella)
Meningitis, meningococcal
MENTAL DEFICIENCY
Mononucleosis, infectious
Mumps
Pertussis (whooping cough)
Plague
Psittacosis
Q fever
Rabies (hydrophobia)
Relapsing fever, louse-borne
Ringworm of scalp
Rocky Mountain spotting fever
Salmonellosis (other than typhoid fever)
Scarlet fever
Shigellosis
Smallpox (varioloid)
Streptococcic sore throat
TETANUS
TRACHOMA
TRICHINOSIS
Tuberculosis, all forms
Tularemia
Typhoid fever
Typhus fever (Brill's disease)
Venereal diseases:
Chancroid
Gonorrhea
§ 29-2 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 29-2
1:178
§ 29-3. Reporting requirements.
§ 29-4. Medical examinations.
Granuloma inguinale
Lymphogranuloma venereum
Ophthalmia neonatorum
Syphilis
Virus infections of the central nervous system:
Aseptic meningitis (specify)
Encephalitis (specify)
Poliomyelitis
Yellow fever
B. Any other communicable or contagious diseases which may be
hereafter declared by the Board of Health to be dangerous to the public
health may be added at any time.
C. Cases of venereal diseases are to be reported directly to the State
Department of Health.
A. Every physician in professional attendance upon any person in the
Borough suffering from a communicable disease (or, where no
physician is in attendance, every parent, guardian, householder,
superintendent or supervisor of clinics or institutions who knows that
any person, living, dwelling or being in any house or building in the
Borough under his or her control, has or is suspected of having a
communicable disease) shall report, in writing to the reporting officer
of the Board of Health, the name, age, sex, color and address of such
person or suspect with the name of the disease diagnosed or suspected
within 24 hours after such diagnosis is made.
B. Every attending physician shall, within 12 hours to 24 hours next after
he shall have been informed of death of any person in the Borough who
shall have died of a communicable disease, give written notice thereof
to the reporting officer of the Board of Health, particularly setting forth
in said notice the name, age, sex, color and address of such deceased
person, the date of his or her death and the name of the disease causing
death. This notice shall be given independently of the regular certificate
of death required by law.
C. Communicable diseases occurring on dairy premises are reportable
within 12 hours by telephone or telegram.
A. Whenever it shall be deemed necessary by the Board or the reporting
officer to establish the true character of any disease which is suspected
to be communicable, a medical examination of the person or persons
§ 29-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-4
1:179
§ 29-5. Quarantine and isolation.
§ 29-6. Adoption of isolation regulations.
All regulations concerning isolation of persons ill or infected with a
communicable disease and restriction of contacts of such communicable
disease as established by the State Department of Health of the State
of New Jersey, and all amendments thereof and supplements thereto, are
hereby adopted as part of this chapter.
§ 29-7. Maximum incubation periods.
The maximum periods of incubation (that is, the time which may elapse
between the date of the last exposure to a given disease and the date of its
development) of the following communicable diseases are hereby declared
as follows:
affected may be ordered by the Board, and no person shall interfere
with or refuse to submit to such examination.
B. Whenever the Board, or the reporting officer, shall have reason to
suspect that any person may be a carrier of germs of communicable
disease, the Board may require that specimens be taken from such
person for examination, and it shall be the duty of such person to
furnish the specimens required.
A. Whenever a case of diphtheria, poliomyelitis or smallpox exists in any
house or apartment or other premises in the Borough, it shall be the
duty of the reporting officer or his representatives forthwith to
establish such quarantine, isolation or other restrictive measures as
may be by law or this chapter required, and he shall cause a written
order, establishing such isolation or quarantine, to be served upon the
person in charge of such premises.
B. Every such isolation or quarantine so ordered or established shall
remain in force until the reporting officer or designate has cause to
serve on the affected person or persons a notice, in writing, terminating
such isolation or quarantine.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person, while suffering from any
communicable disease, or for any person in charge of anyone suffering
from any communicable disease, to wilfully expose or allow to be
exposed such persons so suffering in any street, shop, inn, public
conveyance, school, church or other public place in the Borough, except
as ordered or permitted by the reporting officer or designate.
A. Chicken pox (varicella), from 10 days to 21 days (usually 14 days).
B. Diphtheria (membranous croup), usually two days to six days.
C. German measles (rubella), from 12 days to 21 days (usually about 14
days).
§ 29-4 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 29-7
1:180
§ 29-8. Persons exposed to infected individuals.
When any person has been exposed at home or elsewhere to a person
affected with chicken pox, diphtheria, meningitis (epidemic cerebrospinal),
measles, German measles, mumps, poliomyelitis, scarlet fever, smallpox
or whooping cough, such person may be prohibited by the local Board of
Health, or the reporting officer thereof, from attending any public or private
school or any public gathering, and if, in the judgment of said Board or
officer, it is necessary in order to protect the public health, he may be
prohibited by such exposed person from leaving the premises upon which
such exposed person resides until a permit so to do has been secured from
the Board or its reporting officer; providing, however, that such prohibition
shall not exceed the maximum period of incubation as fixed in this chapter
for the disease to which such person was exposed.
§ 29-9. Additional regulations.
D. Measles (rubeola), from seven days to 14 days (usually 10 days).
E. Meningitis, epidemic cerebrospinal meningitis, meningococcus,
generally one day to 10 days (usually seven days).
F. Mumps, from 12 days to 38 days (average 18 days).
G. Poliomyelitis, acute anterior, from five days to 14 days.
H. Scarlet fever (scarlatina), from two days to five days.
I. Smallpox (variola), from eight days to 12 days (usually 12 days).
J. Streptococcic sore throat (septic sore throat), from two days to five
days.
K. Typhoid fever in food poisoning outbreaks, from six hours to 48 hours
(usually 12 hours); in sporadic cases, probably one to seven days.
L. Paratyphoid fever A, B, C, from four days to 10 days (usually about
seven days), and usually longer for A than for B and C.
M. Whooping cough, from five days to 21 days; almost uniformly within 10
days.
A. It shall be the duty of the reporting officer of the Board of Health of the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, as soon as a case of communicable disease is
reported, to ascertain the source of the infection and to give all
necessary directions in writing or printed instructions to the person so
affected and to any person in charge of such person regarding
disinfection and disposal of excretions, other body discharges and other
materials which may be or become infected.
B. When the reporting officer or other duly authorized representative of
the Board has reason to believe that a person may be a carrier of a
contagious or infectious disease, such officer or representative may
§ 29-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-9
1:181
require that materials for examination shall be taken from such person,
and it shall be the duty of such person to furnish the necessary
specimens for examination or to permit said officer or representative to
collect such specimens.
C. Exclusion from schools and gatherings of cases and contacts of certain
communicable diseases, either actual or suspected, shall and may be
done in accordance with this chapter and all laws of the State of New
Jersey now or hereafter pertaining thereto.
D. Removal of cases of diseases, the restrictions of visiting, the isolation
and provisions for persons who cannot be removed and quarantined in
emergencies, shall be accomplished in accordance with all laws of the
State of New Jersey now or hereafter pertaining hereto.
E. Physicians having knowledge of any outbreak of a disease not listed or
of unusual manifestations of disease shall report the facts to the
reporting officer in whose jurisdiction the condition exists, who shall
make an investigation and submit a report thereof to the State
Department of Health.
F. After the death, removal or release from isolation of a case of
communicable disease, adequate cleaning or disinfection or both of the
room or rooms that have been occupied by the patient and of any
articles which have become infected shall be carried out under the
supervision of the reporting officer.
G. It shall be unlawful to transport any person having any contagious
disease, or any disease having the symptoms of a contagious disease, in
any bus, taxicab or other public conveyance, except in an ambulance or
other vehicle, the use of which is permitted for that purpose.
H. Whatever quarantine has been established by the Board of Health in
any house within this Borough in which any contagious, communicable
or infectious disease exists, such quarantine and all provisions thereof
shall be maintained and obeyed by all persons until recovery or death of
the person or persons affected with any such disease has been reported
to the Board of Health and until such disinfection has been approved by
said Board of Health. After all the terms of this chapter have been
complied with, the Board of Health will issue a certificate to school
children in the said house, without which no pupil shall be allowed to
return to school.
I. No principal, teacher or superintendent of any school and no parent or
guardian of any person suffering from any of the diseases mentioned
above shall knowingly permit any such person to attend any day, night
or Sunday school. No person suffering from any such disease shall
attend any place of amusement or public assembly while so suffering.
J. It shall be the duty of the principal or teacher of any private or public
day school, night school or Sunday school within this Borough to report
to the Board of Health the name and residence of any child suspected of
§ 29-9 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 29-9
1:182
any contagious, communicable or infectious disease mentioned above,
who shall present himself or herself for attendance at such school.
K. It shall be the duty of every resident of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus
having information of the existence of a communicable, infectious or
contagious disease within said Borough, not known by such person to
have been reported by the attending physician, to report the same to
the Board of Health.
L. All milk bottles delivered at the home where a contagious disease
existed shall be redelivered on said premises when the attending
physician permits their return, and then only after they have been
sterilized.
M. The reporting officer or the Clerk of the Board of Health shall, at least
once a month, examine the death certificates and vital statistics of the
municipality to ascertain if any death from reportable communicable
diseases resulting in death have occurred from which no reports were
received prior to the patient's death. Should such an instance be found,
the attending physician in each case shall be called upon by such
reporting officer or Clerk to explain his failure to make a report. If he is
unable to make a satisfactory explanation, the reporting officer or Clerk
shall refer the matter to the Board of Health for such action as the law
provides.
§ 29-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-9
1:183

ARTICLE II
Burials
§ 29-10. Adoption of standards; copies on file.
A. For purposes of this article, all regulations concerning the burial or
other lawful disposition of dead human bodies, as set forth in Chapter V
of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code, entitled "Preparation, Handling,
Transportation, Burial and Disinterment of Dead Human Bodies," and
all amendments thereof and supplements thereto, are incorporated
herein and made a part hereof as though set forth at length herein.
B. Three copies of said Chapter V of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code,
entitled "Preparation, Handling, Transportation, Burial and
Disinterment of Dead Human Bodies," have been placed on file in the
office of the Secretary of the Board of Health upon the introduction of
this chapter and will remain on file there for the use and examination of
the public.
§ 29-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-10
1:185

ARTICLE III
Production and Sale of Milk
§ 29-11. Adoption of standards; copies on file; interpretation.
§ 29-12. Sale of certain milk prohibited.
All persons, corporations and associations of persons are prohibited from
selling or having in their possession for sale any milk containing any
unhealthy ingredients, constituent or substance or any milk that has been
transported or stored in an unclean manner or place or which is produced
from cows which are diseased or which are kept or stabled under unhealthy
conditions.
§ 29-13. Duties of dealers.
Every person, corporation or association of persons who now are or
hereafter shall be engaged in the sale of milk or exposure for sale of milk,
within the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, New Jersey, shall be termed "dealers" and
shall forthwith, when requested by said Board of Health or any inspector
or officer thereof, furnish a true statement, in writing, upon blanks to be
supplied by said Board of Health, setting forth the locality from which said
milk was purchased and also a full and complete list of the names and
addresses of all persons from whom said milk was purchased and the names
and addresses of all customers or persons to whom he, it or they may sell
or deliver milk in said Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, and said blank, when filled
in as aforesaid, shall be signed by the person selling said milk to whom the
said blank was tendered. Upon changing the source of supply of milk, the
person, corporation or association of persons engaged in the sale of milk as
aforesaid shall notify, in writing, said Board of Health of such changes, and
said notice in writing shall state the name or names of persons supplying
said milk and the locality from which said milk is procured.
A. For the purposes of this article, all regulations concerning the
production, distribution and sale of milk as set forth in Chapter VII of
the New Jersey State Sanitary Code, entitled "Production, Distribution
and Sale of Certified Milk, Cream and Skim Milk," and all amendments
thereto and supplements thereof, are hereby adopted as part of this
chapter, except as hereinafter modified.
B. Three copies of said Chapter VII of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code,
entitled "Production, Distribution and Sale of Certified Milk, Cream and
Skim Milk," have been placed on file in the office of the Secretary of the
Board of Health upon the introduction of this chapter and will remain
on file there for the use and examination of the public.
C. The interpretation of this article of this chapter shall be held to be the
minimum requirements adopted for the protection of the public health,
and whenever the requirements of Chapter VII of the New Jersey State
Sanitary Code are at variance with the requirements of this chapter, the
more restrictive or that imposing the higher standard shall govern.
§ 29-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-14
1:187
§ 29-14. Licensing provisions.
A. No persons, corporation or association of persons, except as hereafter
provided, shall sell or deliver, expose for sale or have in their possession
for sale or delivery any milk or cream without first obtaining from the
Board of Health a license or permit for such sale or delivery.
B. No license for the sale or delivery of milk or cream shall be issued by
the Board of Health until each applicant for such license shall have first
signed an application undertaking and agreeing to obey the ordinances,
rules and regulations of the Board of Health which are now in force and
any changes or modifications that may hereafter be made therein and to
carry out forthwith all orders and directions of said Board of Health.
C. No application for a license shall be considered by the Board of Health
unless it is made in writing and in such form as may be prescribed and
adopted by the Board of Health, and, at or prior to the time such
application is made, the sum of $5 is to be paid by the applicant to the
Board of Health. Any nonprofit, religious, educational, charitable, civic,
volunteer, service or veterans organization shall be exempt from
payment of said fee. [Amended 12-19-1989 by Ord. No. 650;
5-26-1994 by Ord. No. 731]
D. No license as granted shall be operative for a period longer than one
year, and prior to the expiration of such license, if the holder thereof
desired to continue as a licensee of this Board of Health to sell or
deliver milk or cream in the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, application must be
made anew for another year as prescribed in § 29-14C of this chapter
just as if no previous license had ever been obtained.
E. No license granted under the authority of this chapter shall be
assignable or transferable by the licensee.
F. Upon the granting of such license as provided by this chapter, the Board
of Health shall provide signs, which shall have printed or painted
thereon the words "BOARD OF HEALTH PERMIT, Borough of Ho-Ho-
Kus, NJ," and the number of the permit. These signs shall be securely
fastened by the licensee in a conspicuous place, on each and every
vehicle or conveyance of the licensee used for the delivery of milk or
cream, and kept in place by the licensee during the term for which such
license is granted.
G. The Board of Health may, in its discretion, exempt from the provisions
of this chapter such persons who, although they may sell milk
occasionally, the quantities handled and the manner of conducting such
sales do not bring them within the definition of the word "dealer."
H. If any person, corporation or association of persons licensed as
aforesaid, or any of his, her, their or its servants, employees or agents
shall violate any ordinance or rule of the Board of Health relating to the
production, storage, distribution or sale of milk or cream, such license
may, at the discretion of this Board of Health, be revoked.
§ 29-14 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 29-14
1:188
ARTICLE IV
Care and Cleaning of Stables
§ 29-15. Daily cleaning required.
Every stable in the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus shall be thoroughly cleaned
at least once a day. Sufficient light must be provided to make cleaning
practicable and sufficient ventilation to keep the stable air pure at all times.
§ 29-16. Manure bin required.
Every stable shall have within or immediately adjoining a watertight
covered box, bin or barrel, for receiving and holding manure and litter
which accumulates between the times of removal from the premises. The
fitness of said box, bin or barrel shall be passed upon by the inspector of the
Board of Health.
§ 29-17. Removal of manure.
Manure from all stables shall be removed from the premises on which
the stable is situated at least once a week during the portion of the year
embraced between the first day of April and the 30th day of November.
§ 29-18. Storage of manure.
No manure shall be stored or piled in the built-up portion of the Borough,
nor shall it be so stored or piled in any part of the Borough until it has
been thoroughly saturated and mixed with lime, chloride of lime or other
substance that will prevent the propagation of larvae or maggots.
§ 29-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-18
1:189

ARTICLE V
Keeping of Poultry
§ 29-19. License required.
It shall be unlawful to keep chickens, ducks or other poultry within the
limits of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus without first obtaining a license from
the Board of Health for that purpose.
§ 29-20. Restriction on amount of poultry kept.
No license shall be issued for the keeping of such number of chickens, ducks
or other poultry in any place so that the same shall be a nuisance to persons
residing in the vicinity of the place where such chickens, ducks or other
poultry are to be kept.
§ 29-21. License fee. [Amended 3-27-2003 by Ord. No. 869]
The fee for any such license shall be $20.
§ 29-22. Contents of license.
Such license shall be issued by the Board of Health and shall specify the
place where and the maximum number of chickens, ducks or other poultry
that shall be kept thereon.
§ 29-23. Application for license.
Every application for such a license shall give the name of the applicant,
a description and dimensions of the lands whereon the chickens, ducks or
poultry are to be kept, and shall be accompanied by the license fee herein
specified.
§ 29-24. Expiration of license.
All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire on the 31st of December,
following the date of issuing the same.
§ 29-25. Revocation of license.
The Board of Health may revoke any license in case said Board of Health
shall determine the keeping of such chickens, ducks or poultry at such place
shall become a nuisance to persons residing in the vicinity of the place
where the same are kept and whenever the licensee shall violate any of the
rules and regulations hereafter prescribed by the Board of Health for the
keeping of chickens, ducks or other poultry.
§ 29-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-25
1:191

ARTICLE VI
(Reserved)43
§ 29-26. through § 29-35. (Reserved)
43.Editor's Note: Former Art. VI, Sale and Distribution of Ice, was repealed 3-27-2003 by Ord.
No. 869.
§ 29-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-26
1:193

ARTICLE VII
Laundries
§ 29-36. Permit for vehicles required.
It shall be unlawful to operate any automobile, other vehicle or carrier
within the limits of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus for the purpose of collecting
or distributing laundry without first registering with the Board of Health of
the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus for that purpose and obtaining a permit.
§ 29-37. Separation of clean and soiled laundry in vehicles.
It shall be unlawful to place any soiled laundry in any automobile, other
vehicle or carrier containing clean laundry or laundry intended for delivery,
except where such automobile, vehicle or other carrier is so constructed as
to effect complete separation of and avoidance of contact between soiled
and cleaned laundry and in a manner acceptable to the Board of Health.
§ 29-38. Collection from house having case of communicable
disease.
It shall be unlawful to collect laundry from a house wherein there exists a
communicable disease or from a house placarded by the Board of Health as
having or having had a case of communicable disease during the period of
quarantine established by such placarding.
§ 29-39. Laundry accumulated during period of communicable
disease.
Laundry which has accumulated during the period of communicable illness
shall not be removed from such house where the same has accumulated
until a permit is issued by the attending physician or health officer or
inspector, certifying that such accumulated laundry has been properly
sterilized and is in acceptable condition for removal and relaundering.
§ 29-40. Fumigation of laundry vehicles; permit for use.
Every automobile, other vehicle or carrier used for the purpose of collecting
or distributing laundry, or both, shall be fumigated by the person or persons,
company or corporation operating the same at such times and in such
manner as the Board of Health may by rules and regulations prescribe
and shall at all times be kept in a sanitary condition and shall be subject
at all times to inspection by the Board of Health or its duly authorized
representative, and when, upon such inspection, said automobile or other
vehicle shall be found properly fumigated and sanitary, a permit, in writing,
for the use of such automobile or other vehicle shall be issued by the
Board of Health, setting forth the date of inspection, a description of the
automobile or other vehicle so inspected and authority to use the same for
the collection and delivery of laundry, which permit shall remain in force
until revoked by the Board of Health or its Sanitary Inspector.
§ 29-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-41
1:195
§ 29-41. Permit requirements.
Before any such permit shall be granted, an application shall be made to
the Board of Health by the person, persons or corporation, shall be signed
by such person or persons, company or corporation and shall state the post
office address of the applicant, the name under which the business is to be
conducted and the number of vehicles to be used under the same name. The
permit when issued shall be for the current year for which issued unless
sooner revoked. All permits shall expire at 12:00 midnight on December 31
of the year for which issued. Such permit shall be kept continuously posted
in a conspicuous place in the automobile or other vehicles for which issued
while the same is used in collecting or delivering laundry and shall not be
transferred to or posted in any other vehicle without consent of the Board
of Health.
§ 29-42. Condition of plant; inspections; separation of laundry.
The plant, buildings and premises wherein or whereon the work of
laundering is done and wherein or whereon soiled and cleaned laundry is
stored or handled shall at all times be kept in a clean, sanitary condition
satisfactory to the Board of Health, and such plant, buildings and premises
shall at all times be subject to examination and inspection by the Board of
Health and its duly authorized representatives. Soiled laundry which is in
transit to or from or within such plant, buildings and premises shall not at
any time be allowed to come in contact with cleaned laundry, and means
satisfactory to the Board of Health must be provided by the permittee to
effectively prevent possibility of such contact. This provision shall also apply
to automatic laundries and dry-cleaning establishments.
§ 29-41 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 29-42
1:196
ARTICLE VIII
(Reserved)44
§ 29-43. through § 29-45. (Reserved)
44.Editor's Note: Former Art. VIII, Barbershops, Beauty Parlors, Etc., was repealed
12-19-1989 by Ord. No. 650.
§ 29-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-43
1:197

ARTICLE IX
Nuisances
§ 29-46. Adoption of standards.
A code defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions or acts
and each of them as a nuisance; prohibiting certain noises or sounds;
requiring the proper heating of apartments; prohibiting lease or rental
of certain buildings; prohibiting spitting in or upon public buildings,
conveyances or sidewalks; authorizing the inspection of premises by an
enforcing official; providing for the removal or abatement of certain
nuisances and recovery of expenses incurred by the Board of Health in
removing or abating such nuisances; and prescribing fines for violations is
hereby established pursuant to Chapter 188, Laws of 1950.45 A copy of said
code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof without the inclusion of the
text thereof herein.
§ 29-47. Title.
Said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey
(1953)."
§ 29-48. Copies on file.
Three copies of said Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953)
have been placed on file in the office of the Secretary of this Board of Health
upon the introduction of this chapter and will remain on file there for the
use and examination of the public.
45.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 et seq.
§ 29-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-48
1:199

ARTICLE X
Retail Food Control
§ 29-49. Adoption of standards.
A code regulating the retail food-handling establishments, providing for
the inspection of such establishments and fixing penalties for violations is
hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 26:3-69.6. A copy of
said code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof without the inclusion of
the text thereof herein.
§ 29-50. Title. [Amended 3-27-2003 by Ord. No. 869]
Said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "New Jersey Sanitary Code, Chapter 12,
Construction Operation and Maintenance of Retail Food Establishments."
§ 29-51. Copies on file.
Three copies of said Retail Food Establishment Code of New Jersey (1965)
have been placed on file in the office of the Secretary of this local Board of
Health upon the introduction of this chapter and will remain on file there
until final action is taken on this chapter for the use and examination of the
public.
§ 29-52. License requirements; fees.
A. No person shall operate a retail food-handling establishment unless a
license or approval of an existing license shall have been issued by this
Board of Health. Such license or approval of an existing license shall be
posted in a conspicuous place in such establishment.
B. License fees. [Amended 12-19-1989 by Ord. No. 650; 5-26-1994 by
Ord. No. 731; 10-22-1998 by Ord. No. 809]
(1) License fees for retail food-handling establishments be and are
hereby established as follows: [Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord.
No. 1013]
Establishment 2013 2014 and Beyond
Restaurant capacity:
25 to 49 $200 $250
50 to 100 $250 $300
Over 100 $300 $350
Bakery $200 $225
Butcher $200 $225
Convenience store $150 $200
Dairy $175 $200
§ 29-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-52
1:201
§ 29-52.1. Plan review. [Added 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1013]
Establishment 2013 2014 and Beyond
Dairy-milk $50 $75
Delicatessen $200 $225
Ice cream $100 $100
Keeping of poultry or
fowl
$50 $50
Late fees 50% of license fee
Mobile vendor $100 $100
Nursery/day care $175 $200
Petshop/grooming/
boarding
$150 $175
Pharmacy/liquor
Prepackaged $80 $80
Produce $150 $150
School catering $200 $225
Special temporary $50 $50
Supermarket $800 $800
(2) Any nonprofit, religious, educational, charitable, civic, volunteer,
service or veterans organization shall be exempt from payment of
said fees.
C. Licenses issued or approved under the provisions of this chapter shall
expire annually on December 31 of each year, and application for
renewal thereof shall be submitted together with the required fee prior
to January 1 of each year.
D. A person conducting an itinerant retail food-handling establishment
shall secure a license.
E. A license may be suspended or revoked for a violation by the holder of
any provision of this chapter or code established herein after an
opportunity for a hearing by the Board of Health or its authorized
representative on seven days' notice to the licensee.
F. A certificate, permit, license or approval of a certificate, permit or
license issued by another Board of Health is not transferable.
A. Plan review fees. Plan review fees for retail food-handling
establishments be and are hereby established as follows:
§ 29-52 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 29-52.1
1:202
§ 29-53. Mechanical devices.
No mechanical device for vending any food or beverage shall be installed,
operated or maintained within the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus unless such
device is located wholly within a store, restaurant, factory, school, theater,
club, lodge or other building.
Type of Plan Review 2013 2014 and Beyond
New establishment $150 $150
Alteration/
modification
$100 $100
Change of ownership $100 $100
§ 29-52.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-53
1:203

ARTICLE XI
Weed Control
§ 29-54. Adoption of standards.
A code declaring ragweed and poison ivy to be a nuisance, providing for
removal or abatement thereof and recovery of expenses incurred by the
Board of Health in removing or abating such nuisance and prescribing
penalties for violations is hereby established pursuant to Chapter 188, Laws
of 1950.46 A copy of said code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof
without the inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ 29-55. Title.
Said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Weed Control Code of New Jersey (1953)."
§ 29-56. Copies on file.
Three copies of the said "Weed Control Code of New Jersey (1953)" have
been placed on file in the office of the Secretary of this local Board of Health
upon the introduction of this chapter and will remain on file there for the
use and examination of the public so long as said chapter is in effect.
46.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 et seq.
§ 29-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-56
1:205

ARTICLE XII
Emptying and Cleaning of Septic Tanks and/or Cesspools
§ 29-57. License and permit requirements.
§ 29-58. Hearing upon denial of license or permit.
In case any license or permit or certification required by this chapter is
denied by the Board of Health, a hearing shall be held thereon before the
Board within 15 days after request therefor is made by the applicant, and,
upon such hearing, the Board of Health shall affirm, alter or rescind its
previous determination and take action accordingly within 15 days after the
date of such hearing.
§ 29-59. Issuance or renewal; fee.
For the issuance or renewal of a license to a person or corporation engaged
in the business of cleaning or emptying receptacles for the reception and
storage of human excrement or other putrescible matter, $20 for each
vehicle or conveyance.
A. Persons shall not engage in the business of emptying or cleaning septic
tanks, cesspools, privies or any place used for the reception or storage
of human excrement who do not hold a license to engage in such
business issued by this Board of Health. Such licenses shall be valid for
the period of one calendar year but may be renewed by this Board of
Health. Said license may be revoked for the failure of the licensee to
comply with the provisions of the Code or any rule or ordinance of this
Board of Health.
B. The contents of any septic tank, cesspool, privy or other receptacle
containing human excrement shall not be removed until a permit for
such removal has been obtained from the Board of Health.
§ 29-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-59
1:207

ARTICLE XIII
Air Pollution Control
§ 29-60. Adoption of standards; copies on file.
A. For purposes of this article, all regulations concerning the control and
prohibition of air pollution from sulphur compounds in the form of
gases, vapors or liquid particles, as set forth in the "New Jersey Air
Pollution Control Code," adopted by the New Jersey State Department
of Health, effective May 1, 1956, and all amendments thereof and
supplements thereto, are incorporated herein and made a part hereof
as though set forth at length herein.
B. Three copies of said "New Jersey Air Pollution Control Code" have been
placed on file in the office of the Secretary of the Board of Health upon
the introduction of this chapter and will remain on file there for the use
and examination of the public.
§ 29-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-60
1:209

ARTICLE XIV
Licenses and Permits
§ 29-61. Expiration.
All licenses and permits issued by the Board of Health of the Borough of
Ho-Ho-Kus under this chapter, except when otherwise specified in such a
license, shall expire on the 31st day of December following the date of issue.
§ 29-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-61
1:211

ARTICLE XV
Violations and Penalties; Construction; When Effective
§ 29-62. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-27-2003 by Ord. No.
869]
Any person or persons, corporation or corporations violating, aiding or
abetting in the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any code
or regulation adopted herewith shall be subject to a penalty not less than
$50 nor more than $500 for each violation. Each day a particular violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 29-63. Construction.
This chapter is not to act as a repealer of any ordinance heretofore made
but is to be considered an addition thereto. In the event this chapter or any
part thereof is inconsistent with any ordinance heretofore passed, then this
chapter is to supplant and repeal to the extent of such inconsistency such
preexisting ordinance. Should any section, paragraph, sentence or clause
be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, the remainder of said
chapter shall not be affected thereby.
§ 29-64. When effective.
This chapter and the codes herein established shall take effect 30 days after
first publication.
§ 29-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-64
1:213

ARTICLE XVI
Procedure for Obtaining Food Handler's Certificates
[Added 3-27-2003 by Ord. No. 869]
§ 29-65. Course of instruction required.
A food handler's certificate shall be obtained from the Department of Health
upon proof of successful completion of a course of instruction in health
education, sanitation, personal hygiene, food poisoning, dishwashing
procedures, insects, rodents and other related matters.
§ 29-66. Time frame for course completion.
All food handlers are required to attend a food handler's course of
instruction within three months of employment. Any person who fails to
successfully complete the course for any reason shall reapply for the next
scheduled food handler's course in the municipality, in the county or in any
other municipality offering certification.
§ 29-67. Recertification.
Any person engaged or employed in the business of preparing, selling or
processing exposed food and having successfully completed a course of
instruction in food handling is required to re-attend a food handler's course
of instruction within a period of five years after the satisfactory completion
of a course.
§ 29-68. Establishments failing inspection; food manager's course.
Any food establishment in the business of preparing, selling or processing
exposed food which fails the health inspection two consecutive times within
a period of one year shall require the managers and supervisors of each
department (if applicable) to attend a twenty-hour food manager's
certification course.
§ 29-69. Failure to comply; hearing.
In the event that, pursuant to § 29-68, all managers or supervisors of the
business fail to attend a food manager's course within three months of
notification by the Department of Health, the Department of Health shall
cite the establishment and conduct a hearing, the subject of which shall be
revocation of the establishment's license to operate.
§ 29-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-69
1:215
Chapter 31
HUNTING AND FIREARMS
§ 31-1. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted as a measure to safeguard the residents of the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus and to protect their property.
§ 31-2. Discharge of firearms prohibited; exceptions.
No person or persons, while engaged in hunting, target shooting, practice
shooting or otherwise within the limits of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, shall
at any time fire or discharge, or cause to be fired or discharged, any
pistol, shotgun, rifle or other firearms. However, nothing in this section shall
prohibit the use of firearms for the protection of life, person or property, or
by any law enforcement officers, and provided further that the provisions
hereof shall not apply to any pistol or rifle range equipped with proper
safeguards for the protection of life and property and approved by the Chief
of Police.
§ 31-3. Repealer.
Ordinance No. 231, entitled "An Ordinance to Prohibit Hunting within the
Limits of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus," passed September 30, 1946, and any
other ordinances or parts thereof inconsistent with the terms of this chapter
be and the same are hereby repealed.
§ 31-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be liable to a fine not exceeding $50 or by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days in the county jail for each
offense, or both.
§ 31-5. Severability.
In the event that any section or part of this chapter shall be held invalid,
such adjudication shall apply only to the section or part so adjudged, and
the remainder of said chapter shall be deemed valid and effective.
§ 31-6. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect when passed and published as required by law.
§ 29-69 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 31-6
1:216
Chapter 31A
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Floodplain management — See Ch. 27.
Improper disposal of waste — See Ch. 32.
Stormwater control — See Ch. 66A.
§ 31A-1. Purpose.
This chapter prohibits illicit connections to the municipal separate storm
sewer systems operated by the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus so as to protect
public health, safety and welfare and prescribes penalties for the failure to
comply.
§ 31A-2. Definitions; word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number,
and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions
below are the same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C.
7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Borough of Ho-
Ho-Kus, unless that discharge is authorized under NJPDES Permit No.
NJ0141852. Nonphysical connections may include, but are not limited to,
leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal separate storm sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including but not limited to
those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b) or (c) of the Federal
Clean Water Act [33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c)].
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough or other public body and
is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
§ 31-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 31A-2
1:217
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature for
the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come in direct contact with any
raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished product.
Noncontact cooling water may, however, contain algaecides or biocides to
control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers and/or corrosion
inhibitors.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production
or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct,
or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited
to, leachate and cooling water other than noncontact cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 31A-3. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus any domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water,
process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
§ 31A-4. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department and/or Certified
Public Works Manager or his designee.
§ 31A-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to a not to exceed $2,000.
§ 31A-2 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 31A-5
1:218
Chapter 32
IMPROPER DISPOSAL OF WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hazardous waste materials — See Ch. 28.
Pet waste — See Ch. 43.
Recycling — See Ch. 52.
Sewage disposal — See Ch. 55.
Solid waste — See Ch. 64.
Stormwater control — See Ch. 66A.
§ 32-1. Purpose.
This chapter prohibits the spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other
than stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4)
operated by the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus so as to protect public health, safety
and welfare and prescribes penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 32-2. Definitions; word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus or other
public body and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 32-3. Prohibited conduct.
The spilling, dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Borough of Ho-Ho-
Kus is prohibited. The spilling, dumping or disposal of materials other than
§ 31A-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-3
1:219
stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge of the pollutants to
the municipal separate storm sewer system is also prohibited.
§ 32-4. Exceptions.
§ 32-5. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department and/or Health
Officer of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
§ 32-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who continues to be in violation of the provisions of this
chapter after being duly notified shall be subject to a fine not to exceed
$2,000.
§ 32-7. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this chapter is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
A. Waterline flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
B. Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising
groundwaters).
C. Air-conditioning condensate (excluding contact and noncontact cooling
water).
D. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn-watering runoff).
E. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
F. Residential car washing water and residential swimming pool
discharges.
G. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
H. Flows from fire-fighting activities.
I. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water: beach
maintenance equipment immediately following its use for its intended
purposes, and equipment used in the application of salt and deicing
materials immediately following salt and deicing materials applications.
Prior to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and deicing materials
must be removed from equipment and vehicles to the maximum extent
practicable using dry cleaning methods (e.g., shoveling and sweeping).
Recovered materials are to be returned to storage for reuse or properly
discarded. Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the above situation, is
limited to exterior, undercarriage, and exposed parts and does not
apply to engines or other enclosed machinery.
§ 32-3 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 32-7
1:220
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this chapter to be
unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause or reason shall not affect
any other portion of this chapter.
§ 32-8. Repealer.
All other ordinances of the Borough or parts thereof which are in conflict
with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
§ 32-9. When effective.
This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption and
any publication as may be required by law.
Chapter 32A
LAND USE PROCEDURES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land subdivision and site plan review — See
Ch. 32B.
Zoning — See Ch. 85.
§ 32-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-9
1:221

ARTICLE I
Planning Board
§ 32A-1. Establishment; composition. [Amended 12-17-1985 by Ord.
No. 591]
There is hereby established, pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 291,47 in the Borough
of Ho-Ho-Kus a Planning Board of nine members and two alternates
consisting of the following four classes:
§ 32A-2. Terms.
A. Class I: the Mayor.
B. Class II: one of the officials of the municipality other than a member of
the governing body, to be appointed by the Mayor.
C. Class III: a member of the governing body, to be appointed by it.
D. Class IV: six other citizens of the municipality and two alternates, to be
appointed by the Mayor. The members of Class IV shall hold no other
municipal office, except that one member may be a member of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment and one may be a member of the Board of
Education.
A. The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond with his
official tenure. The terms of the members composing Class II and Class
III shall be for one year or terminate at the completion of their
respective terms of office, whichever occurs first.
B. The terms of all Class IV members first appointed pursuant to this
chapter shall be so determined that, to the greatest practicable extent,
the expiration of such term shall be distributed evenly over the first four
years after their appointment as determined by resolution of the
governing body; provided, however, that no term of any member shall
exceed four years, and further provided that nothing herein shall affect
the term of any present member of the Planning Board, all of whom
shall continue in office until the completion of the terms for which they
were appointed. Thereafter, all Class IV members shall be appointed for
terms of four years except as otherwise hereinabove provided. All terms
shall run from January 1 of the year in which the appointment is made.
The alternates shall be appointed for a term of two years from January 1
of the year of their appointment, except that the term of one of the
alternates first appointed shall be for one year only and thereafter for
two years, so that the term of not more than one alternate shall
thereafter expire in any one year. Vacancies occurring other than by
expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired term only. Alternate
members shall be designated at the time of appointment by the Mayor
47.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 32A-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32A-2
1:223
§ 32A-3. Vacancies.
If a vacancy in any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term, it
shall be filled by appointment as above provided for the unexpired term.
§ 32A-4. Organization.
The Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from the
members of Class IV and select a Secretary who may be either a member
of the Planning Board or a municipal employee designated by the Planning
Board.
§ 32A-5. Attorney.
There is hereby created the office of Planning Board Attorney. The Planning
Board may annually appoint and fix the compensation of or agree upon the
rate of compensation of the Planning Board Attorney, provided that it does
not exceed the amount appropriated by the governing body for its use and it
does not exceed the compensation set forth for the Planning Board Attorney
in the annual Salary Ordinance.48 The Planning Board Attorney shall be an
attorney other than the Municipal Attorney.
§ 32A-6. Experts and staff.
The Planning Board may also employ or contract for the services of experts
and other staff and services as it may deem necessary. The Board shall not,
however, exceed, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by
the governing body for its use.
§ 32A-7. Powers and duties.
The Planning Board is authorized to adopt bylaws governing its procedural
operation. It shall also have the following powers and duties:
as "Alternate No. I" and "Alternate No. II." [Amended 12-17-1985 by
Ord. No. 591]
A. To make and adopt and from time to time amend a Master Plan for the
physical development of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, taking into
consideration any areas outside its boundaries which, in the Board's
judgment, bear essential relation to the planning of the Borough of Ho-
Ho-Kus, in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
B. To administer the provisions of Chapter 32B, Land Subdivision and Site
Plan Review, in accordance with the provisions of said chapter and the
Municipal Land Use Law of 1975, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
C. To approve conditional uses in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 85, Zoning, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67.
48.Editor's Note: See Ch. 53, Salaries.
§ 32A-2 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 32A-7
1:224
§ 32A-8. Time limits; default approval. [Amended 6-28-1983 by Ord.
No. 568]
D. To participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by state or federal law or regulations if requested to do so by
resolution of the governing body.
E. To assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous planning
process.
F. To annually prepare a program of municipal capital improvement
projects projected over a term of six years, and amendments thereto,
and recommend same to the governing body.
G. To consider and make report to the governing body within 35 days after
referral as to any proposed development regulation, revisions or
amendments thereto, submitted to it pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26a, and also pass upon other matters specifically
referred to the Planning Board by the governing body of the Borough of
Ho-Ho-Kus, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26b.
H. Variances; issuance of permits.
(1) When reviewing applications for approval of subdivision plats, site
plans or conditional uses, to:
(a) Grant, to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions
as the Zoning Board of Adjustment, variances, pursuant to
Section 57c of Chapter 291 of the Laws of New Jersey 1975,49
from lot area, lot dimensional, setback and yard requirements,
provided that such relief from lot area requirements shall not
be granted for more than one lot.
(b) Direct issuance of a permit, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34, for
a building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public
drainageway, flood-control basin or public area reserved on the
Official Map, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32.
(c) Direct issuance of a permit, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36, for
a building or structure not related to a street.
(2) Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this subsection, notice of
a hearing on the application for development shall include
reference to the request for a variance or direction for issuance of a
permit, as the case may be.
I. To perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by ordinance
or resolution of the governing body for the aid and assistance of the
governing body or other agencies or officers.
A. Minor subdivisions and minor site plans.
49.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c.
§ 32A-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32A-8
1:225
(1) The Planning Board may waive notice and public hearing for an
application for development if the Planning Board or Subdivision
Committee of the Board finds that the application for development
conforms to the definition of "minor subdivision" or "minor site
plan" as set forth in Chapter 32B, Land Subdivision and Site Plan
Review.
(2) Minor subdivision or minor site plan approval shall be deemed to
be final approval of the subdivision or site plan by the Board,
provided that the Board may condition such approval on terms
ensuring the provision of improvements pursuant to Chapter 32B,
Land Subdivision and Site Plan Review, and the Municipal Land
Use Act.50
(3) The approval of a minor subdivision or minor site plan shall be
granted or denied within 45 days of the date of submission of a
complete application to the Planning Board or within such further
time as may be consented to by the applicant.
B. Preliminary approval of major subdivisions. Upon submission of a
complete application for a subdivision of 10 or fewer lots, the Planning
Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 45 days of the
date of such submission or within such further time as may be
consented to by the developer. Upon submission of a complete
application for a subdivision of more than 10 lots, the Planning Board
shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 95 days of the date of
such submission or within such further time as may be consented to by
the developer. Otherwise, the Planning Board shall be deemed to have
granted preliminary approval for the subdivision. If an application for
development is found to be incomplete, the developer shall be notified
in writing of the deficiencies therein by the Board or the Board's
designee for the determination of completeness within 45 days of
submission of such application or it shall be deemed to be properly
submitted.
C. Ancillary powers. Whenever the Planning Board is called upon to
exercise its ancillary powers before the granting of a variance as set
forth in § 32A-7H of this chapter, the Planning Board shall grant or deny
approval of the complete application within 95 days after submission by
the developer of a complete application or within such further time as
may be consented to by the applicant.
D. Final approval of major subdivisions. Upon submission of a completed
application for final subdivision approval, the Planning Board shall
grant or deny said application within 45 days of submission of a
complete application or within such further time as may be consented
to by the applicant. Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95
days from the date of signing of the plat unless, within such period, the
plat shall have been duly filed by the developer with the county
50.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 32A-8 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 32A-8
1:226
§ 32A-9. Authority to grant exceptions.
recording officer. The Planning Board may, for good cause shown,
extend the period for recording for an additional period not to exceed
190 days from the date of signing of the plat.
E. Preliminary approval of site plans.
(1) Upon the submission to the Secretary of the Planning Board of a
complete application for a site plan for 10 acres of land or less and
10 dwelling units or less, the Planning Board shall grant or deny
preliminary approval within 45 days of the date of such submission
or within such further time as may be consented to by the
developer. Upon the submission of a complete application for a site
plan which involves more than 10 acres or more than 10 dwelling
units, the Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval
within 95 days of the date of such submission or within such further
time as may be consented to by the developer.
(2) If an application for development is found to be incomplete, the
developer shall be notified in writing of the deficiencies therein by
the Board or the Board's designee for the determination of
completeness within 45 days of the submission of such application
or it shall be deemed to be properly submitted.
F. Final approval of site plans. The Planning Board shall grant final
approval if the site plan conforms to the standards established by
Chapter 32B, Land Subdivision and Site Plan Review, for final approval
and the conditions of preliminary approval are met. Final approval shall
be granted or denied within 45 days after submission of a complete
application, or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant. Whenever review or approval of the application by the
County Planning Board is required, the Municipal Planning Board shall
condition any approval that it grants upon the timely receipt of a
favorable report on the application by the County Planning Board or
approval by the County Planning Board by its failure to report thereon
within the required time period.
G. Default approval. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the
periods prescribed in Subsections A, B, C, D, E and F above shall
constitute approval of the completed application, and a certificate from
the Secretary of the Planning Board as to the failure of the Planning
Board to act shall be issued on request of the applicant, and it shall be
sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of
approval required.
A. The Planning Board, when acting upon applications for preliminary or
minor subdivision approval, shall have the power to grant such
exceptions from the requirements for subdivision approval as may be
reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of the provisions
of Chapter 32B, Land Subdivision and Site Plan Review, if the literal
§ 32A-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32A-9
1:227
§ 32A-10. Procedure for filing applications.
Completed applications for development within the jurisdiction of the
Planning Board pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1975, c. 291,51 shall be
filed with the Secretary of the Planning Board. The applicant shall file, at
least 14 days before the date of the monthly meeting of the Board, the
sketch plats and completed application forms as required by ordinance and
the rules and regulations of the Board. At the time of filing the completed
application, but in no event less than 10 days prior to the date set for
hearing, the applicant shall also file all plot plans, maps or other papers
required by ordinance or any rule and regulation of the Planning Board,
and same shall be available for public inspection during normal business
hours in the office of the Planning Board Secretary. The Secretary of the
Planning Board shall inform the applicant of the steps to be taken to initiate
applications and of the regular meeting date of the Board.
§ 32A-11. Signing of plats and plans.
Approved plats for minor subdivisions, preliminary and final major
subdivisions, site plans and conditional uses shall be signed by the Planning
Board Chairman and Secretary.
enforcement of one or more provisions of the chapter is impracticable
or will exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining
to the land in question.
B. The Planning Board, when acting upon applications for preliminary site
plan approval, shall have the power to grant such exceptions from the
requirements for site plan approval as may be reasonable and within
the general purpose and intent of the provisions of Chapter 32B, Land
Subdivision and Site Plan Review, if the literal enforcement of one or
more provisions of the chapter is impracticable or will exact undue
hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in
question.
C. The Planning Board shall have the power to review and approve or deny
conditional uses or site plans simultaneously with review for
subdivision approval without the developer being required to make
further application to the Planning Board or the Planning Board being
required to hold further hearings. The longest time period for action by
the Planning Board, whether it is for subdivision, conditional use or site
plan approval, shall apply. Whenever approval of a conditional use is
requested by the developer pursuant to this subsection, notice of the
hearing on the plat shall include reference to the request for such
conditional use.
51.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 32A-9 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 32A-12
1:228
§ 32A-12. Citizens' Advisory Committee.
The Mayor may appoint one or more persons as a Citizens' Advisory
Committee to assist or collaborate with the Planning Board in its duties, but
such person or persons shall have no power to vote or take other action
required of the Board. Such person or persons shall serve at the pleasure of
the Mayor.
§ 32A-13. Rules and regulations.
The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary
to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this chapter. In the
issuance of subpoenas, administration of oaths and taking of testimony, the
provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A.
2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
§ 32A-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32A-13
1:229

ARTICLE II
Zoning Board of Adjustment
§ 32A-14. Establishment; composition; vacancies.
§ 32A-15. Officers.
The Board of Adjustment shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from
its members and shall also select a Secretary who may be either a Board of
Adjustment member or a municipal employee.
§ 32A-16. Attorney.
There is hereby created the office of Attorney to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may annually appoint and fix
the compensation of or agree upon the rate of compensation of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment Attorney, provided that it does not exceed the amount
appropriated by the governing body for its use and it does not exceed the
compensation set forth for the Zoning Board of Adjustment Attorney in the
A. A Zoning Board of Adjustment is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-69 et seq., consisting of seven residents of the Borough of Ho-
Ho-Kus, each to be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the
Borough Council, to serve for terms of four years from January 1 of the
year of their appointment. The terms of the members first appointed
shall be so determined that, to the greatest practicable extent, the
expiration of such terms shall be distributed evenly over the first four
years after their appointment, provided that the initial term of no
member shall exceed four years. Thereafter, the term of each member
shall be for four years. Nothing in this chapter shall, however, be
construed to affect the terms of any present members of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment, all of whom shall continue in office until the
completion of the terms for which they were appointed.
B. No member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment may hold any elective
office or position under the municipality.
C. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled
for the unexpired term only.
D. The Mayor may also appoint with the advice and consent of the Borough
Council two alternate members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment
which shall each be appointed for a term of two years from January 1 of
the year of their appointment. The alternate members shall be
designated by the Chairman of the Zoning Board of Adjustment as
"Alternate No. I" and "Alternate No. II" and shall serve in rotation
during the absence or disqualification of any regular member. [Added
12-17-1985 by Ord. No. 591]
§ 32A-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32A-16
1:231
annual Salary Ordinance.52 The Zoning Board of Adjustment Attorney shall
be an attorney other than the Municipal Attorney.
§ 32A-17. Experts and staff.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment may also employ or contract for and fix
the compensation of such experts and other staff and services as it may
deem necessary. The Board shall not authorize expenditures which exceed,
exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the governing body
for its use.
§ 32A-18. Rules and regulations.
The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary
to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this chapter. In the
issuance of subpoenas, administration of oaths and taking of testimony, the
provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A.
2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
§ 32A-19. Powers and duties.
§ 32A-20. Appeals and applications.
A. The powers of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 et seq., and amendments and supplements
thereto, and with the provisions of this chapter.
B. It is further the intent of this chapter to confer upon the Zoning Board
of Adjustment as full and complete powers as may lawfully be conferred
upon such Board, including, but not by way of limitation, the authority,
in connection with any case, action or proceeding before the Board, to
interpret and construe the provisions of this chapter or any term,
clause, sentence or word hereof and the Zoning Map, in accordance
with the general rules of construction applicable to legislative
enactments.
C. The Board may, in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate
conditions and safeguards, relax or dispense with the terms of this
chapter in accordance with the general or specific rules contained
herein, and with the general rules hereby laid down that equity shall be
done in cases where the strict construction of the provisions of this
chapter would work undue hardship. The powers and duties of the
Board having been delegated to and imposed upon it by statute, the
Board shall in all cases follow the provisions applicable to it in said P.L.
1975, c. 291,53 or subsequent statutes in such case made and provided,
and it shall from time to time furnish to any person requesting the same
a copy of its rules and information as to how appeals or applications
may properly be filed with the Board for its decision thereon.
52.Editor's Note: See Ch. 53, Salaries.
53.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 32A-16 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 32A-20
1:232
A. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any interested
party affected by any decision of an administrative officer of the
municipality based on or made in the enforcement of Chapter 85,
Zoning, or the Official Map. Each appeal shall be taken within the
twenty-day period prescribed by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-72 by filing a notice of
appeal, in the manner set forth in Article II, § 32A-20B, of this chapter,
and in accordance with the provisions of Article 9 of the Municipal Land
Use Law of 1975, as the same may be amended from time to time, and
the rules and regulations of the Board. [Amended 7-26-1988 by Ord.
No. 626; 8-28-1990 by Ord. No. 661]
B. Required appeal and variance documents. [Amended 8-28-1990 by
Ord. No. 661]
(1) Applications to the Board of Adjustment shall be filed in accordance
with the rules and regulations of the Board, the provisions of
Article 9 of the Municipal Land Use Law of 1975 and the provisions
of this section.
(2) When an appeal is taken from a decision of an administrative
officer or any other relief referred to in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a is
sought, the following documents shall be required:
(a) Twelve copies of the decision of the administrative officer on
which the appeal is based.
(b) A check for the filing fee.
(c) Twelve copies of a fully completed application form.
(d) Proof that no taxes or assessments are due on the property.
(3) The applicant shall serve a copy of the application upon the
administrative officer from whose decision the appeal was taken,
who shall forthwith transmit to the Board all papers constituting
the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
(4) When an interpretation of Chapter 85, Zoning, or the Zoning Map
or any other relief referred to in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b is sought, the
following documents shall be required:
(a) Twelve copies of any denial/decision of an administrative
officer.
(b) A check for the filing fee.
(c) Twelve copies of a fully completed application form.
(d) Proof that no taxes or assessments are due on the property.
(5) When a variance from the provisions of Chapter 85, Zoning, or any
other relief referred to in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c and d, 40:55D-34 or
40:55D-36 is sought, the following documents shall be required:
§ 32A-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32A-20
1:233
(a) Twelve copies of the denial/decision of the Chief Construction
Official.
(b) A check for the filing fee.
(c) Twelve copies of a fully completed application form.
(d) Twelve copies of the building plans submitted to the
administrative officer.
(e) Proof that no taxes or assessments are due on the property.
(f) Twelve copies of a plot plan showing the lot and block number
of the property, dimensions of the lot, dimensions and locations
of present structures, including all setbacks. The plan must be
prepared by a licensed professional authorized by state law or
regulation to prepare such a plan.
(g) Twelve copies of a map showing all properties within 200 feet
of the property which is the subject of the application and
approximate location of all structures thereon, together with
the name of the owner(s). This map may be prepared by a
licensed professional or by the applicant, in which event the
applicant must furnish the Board with a certification that all
information shown on the map is correct.
(h) A copy of the proposed notice to adjoining property owners,
with all information complete except the hearing date.
(i) A copy of the proposed affidavit of service.
(6) All applications will be processed in accordance with the rules and
regulations established by the Board.
C. An appeal to the Board of Adjustment shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action in respect to which the decision appealed from
was made, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to
the Board of Adjustment, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed
with him, that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would,
in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case,
proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order
which may be granted by the Board of Adjustment or by the Superior
Court of New Jersey on application or notice to the officer from whom
the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
D. In granting subdivision or site plan approval in connection with a use
variance, the Board of Adjustment shall follow the same procedures as
the Planning Board as contained in this chapter.
E. Public notice on any application for variances shall be given in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12.
§ 32A-20 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 32A-21
1:234
§ 32A-21. Power to reverse or modify decisions.
In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the Board of Adjustment may,
in conformity with the provisions of P.L. 1975, c. 291,54 or amendments
thereto or subsequent statutes applying thereto, reverse or affirm, wholly
or in part, or modify the action, order, requirement, decision, interpretation
or determination appealed from and, to that end, have all the powers of the
administrative officer from whom the appeal is taken.
§ 32A-22. Expiration of variance. [Amended 7-16-2013 by Ord. No.
1024]
§ 32A-23. Powers granted by law.
A. Any variance hereafter granted by the Board of Adjustment permitting
the erection or alteration of any structure or structures or permitting a
specified use of any premises shall expire by limitation unless such
construction or alteration shall have been actually commenced on each
and every structure permitted by said variance or unless such
permitted use has actually been commenced within one year from the
date of publication of the judgment or determination of the Board of
Adjustment; except, however, that the running of the period of
limitation herein provided shall be tolled from the date of filing an
appeal from the decision of the Board of Adjustment to the governing
body or to a court of competent jurisdiction until the termination or
conclusion in any manner of such appeal or proceeding; and also
except, however, in the case of a use variance which also involves a
subdivision or site plan approval, the variance shall extend for the full
period of preliminary approval.
B. Upon a showing of good cause and if the reason(s) for the grant of a
variance have not changed, the Zoning Board of Adjustment is
authorized to, upon notice to all entitled property owners and the
publication of a legal notice in the official newspaper of the Borough,
grant an extension of time on the duration of the variance for a period
to be determined by the Board of Adjustment but not to extend beyond
an additional year. The Board of Adjustment shall not grant more than
two such extensions of any variance approval.
A. The Board of Adjustment shall have such powers as are granted by law
to:
(1) Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that
there is error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made
by an administrative official or agency based on or made in the
enforcement of Chapter 85, Zoning.
(2) Hear and decide requests for interpretation of the Zoning Map or
Chapter 85, Zoning, or for decisions upon other special questions
54.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 32A-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32A-23
1:235
upon which such Board is authorized by Chapter 85, Zoning, to
pass.
(3) Where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape
of a specific piece of property, or by reason of exceptional
topographic conditions, or by reason of other extraordinary and
exceptional situation or condition of such piece of property, the
strict application of any regulation in Chapter 85, Zoning, would
result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to or
exceptional and undue hardship upon the owner of such property,
grant, upon an application or an appeal relating to such property, a
variance from such strict application so as to relieve such
difficulties or hardship; provided, however, that no variance shall
be granted under this subsection to allow a structure or use in a
district restricted against such structure or use, and further
provided that the proposed development does not require approval
by the Planning Board of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use
in conjunction with which the Planning Board shall review a
request for variance pursuant to Section 47a of the Municipal Land
Use Law of 1975, P.L. 1975, c. 291.55
(4) In particular cases and for special reasons, grant a variance to
allow departure from any regulation adopted pursuant to Article 8
of the Municipal Land Use Law, so as to permit a use or principal
structure; an expansion of a nonconforming use; deviation from a
specification or standard pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67,
pertaining solely to a conditional use; and an increase in the
permitted floor area ratio as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4, except as
applied to the required lot area for a lot or lots for detached one- or
two-dwelling-unit buildings, which lot or lots are either an isolated
or undersized lot or lots resulting from a minor subdivision. A
variance granted under this subsection shall be granted only by
affirmative vote of at least five members of the Board. [Amended
8-28-1990 by Ord. No. 661]
(5) Where an application or appeal relating to a specific piece of
property seeks a variance from any regulation adopted pursuant to
Article 8 of the Municipal Land Use Law, including without
limitation a variance from the requirements of Chapter 85, Zoning,
the purposes of the Municipal Land Use Law would be advanced by
a deviation from the requirements of Chapter 85, Zoning, and the
benefits of the deviation would substantially outweigh any
detriment, grant such a variance; provided, however, that no
variance from those departures enumerated in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d
shall be granted under this subsection. [Added 8-28-1990 by
Ord. No. 661]
B. No variance or other relief may be granted under the provisions of this
section unless such variance or other relief can be granted without
55.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60a.
§ 32A-23 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 32A-23
1:236
§ 32A-24. Additional powers.
§ 32A-25. Time requirements for decision.
substantial detriment to the public good and will not substantially
impair the intent and purpose of the zone plan and Chapter 85, Zoning.
Any application under any subsection of this section may be referred to
any appropriate person or agency, including the Planning Board, for its
report, provided that such reference shall not extend the period of time
within which the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act.
A. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall, in addition to the powers
specified in § 32A-23 of this article, have power given by law to:
(1) Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for a
building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public
drainageway, flood-control basin or public area reserved on the
Official Map, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32.
(2) Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for a
building or structure not related to a street.
B. The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to grant, to the same
extent and subject to the same restrictions as the Planning Board,
subdivision or site plan approval pursuant to Article 6 of P.L. 1975, c.
291,56 or conditional use approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67,
whenever the Board is reviewing an application for approval for a use
variance pursuant to Article II, § 32A-23A(4), of this chapter.
A. The Board of Adjustment shall render its decision not later than 120
days after the date a notice of appeal has been filed with the Secretary
of the Board of Adjustment from the decision of an administrative
officer, or not later than 120 days after the submission of a complete
application for development to the Board pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b. Failure of the Board to render a decision within
such one-hundred-twenty-day period or within such further time as may
be consented to by the applicant shall constitute a decision favorable to
the applicant.
B. The Board of Adjustment may refer any application to any appropriate
person or agency, including the Planning Board, for its report, provided
that such reference shall not extend the period of time within which the
Board of Adjustment shall act.
C. Whenever review or approval of an application by the County Planning
Board is required by Section 5 of P.L. 1968, c. 285 (N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3),
in the case of a subdivision or by Section 8 of P.L. 1968, c. 285 (N.J.S.A.
40:27-6.6), in the case of a site plan, the Municipal Board of Adjustment
shall condition any approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a
56.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 32A-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32A-25
1:237
favorable report on the application by the County Planning Board or
approval by the County Planning Board by its failure to report thereon
within the required time.
§ 32A-25 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 32A-25
1:238
ARTICLE III
Provisions Applicable to Both Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment
§ 32A-26. Conflicts of interest.
No member of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act
on any matter in which he has either directly or indirectly any personal or
financial interest. Whenever any such member shall disqualify himself from
acting on a particular matter, he shall not continue to sit with the Board
on the hearing of such matter, nor participate in any discussion or decision
relating thereto.
§ 32A-27. Meetings.
§ 32A-28. Minutes.
Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall include
the names of the persons appearing and addressing the Board and of
the persons appearing by attorney; the action taken by the Board; and
the findings, if any, made by it and reasons therefor. The minutes shall
thereafter be made available for public inspection during normal business
hours at the office of the Borough Clerk. Any interested party shall have the
right to compel production of the minutes for use as evidence in any legal
proceeding concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such interested
A. Meetings of both the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall be scheduled no less often than once a month, and any meeting so
scheduled shall be held as scheduled unless canceled for lack of
completed applications for development to process.
B. Special meetings may be provided for at the call of the Chairman or on
the request of any two Board members, which meetings shall be held on
notice to its members and the public in accordance with all applicable
legal requirements.
C. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present.
D. All actions shall be taken by majority vote of a quorum except as
otherwise required by any provision of P.L. 1975, c. 291.57
E. All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the
public. Notice of all such meetings shall be given in accordance with the
requirements of the Open Public Meetings Law, P.L. 1975, c. 231.58 An
executive session for the purpose of discussing and studying any
matters to come before either Board shall not be deemed a regular or
special meeting in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-9.
57.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
58.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 32A-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32A-28
1:239
party may be charged a fee for reproduction of the minutes for his use as
provided for in the rules of the Board.
§ 32A-29. Fees payable to Borough Clerk. [Amended 11-27-1979 by
Ord. No. 542; 6-28-1983 by Ord. No. 568]
A. All fees as hereinafter required shall be payable to the Borough Clerk at
the time of filing any application for development. All permits,
terminations, resolutions or certificates of approval are subject to the
payment of all fees, and no approval shall be given by the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment until proof has been submitted to
them that the requisite fees have, in fact, been paid.
B. Schedule of fees. In addition to those established elsewhere in this
Code, all applicants or appellants to the Planning Board, Board of
Adjustment, Construction Code Officials or Mayor and Council shall pay
the following: [Amended 7-26-1988 by Ord. No. 626]
(1) Minor subdivision or resubdivision.
(a) At the time of filing a sketch plat for a minor subdivision, the
subdivider shall deposit with the Borough Clerk a filing fee of
$350, by check made payable to the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, to
cover the administrative costs of the Borough, together with an
amount of $1,500 in cash to be held by the Borough in escrow
which shall be charged for the actual out-of-pocket expenses to
the Borough for services rendered to it, including but not
limited to legal and engineering fees. If the subdivision is
classified by the Planning Board as a major subdivision, then
the applicant must submit an additional $150 filing fee and
$100 for each lot to be created by the proposed subdivision,
but applicant shall receive a credit for any amount paid
pursuant to this subsection. [Amended 7-27-1993 by Ord.
No. 720; 5-24-2011 by Ord. No. 988; 2-25-2014 by Ord.
No. 1026; 11-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-12]
(b) When the amount deposited under this subsection for the
actual out-of-pocket expenses of the Borough has been
obligated or exhausted, the subdivider shall, upon request,
deposit additional amounts as required for legal, engineering,
publication, filing, recording, transcribing and similar items
within two weeks of notification by the Borough Clerk and
prior to the time the Borough authorizes further expenditures.
(c) Applications before either the Planning Board or the Zoning
Board of Adjustment for minor subdivision involving a hardship
variance: [Added 5-24-2011 by Ord. No. 988]
[1] Filing fee: $400;
[2] Use variance: $450; and
§ 32A-28 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 32A-29
1:240
[3] Nonresidential variance: $1,000.
(2) Major subdivision.
(a) At the time of filing a sketch plat for a major subdivision, the
subdivider shall deposit with the Borough Clerk a filing fee of
$500, plus $100 for each lot to be created by such major
subdivision, by check made payable to the Borough of Ho-Ho-
Kus, to cover the administrative costs of the Borough, together
with an amount of $5,000 in cash to be held by the Borough in
escrow which shall be charged for the actual out-of-pocket
expenses of the Borough for services rendered to it including
but not limited to legal and engineering fees. [Amended
7-27-1993 by Ord. No. 720; 5-24-2011 by Ord. No. 988;
2-25-2014 by Ord. No. 1026; 11-27-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-12]
(b) When the amount deposited under this subsection for the
actual out-of-pocket expenses of the Borough has been
obligated or exhausted, the subdivider shall, upon request,
deposit additional amounts as required to cover further out-ofpocket
expenses of the Borough for legal, engineering,
publication, filing, recording, transcribing and similar items
within two weeks and prior to the time the Borough authorizes
further expenditures.
(c) For applications before the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment for major subdivision involving a hardship
variance: [Added 5-24-2011 by Ord. No. 988]
[1] Filing fee: $400;
[2] Use variance: $450; and
[3] Nonresidential variance: $1,000.
(3) Chapter 85, Zoning, interpretations pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70b: $175. Planning Board review of new business: filing
fee of $150. [Amended 5-24-2011 by Ord. No. 988]
(4) Use variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d: $450. [Amended
5-24-2011 by Ord. No. 988]
(5) Variance applications other than use variances by the Board of
Adjustment: $400; variance before Zoning Board of Adjustment for
nonresidential property: $1,000. [Amended 5-24-2011 by Ord.
No. 988]
(a) An escrow in the amount of $1,500 is required for all Zoning
Board applications to cover legal and engineering fees.
[Added 2-25-2014 by Ord. No. 1026; amended
11-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-12]
§ 32A-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32A-29
1:241
(6) Minor site plan.
(a) At the time of filing a sketch plat for a minor site plan, the
applicant shall deposit with the Borough Clerk a filing fee of
$300, by check made payable to the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, to
cover administrative costs of the Borough, together with an
amount in cash to be held by the Borough in escrow of $600,
which shall be charged for the actual out-of-pocket expenses of
the Borough for services rendered to it, including but not
limited to legal and engineering fees. [Amended 7-27-1993
by Ord. No. 720; 2-25-2014 by Ord. No. 1026]
(b) When the amount deposited under this subsection for the
actual out-of-pocket expenses of the Borough has been
obligated or exhausted, the applicant shall, upon request,
deposit additional amounts as required to cover further out-ofpocket
expenses of the Borough for legal, engineering,
publication, filing, recording, transcribing and similar items
within two weeks and prior to the time the Borough authorizes
further expenditures.
(7) Major site plan.
(a) At the time of filing a sketch plat for a major site plan, the
applicant shall deposit with the Borough Clerk a filing fee of
$500, by check made payable to the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, to
cover administrative costs of the Borough, together with an
amount in cash to be held by the Borough in escrow of $600,
which shall be charged for the actual out-of-pocket expenses of
the Borough for services rendered to it, including but not
limited to legal and engineering fees. [Amended 7-27-1993
by Ord. No. 720; 2-25-2014 by Ord. No. 1026]
(b) When the amount deposited under this subsection for the
actual out-of-pocket expenses of the Borough has been
obligated or exhausted, the applicant shall, upon request,
deposit additional amounts as required to cover further out-ofpocket
expenses of the Borough for legal, engineering,
publication, filing, recording, transcribing and similar items
within two weeks and prior to the time the Borough authorizes
further expenditures.
(8) Simultaneous applications for site plan review and subdivision and/
or variance applications shall be charged the filing fees established
for each application as if filed separately.
(9) All other applications, including but not limited to conditional use
approval or an application for issuance of a permit pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 or N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36: $250 Planning Board;
$400 Zoning Board of Adjustment. [Amended 2-25-2014 by Ord.
No. 1026]
§ 32A-29 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 32A-29
1:242
(10) Reinstatement of dismissed applications: $100.
(11) Copies of any public records or municipal ordinances: as provided
in §§ 51-1 through 51-7.
(12) Transcript fees: as set forth in N.J.S.A. 2A:11-1559 and as may be
amended from time to time.
(13) At time of filing a sketch plat for a subdivision or site plan involving
property on which wetlands are located, the applicant shall deposit
with the Borough Clerk a filing fee of $500, by check made payable
to the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, to cover administrative and
engineering costs of the Borough. Said amount shall be in addition
to any fees required to be deposited pursuant to this section.
(14) Sign applications: $100.
(15) Resubmission of minor and/or major subdivision applications,
following previously granted approval by the Planning Board,
caused by failure of the applicant to file said subdivision map and/
or deed as required by the Municipal Land Use Act: $150.
(16) At the time of filing an application before the Board of Adjustment
involving commercial property or the development of vacant land
(residential or commercial), the applicant shall deposit with the
Borough Clerk the sum of $250 to be held by the Borough in
escrow, which shall be charged for the actual expenses of the Board
for services rendered to it in connection with such application,
including but not limited to legal, engineering and other fees
incurred by the Board with respect to the application. These
expenses shall include the fees of any expert witness retained by
the Board, the legal fees of the Board Attorney related to the
application, including but not limited to the preparation of legal
memoranda, opinion letters and resolution, correspondence and
telephone conversations with counsel for the applicant and
objectors, and all other necessary and reasonable services
rendered with respect to the application, exclusive of the Board
Attorney's attendance at meetings of the Board. When the amount
deposited for the actual out-of-pocket expenses of the Board has
been obligated or exhausted, the applicant shall, upon request,
deposit additional amounts as required for the legal, engineering,
expert witness fees, publication, filing, recording, transcribing and
similar items within two weeks of notification by the Borough Clerk
and prior to the time the Borough authorizes further expenditures.
[Added 8-23-1994 by Ord. No. 735]
(17) Applications for awning, canopy or marquee: $100. [Added
12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 754]
59.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 2A:11-15 was repealed by L. 1991, c. 119, § 4.
§ 32A-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32A-29.1
1:243
§ 32A-29.1. Miscellaneous zoning fees. [Added 2-25-2014 by Ord.
No. 1026]
§ 32A-30. Hearings.
A. Driveway permit: $50.
B. New construction review: $50.
C. Air-conditioning unit permit: $50.
D. Generator permit: $50.
E. Pool permit: $50.
F. Shed permit: $50.
G. Permit for additions to residence: $50.
H. Permit for retaining wall: $50.
I. Patio/deck: $50.
J. Pod/dumpster: [Amended 4-26-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-07]
(1) One to two months: $40 (nonrefundable).
(2) Over two months: $100 (nonrefundable).
A. Rules. The Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment may make
rules governing the conduct of hearings before such bodies, which rules
shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
or of this chapter.
B. Oaths. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he may
designate shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
evidence, including witnesses and documents presented by the parties,
and the provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law, P.L.
1953, c. 38 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.), shall apply.
C. Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer, and the right of cross-examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
D. Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the
hearing, but the Board may exclude the irrelevant, immaterial or
unduly repetitious evidence.
E. Records. Each Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the
proceedings by either stenographer or mechanical or electronic means.
The Board shall furnish a transcript or duplicate recording in lieu
§ 32A-29.1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 32A-30
1:244
§ 32A-31. Notice requirements for hearings.
Whenever a hearing is required on an application for development pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., the applicant shall give notice thereof, at his
expense, as follows:
thereof on request to any interested party at his expense. Such
interested party shall be charged a fee for the transcript or a duplicate
recording as provided for in the rules of the Board.
A. Public notice shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of
the municipality at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.
B. Notice shall be given to the owners of all real property, as shown on the
current tax duplicate or duplicates, located within 200 feet in all
directions of the property which is the subject of such hearing and
whether located within or without the municipality in which the
applicant's land is located. Such notice shall be given by serving a copy
thereof on the owner as shown on said current tax duplicate or his
agent in charge of the property or by mailing a copy thereof by certified
mail to the property owner at his address as shown on said current tax
duplicate. A return receipt is not required. Notice to a partnership
owner may be made by service upon any partner. Notice to a corporate
owner may be made by service upon its president, a vice president,
secretary or other person authorized by appointment or by law to
accept service on behalf of the corporation.
C. Notice of all hearings on applications for development involving
property located within 200 feet of an adjoining municipality shall be
given by personal service or certified mail to the Clerk of such
municipality, which notice shall be in addition to the notice required to
be given pursuant to § 32A-31B of this article to the owners of lands in
such adjoining municipality which are located within 200 feet of the
subject premises.
D. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the County
Planning Board of a hearing on an application for development of
property adjacent to an existing county road or proposed road shown on
the Official County Map or on the County Master Plan, adjoining other
county land or situate within 200 feet of a municipal boundary.
E. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to a state highway.
F. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Director of the Division of State and Regional Planning in the
Department of Community Affairs of a hearing on an application for
development of property which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling
units. Such notice shall include a copy of any maps or documents
required to be on file with the Secretary of the Planning Board or the
§ 32A-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32A-31
1:245
§ 32A-32. List of property owners furnished.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12c, the Tax Assessor of the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus shall, within seven days after receipt of a request
therefor and upon receipt of payment of a fee of $10, make and certify a list
from the current tax duplicate of names and addresses of owners to whom
the applicant is required to give notice pursuant to Article III, § 32A-31B, of
this chapter.
§ 32A-33. Decisions.
Secretary of the Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, pursuant to
Section 6b of P.L. 1975, c. 291.60
G. All notices hereinabove specified in this section shall be given at least
10 days prior to the date fixed for hearing, and the applicant shall file
an affidavit of proof of service with the Attorney for the Board holding
the hearing on the application for development.
H. Any notice made by certified mail as hereinabove required shall be
deemed to be complete upon mailing in accordance with the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-14.
I. Form of notice. All notices required to be given pursuant to the terms of
this chapter shall state the date, time and place of the hearing; the
nature of the matters to be considered; identification of the property
proposed for development by street address, if any, or by reference to
lot and block numbers as shown on the current tax duplicate in the
Municipal Tax Assessor's office; and the location and times at which any
maps and documents for which approval is sought are available as
required by law.
A. Each decision on any application for development shall be set forth in
writing as a resolution of the Board, which resolution shall include
findings of fact and legal conclusions based thereon.
B. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Board within 10 days of the
date of decision to the applicant or, if represented, then to his attorney,
without separate charge. A copy of the decision shall also be mailed to
all persons who have requested it and who have paid the fee prescribed
by the Board for such service. A copy of the decision shall also be filed
in the office of the Borough Clerk, who shall make a copy of such filed
decision available to any interested party upon payment of a fee
calculated in the same manner as those established for copies of other
public documents in the municipality.
60.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10b.
§ 32A-31 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 32A-34
1:246
§ 32A-34. Publication of decisions.
A brief notice of every final decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the municipality. Such publication shall be arranged by either
the applicant or the Secretary of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, and paid for by the applicant in accordance
with the rules and regulations set forth by the respective Board. Said notice
shall be sent to the official newspaper for publication within 10 days of the
date of any such decision.
§ 32A-35. Payment of taxes.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39 and 40:55D-65, every
application for development submitted to the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall be accompanied by proof that no taxes or
assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on the property
which is the subject of such application; or if it is shown that taxes or
assessments are delinquent on said property, any approvals or other relief
granted by either Board shall be conditioned upon either the prompt
payment of such taxes or assessments or the making of adequate provision
for the payment thereof in such manner that the municipality will be
adequately protected.
§ 32A-36. Conditional approvals.
A. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-22, if an application for
development is submitted to the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment proposing a development that is barred or prevented,
directly or indirectly, by a legal action instituted by any state agency,
political subdivision or other party to protect the public health and
welfare or by a directive or order issued by any state agency, political
subdivision or court of competent jurisdiction to protect the public
health and welfare, the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall process such application for development in accordance with said
Act and this chapter, or rules and regulations as established by said
Boards, and, if such application for development complies with the
Borough's development regulations, the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall approve such application conditioned on
removal of such legal barrier to development.
B. In the event that development proposed by an application for
development requires an approval by a governmental agency other
than the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall, in appropriate instances,
condition its approval upon the subsequent approval of such
governmental agency, provided that said Boards shall make a decision
on any application for development within the time period provided in
this chapter or within an extension of such period as has been agreed to
by the applicant, unless the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
§ 32A-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32A-36
1:247
§ 32A-37. Removal from office.
Any member, other than a Class I member, of the Planning Board or any
member of the Board of Adjustment may, after public hearing if he requests
it, be removed by the governing body for cause.
Adjustment is prevented or relieved from so acting by the operation of
law.
§ 32A-36 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 32A-37
1:248
ARTICLE IV
Appeals
§ 32A-38. Appeals to Zoning Board of Adjustment. [Amended
7-26-1988 by Ord. No. 626; 8-28-1990 by Ord. No. 661]
Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any interested party
affected by any decision of an administrative officer of the municipality
based on or made in the enforcement of Chapter 85, Zoning, or the Official
Map. Each appeal shall be taken within the twenty-day period prescribed
by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-72 by filing a notice of appeal, in the manner set forth in
Article II, § 32A-20B, of this chapter, and in accordance with the provisions
of Article 9 of the Municipal Land Use Law of 1975,61 as the same may be
amended from time to time, and the rules and regulations of the Board.
§ 32A-39. through § 32A-41. (Reserved)62
61.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
62.Editor's Note: Former §§ 32A-39, Appeals from Planning Board to governing body, 32A-40,
Appeals from Zoning Board of Adjustment to governing body, and 32A-41, Procedure for
appeals to governing body, were repealed 7-26-1988 by Ord. No. 626.
§ 32A-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32A-39
1:249

ARTICLE V
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 32A-42. Definitions.
Whenever a term is used in this chapter which is defined in P.L. 1975, c.
291,63 such term is intended to have the meaning set forth in the definition
of such term found in said statute, unless a contrary intention is clearly
expressed from the context of this chapter.
§ 32A-43. Tolling of period of approval.
In the event that during the period of approval heretofore or hereafter
granted to an application for development the developer is barred or
prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the development
otherwise permitted under such approval by a legal action instituted by any
state agency, political subdivision or other party to protect the public health
and welfare, or by a directive or order issued by any state agency, political
subdivision or court of competent jurisdiction to protect the public health or
welfare, and the developer is otherwise ready, willing and able to proceed
with said development, the running of the period of approval under this
chapter or under any ordinance repealed by this chapter, as the case may
be, shall be suspended for the period of time said legal action is pending or
such directive or order is in effect.
§ 32A-44. Repealer.
All sections of Chapter 32B, Land Subdivision and Site Plan Review, Chapter
85, Zoning, the Zoning Board of Adjustment Ordinance and the Planning
Board Ordinance or any other ordinance of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus which
contains provisions contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and
are hereby, to the extent of such inconsistency, repealed.
§ 32A-45. Pending applications.
All applications for development filed prior to the effective date of this
chapter may be continued, but any appeals arising out of decisions made on
any such applications shall be governed by the provisions of Article IV of
this chapter.
§ 32A-46. Filing of copies.
Immediately upon adoption of this chapter, the Borough Clerk shall file a
copy of this chapter with the County Planning Board as required by law.
The Clerk shall also file with said County Planning Board copies of all other
ordinances of the municipality relating to land use, such as Chapter 32B,
Land Subdivision and Site Plan Review, and Chapter 85, Zoning.
63.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 32A-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32A-47
1:251
§ 32A-47. Severability.
If any article, section, paragraph, clause or provision of this chapter shall be
adjudged invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to that article, section,
paragraph, clause or provision so adjudged, and the remainder of this
chapter shall be deemed valid and effective.
§ 32A-48. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Land Use Procedures
Ordinance of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus."
§ 32A-49. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect on February 1, 1977.
§ 32A-47 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 32A-49
1:252
Chapter 32B
LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Development fees — See Ch. 17.
Excavations and dredging — See Ch. 21.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 27.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 32A.
Landscaper registration — See Ch. 32C.
Official Map — See Ch. 39.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 47.
Soil movement — See Ch. 63.
Soil importation — See Ch. 63A.
Uniform Construction Code
Department — See Ch. 77.
Zoning — See Ch. 85.
§ 32B-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Land Subdivision and
Site Plan Review Ordinance of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus."
§ 32B-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide guidelines, rules, regulations and
standards for land subdivision and for site plan review in the Borough
of Ho-Ho-Kus, in order to promote its public health, safety, convenience
and general welfare. Its administration will ensure the orderly growth,
development, conservation, protection and proper use of land. It will
provide for adequate traffic circulation and utilities and serve to preserve
and enhance the unique historical character, appearance and visual quality
of the Borough.
§ 32B-3. Administration.
As authorized by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37, the provisions of this chapter shall
be administered by the Planning Board; provided, however, that whenever,
pursuant to law or ordinance, the Board of Adjustment has jurisdiction to
grant the plan approval, then the applicable provisions of this chapter shall
be administered by the Board of Adjustment.
§ 32B-4. Definitions.
Certain words and terms in this chapter are to be given the following
meanings:
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The person with whom applications for
development are filed pursuant to this chapter. The administrative officer
for the Board of Adjustment shall be the Secretary to the Board of
Adjustment. The administrative officer for the Planning Board shall be the
Secretary to the Planning Board.
§ 32A-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32B-4
1:253
ALTERATION — As applied to a building, a structure or use, any change
in supporting or nonsupporting members of a building or structure, any
addition to or diminution of a building or structure, or change in use from
that of one district classification to another, or any removal of a building or
structure or part thereof from one location to another.
APPLICANT — A developer submitting an application for development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required by this chapter, Chapter 32A, Land Use
Procedures, and the rules and regulations of the Board for approval of
a subdivision plat, site plan, plan development, conditional use, zoning
variance or direction of the issuance of a construction permit pursuant to
the Municipal Land Use Act.64
ARCHITECT — A person licensed to engage in the practice of a professional
architect by the State of New Jersey pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:3-1.
BOARD — The Board of Adjustment or the Planning Board when either one
is authorized to act by the Municipal Land Use Law, Chapter 32A, Land Use
Procedures, or this chapter.
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT — The Board of Adjustment of the Borough of
Ho-Ho-Kus.
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Board of Health of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
BOROUGH ENGINEER — The licensed engineer serving the Borough of Ho-
Ho-Kus.
BUILDING — A structure enclosed within exterior walls or fire walls built,
erected and framed of component structural parts and designed for the
housing, shelter, enclosure and support of persons, animals or property of
any kind.
CIRCULATION — Systems, structures and physical improvements for the
movement of people, goods, water, air, sewage or power by such means
as streets, highways, railways, waterways, towers, airways, pipes and
conduits, and the handling of people and goods by such means as terminals,
stations, warehouses and other storage buildings or transshipment points.
COMPLETE AND/OR COMPLETED APPLICATION — An application form
completed as specified by ordinance and the rules and regulations of the
Board, and all accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval
of the application for development, including, where applicable, but not
limited to, a site plan or subdivision plat, provided that the Board may
require such additional information not specified in the ordinance, or any
revisions in the accompanying documents, as are reasonably necessary to
make an informed decision as to whether the requirements necessary for
approval of the application for development have been met. The application
shall not be deemed incomplete for lack of any such additional information
or any revisions in the accompanying documents so required by the Board.
An application shall be certified as complete immediately upon the meeting
64.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 32B-4 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 32B-4
1:254
of all requirements specified in the ordinance and in the rules and
regulations of the Board and shall be deemed complete as of the day it is so
certified by the administrative officer for purposes of the commencement of
the time period for action by the Board.
DAYS — Calendar days.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure, or of any
mining, excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any
building or other structure or land extension or use of land for which
permission may be required pursuant to this chapter or the Municipal Land
Use Law.65
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by
drains, grading or other means, and includes control of runoff during and
after construction or development to minimize erosion and sedimentation,
to assure the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts and bridges, to
induce water recharge into the ground where practical, to lessen nonpoint
pollution, to maintain the integrity of stream channels for their biological
functions, as well as for drainage, and the means necessary for water supply
preservation or prevention or alleviation of flooding.
DRAINAGEWAY — The lands required for the installation of stormwater
sewers, sanitary sewers or drainage ditches as required along a natural
stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the flow
of water therein to safeguard the public against flood damage in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 58:1-1 et seq.66
DWELLING — A building designed or used exclusively as the living quarters
for one or more families, but not including campers, mobile homes or
trailers.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A detached building designed for or
occupied exclusively by not more than one family.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A detached building designed for or occupied
by two families living independently of each other.
DWELLING UNIT — A building or entirely self-contained portion thereof
having cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities providing complete
housekeeping facilities for only one family.
ENGINEER — A person licensed to engage in the practice of a professional
engineer by the State of New Jersey pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:8-1.67
65.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
66.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 58:1-1 et seq. was repealed by L. 1945, c. 22, p. 79, § 44; L. 1979, c.
359, § 15; L. 1981, c. 262, § 26. See now N.J.S.A. 58:1A-1 et seq.
§ 32B-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32B-4
1:255
FINAL APPROVAL — The official action of the Board taken on a preliminary
approved major subdivision or site plan after all conditions, engineering
plans and other requirements have been completed or fulfilled and the
required improvements have been installed or guaranties properly posted
for their completion or approval conditioned upon the posting of such
guaranties and entering into a developer's agreement, if required.
FINAL PLAT — The final map of all or a portion of the subdivision or
site plan, which is presented for final approval in accordance with these
regulations and which, if approved, shall be filed with the proper county
recording officer, and meeting the requirements of this chapter.
INTERESTED PARTY —
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a
building or group of buildings for the temporary parking of a commercial
vehicle while loading or unloading material.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
LOT AREA — The area of a lot expressed in square feet or acres. Any portion
of a lot included in a street shall not be included in calculating lot area.
However, any portion of a lot or lots dedicated to the Borough for the public
use shall not be deducted from the calculation of the lot area.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY — Any security that is acceptable to the
governing body to secure the maintenance of improvements installed by
developers for a period of three years after release of the performance
guaranty with respect to such improvements.
MAJOR SITE PLAN — Any site plan not classified as a minor site plan.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision.
MASTER PLAN — A composite of one or more written or graphic proposals
for the development of the Borough as set forth in and adopted pursuant to
Section 19 of the Municipal Land Use Law.68
In a criminal or quasi-criminal proceeding, any citizen of the State of
New Jersey.
A.
In an administrative proceeding before a Borough agency, any person,
whether residing within or without the Borough, whose right to use,
acquire or enjoy property is or may be affected by any action taken
under this chapter or whose rights to use, acquire or enjoy property
under this chapter or under any law of this state or of the United States
have been denied, violated or infringed by an action or a failure to act
hereunder.
B.
67.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 45:8-1 was repealed by L. 1938, c. 342, § 23. See now N.J.S.A.
45:8-27 et seq.
68.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
§ 32B-4 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 32B-4
1:256
MINOR SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots which
proposes new development within the scope of development specifically
permitted by ordinance as a minor site plan; does not involve planned
development, any new street or extension of any off-tract improvement
which is to be prorated pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42 of the Municipal
Land Use Act; and contains the information reasonably required in order
to make an informed determination as to whether the requirements
established by ordinance for approval of a minor site plan have been met.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision containing not more than two
lots, provided that such subdivision does not involve a planned
development, any new street or the extension of any off-tract improvement,
the cost of which is to be prorated pursuant to Section 30 of the Municipal
Land Use Act.69
MUNICIPAL LAND USE ACT — Chapter 291 of the Public Laws of the State
of New Jersey of 1975, and all amendments and supplements thereto.70
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted in accordance with the Official Map
and Building Permit Act, N.J.S.A. 40:55-1.30 et seq.,71 or any prior act
authorizing such adoption. Such map shall be conclusive with respect to
the locations and width of the streets, public parks and playgrounds and
drainage rights-of-way shown thereon.
OFF-SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but within
the parcel of land (of which the lot is a part) which is the subject of a
development application or contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
OFF-TRACT — Not located on the parcel of land which is the subject of a
development application nor on a contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
ON-SITE — Located on the lot in question.
ON-TRACT — Located on the parcel of land which is the subject of a
development application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
OWNER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership or
corporation having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be
developed to commence and maintain proceedings to develop the same
under this chapter.
PARTY IMMEDIATELY CONCERNED — Any applicant for development, the
owners of the subject land and all owners of land and government agencies
entitled to notice under this chapter.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Any security which may be accepted by
the Borough, including cash, provided that the Borough shall not require
more than 10% of the total performance guaranty in cash, in lieu of a
69.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42.
70.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
71.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:55-1.30 was repealed by P.L. 1975, c. 291. See now N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 32B-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32B-4
1:257
requirement that certain improvements be made before the Planning Board
or other approving body approves a plat, including performance bond,
escrow agreements and other similar collateral or surety agreements.
PERMIT, CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY — A certificate issued
by the Uniform Construction Code Department72 of the Borough of Ho-Ho-
Kus upon completion of the construction of a new building or addition, or
upon a change in the occupancy of a building (other than a dwelling unit
as defined in this chapter), which certifies that all requirements of this
chapter, the construction permit, the Uniform Construction Code and all
other applicable laws and ordinances have been met and that the purpose
for which a building or land is to be used is in conformance with the uses
permitted and all other requirements under this chapter for the zone in
which it is located or is to be located.
PERMIT, CONSTRUCTION — A construction permit issued by the Uniform
Construction Code Department of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus for the
construction, reconstruction, remodeling, alteration or repair of a building
upon approval of the submitted application and plans.
PLANNER — A person licensed to engage in the practice of professional
planning by the State of New Jersey pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:14A-1 et seq.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
PLAT — The map or maps of a subdivision or site plan.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — Rights conferred pursuant to this chapter
prior to final approval after a complete application has been submitted and
approved and the requirements established by the Planning Board have
been satisfied.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — The preliminary map indicating the proposed layout
of a subdivision or site plan which is submitted to the Secretary of the
Planning Board for its consideration and tentative approval and meeting the
requirements of this chapter.
PUBLIC DRAINAGEWAY — The land reserved or dedicated for the
installation of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches or required along
a natural stream or watercourse for preserving the biological, as well as
drainage, function of the channel and providing for the flow of water to
safeguard the public against flood damage, sedimentation and erosion and
to assure the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts and bridges,
to induce water recharge into the ground where practical and to lessen
nonpoint pollution.
RETAINING WALL — A structure designed for the separation of varying
ground levels.
SEDIMENTATION — The deposition of soil that has been transported from
its site of origin by water, ice, wind, gravity or other natural means of a
product of erosion.
72.Editor's Note: See Ch. 77, Uniform Construction Code Department.
§ 32B-4 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 32B-4
1:258
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is shown
the existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but not necessarily
limited to topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains, marshes and
waterways; the location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives,
parking spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities,
utility services, landscaping structures and signs, and lighting and
screening devices; and any other information required by this chapter that
may be reasonably required in order to make an informed determination
pursuant to this chapter.
SKETCH PLAT — The sketch map of a subdivision or a site plan of sufficient
accuracy to be used for the purpose of discussion and meeting the
requirements of this chapter.
STANDARDS OF PERFORMANCE — Standards adopted by ordinance
pursuant to Subsection 52d of the Municipal Land Use Act73 regulating
noise levels, glare, earthborne or sonic vibrations, heat, electronic or atomic
radiation, noxious odors, toxic matters, explosive and inflammable matters,
smoke and airborne particles, waste discharge, screening of unsightly
objects or conditions and such other similar matters as may be reasonably
required by the municipality or required by applicable federal or state laws
or municipal ordinances.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive
or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway; or
which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law; or which
is approved by official action as provided by the Municipal Land Use Act;
or which is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the
county recording officer prior to the appointment of a Planning Board and
the grant to such Board of the power to review plats; and includes the
land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may
comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas and
other areas within the street lines. For the purpose of this chapter, streets
shall be classified as follows:
A. ARTERIAL — Those which are used primarily for fast or heavy traffic.
COLLECTOR — Those which carry traffic from minor streets to the
major system of arterial streets, including the principal entrance
streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within
such development.
B.
MINOR — Those which are used primarily for access to the abutting
properties.
C.
MARGINAL ACCESS — Streets which are parallel to and adjacent to
arterial streets and highways and which provide access to abutting
properties and protection from through traffic.
D.
73.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65d.
§ 32B-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32B-4
1:259
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below the
surface of a parcel of land.
SUBDIVIDER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership,
corporation, trust or any other legal entity commencing proceedings under
this chapter to effect a subdivision of land hereunder for himself or for
another.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or
more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development.
The following shall not be considered subdivisions within the meaning
of this chapter if no new streets are created: divisions of land found by
the Planning Board or Subdivision Committee thereof appointed by the
Chairman to be for agricultural purposes where all resulting parcels are five
acres or larger in size; divisions of property by testamentary or intestate
provisions; division of property upon court order, including but not limited
to judgments of foreclosure; consolidation of existing lots by deed or other
recorded instrument; and the conveyance of one or more adjoining lots,
tracts or parcels of land owned by the same person or persons and all of
which are found and certified by the administrative officer to conform to
the requirements of the municipal development regulations and are shown
and designated as separate lots, tracts or parcels on the Tax Map or Atlas
of the municipality. The term "subdivision" shall also include the term
"resubdivision."
TRANSCRIPT — A typed or printed verbatim record of the proceedings or
reproduction thereof.
VARIANCE — Permission to depart from the literal requirements of a zoning
ordinance pursuant to Section 47 and Sections 29.2b, 57c and 57d of the
Municipal Land Use Act.74
ZONING PERMIT — A document signed by the administrative officer which
is required by ordinance as a condition precedent to the commencement of
a use or the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion
or installation of a structure or building and which acknowledges that
such use, structure or building complies with the provisions of Chapter 85,
Zoning, or variance therefrom duly authorized by the Board pursuant to
Sections 47 and 57 of the Municipal Land Use Act.75
§ 32B-5. Subdivision and site plan approval.
ALLEYS — Minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular service
access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a
street.
E.
A. Subdivision approval. No person shall transfer, sell or agree to transfer
or sell, except pursuant to an agreement expressly conditioned on final
74.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-40b and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c and d,
respectively.
75.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70, respectively.
§ 32B-4 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 32B-5
1:260
subdivision approval, any land which forms part of a subdivision as
defined in this chapter until final approval of such subdivision has been
obtained pursuant to this chapter.
B. Site plan approval. [Amended 12-11-1985 by Ord. No. 593;
4-22-1997 by Ord. No. 776]
(1) No building permit shall be issued for a new building unless a site
plan shall have first been approved by the Planning Board or in
accordance with the terms of this chapter.
(2) No building permit shall be issued for an addition or alteration to
an existing building unless a site plan shall have first been
approved by the Planning Board or in accordance with the terms of
this chapter.
(3) No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any addition to an
existing building or for a change in use, ownership or occupancy of
a building or part thereof, unless a site plan shall have first been
approved by the Planning Board or in accordance with the terms of
this chapter.
(4) Site plan review and approval shall be required before any
excavation, removal of soil, clearing of a site or placing of any fill or
lands contemplated for development.
(5) Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection B(1), (2), (3) and (4)
of this section, no site plan approval shall be required prior to the
issuance of a building permit for any new building or addition to an
existing building or prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for any building or addition, if such building or addition
is used or to be used solely as a single- or two-family dwelling or an
accessory thereto.
(6) Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection B(5) in this section,
for purposes of this chapter, a townhouse development comprising
more than two dwelling units shall be subject to site plan approval,
and, prior to approval of any site plan for the erection of a
townhouse within the R-5 Planned Residential Townhouse District,
the Planning Board shall find the following facts and conclusions:
(a) Departures by the proposed development from zoning
regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property
conform to the zoning ordinance standards pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-65, Subsection c.
(b) The proposals for maintenance and conservation of the
common open space are reliable, and the amount, location and
purpose of the common open space are adequate.
(c) Provisions through the physical design of the proposed
development for public services, control over vehicular and
§ 32B-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32B-5
1:261
§ 32B-5.1. Waiver of requirements. [Added 4-22-1997 by Ord. No.
776]
The Planning Board may waive some or all of the procedural requirements
for site plan approval required for a change of occupancy by expressly
making specific findings that the proposed change of occupancy:
§ 32B-6. Filing procedures.
§ 32B-7. Preliminary approval procedures.
pedestrian traffic and the amenities of light and air, recreation
and visual enjoyment are adequate.
(d) The proposed planned development will not have an
unreasonably adverse impact upon the area in which it is
proposed to be established.
(e) In the case of a proposed development which contemplates
construction over a period of years, the terms and conditions
intended to protect the interests of the public and of the
residents, occupants and owners of the proposed development
in the total completion of the development are adequate.
A. Does not involve the construction of a new building or the extension of
an existing building;
B. Does not require additional parking pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 85, Zoning;
C. Does not affect existing parking facilities, vehicular or pedestrian
circulation, drainage, relationship of buildings to each other, buffering,
landscaping or lighting.
A. Subdivisions. An applicant for major or minor subdivision approval shall
comply with the filing procedures as established by this chapter and
§ 32A-10 of this Code.
B. Site plans. An application for a major or minor site plan approval shall
comply with the filing procedures as established by this chapter and
§ 32A-10 of this Code.
A. Minor subdivision or site plan approval.
(1) At least 14 days prior to the regular meeting of the Board, an
applicant requesting minor subdivision or site plan approval must
submit to the proper administrative officer the following:
(a) A properly completed application form furnishing pertinent
data, such as names and addresses of the owner, agent and
engineer, and identification of property involved.
(b) The required fee as established by § 32A-29 of the Code.
§ 32B-5 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 32B-7
1:262
(c) Eighteen blue- or black-on-white prints of a sketch plat of the
proposed minor subdivision or site plan in accordance with the
details contained in § 32B-9A of this chapter.
(2) Upon receipt of a complete application, as defined herein, for minor
subdivision or site plan approval, the Board shall, within the time
period prescribed by Chapter 32A of this Code and N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq., approve or conditionally approve the subdivision
or site plan without the necessity of full notice and hearing, classify
the subdivision or site plan as a major subdivision or major site
plan, or disapprove the subdivision or site plan. The Board may
grant such exceptions as set forth in § 32A-9 and, in addition to
other conditions which the Board may deem necessary in order to
carry out the purposes of this chapter, require, as a condition for
minor subdivision or site plan approval, that the applicant install
such improvements as are required in § 32B-11 of this chapter as
the Board, in accordance with law, shall deem necessary. Such
improvements shall be in accordance with the standards set forth
in § 32B-10, and performance guaranties may be required in
accordance with § 32B-12 of this chapter. In no event shall final
approval be granted unless the applicant submits proof that no
taxes or assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent
on the property for which the application for minor subdivision and/
or minor site plan is made.
(3) Whenever review or approval of the application by the County
Planning Board is required by N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.6 or the Municipal
Land Use Act, the Board shall condition any approval that it grants
upon timely receipt of a favorable report on the application by the
County Planning Board or approval by the County Planning Board
by its failure to report therein within the required time period.
(4) Copies.
(a) Before the administrative officer returns any approved minor
subdivision or site plan plat to the applicant, sufficient copies
shall be sent to each of the following:
[1] The Borough Clerk.
[2] The Borough Engineer.
[3] The Construction Official or Building Subcode Official.
[4] The Tax Assessor.
[5] The Secretary of the Planning Board.
[6] The County Planning Board, if required.
[7] The Tax Collector.
[8] The Attorney for the Planning Board.
§ 32B-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32B-7
1:263
(b) The cost of the copies will be charged to the applicant and shall
be collected before the return of the original sketch plat to the
applicant.
(5) For a minor subdivision, either a deed clearly describing the
approved minor subdivision or a plat in conformity with such
approval and drawn in compliance with the Map Filing Law, P.L.
1960, c. 141,76 must be filed by the applicant with the county
recording officer, the Borough Engineer and the Borough Tax
Assessor within 190 days from the date of Board approval, or said
approval will expire.
(6) If the plat is classified as a major subdivision or major site plan, a
notation to that effect shall be made on the plat, which will be
returned to the applicant for compliance with the procedure set
forth in § 32A-10 of this Code. A public hearing shall be required on
all major subdivisions or major site plans.
(7) The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions,
whether conditional or otherwise, upon which a minor subdivision
or minor site plan approval was granted thereunder shall not be
changed for a period of two years after the date of approval,
provided that for an approved minor subdivision, it shall have been
duly recorded as provided in § 32B-7A(5) of this chapter and the
provisions of the Municipal Land Use Act.77
B. Major subdivision and/or site plan preliminary approval.
(1) Prior to the submission of an application for preliminary approval
of a major subdivision or a major site plan, 18 blue- or black-onwhite
prints of a sketch plat shall be submitted to the proper
administrative officer. Said plat shall be presented in tentative form
for the purpose of defining specific application requirements for
the preliminary major subdivision or major site plan approval. The
details of the sketch plat shall be in conformity with § 32B-9A of
this chapter. After the Board, or a subcommittee thereof, shall have
reviewed the sketch plat and made any suggested changes, the
applicant shall then proceed with an application for preliminary
approval.
(2) At least two weeks prior to the regular meeting of the Board, an
applicant requesting preliminary approval of a major subdivision or
major site plan must submit to the proper administrative officer in
writing, on forms supplied by the Board, the following:
(a) A properly completed subdivision or site plan application form
furnishing pertinent data, such as names and addresses of the
owner, agent and engineer and identification of property
involved.
76.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
77.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 32B-7 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 32B-7
1:264
(b) Stockholders.
[1] An application for permission to subdivide a parcel of land
into six or more lots, or applying for a variance to
construct a multiple dwelling of 25 or more family units or
for approval of a site to be used for commercial purposes
shall list the names and addresses of all stockholders or
individual partners owning at least 10% of its stock of any
class or at least 10% of the interest in the partnership, as
the case may be.
[2] In the event that a corporation or partnership owns 10% or
more of the stock of a corporation, or a ten-percent or
greater interest in a partnership, subject to disclosure
pursuant to the preceding subsection, that corporation or
partnership shall list the names and addresses of its
stockholders holding 10% or more of its stock or a tenpercent
or greater interest in the partnership, as the case
may be, and this requirement shall be followed by every
corporate stockholder or partner in a partnership until the
names and addresses of the noncorporate stockholders
and individual partners exceeding the ownership criterion
of 10% established in the Municipal Land Use Act have
been listed.
(c) The required fee as established by § 32A-29 of this Code.
(d) The application shall be accompanied by 10 copies of a
preliminary plat of the proposed major subdivision or site plan,
accurate and to scale as to boundaries, existing features and
proposed features. The accuracy of the boundaries and
existing features shall be certified by a licensed land surveyor.
All design shall be done by a licensed professional engineer.
The details of the preliminary plat shall be in conformity with
§ 32B-9B.
(e) Copies.
[1] Simultaneously with filing the application, the applicant
shall forward copies of the preliminary plat to the
following persons and immediately file proof by affidavit of
the date said copies were sent:
[a] The Borough Engineer.
[b] The Board of Health.
[c] The Chief of Police.
[d] The Department of Public Works.
[e] The Fire Prevention Bureau.
§ 32B-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32B-7
1:265
[f] The Shade Tree Commission.
[g] The Construction Code Official.
[h] Such other municipal, county or state officials as
directed by the Planning Board.
[2] Said persons and boards may make recommendations in
writing to the Board within 30 days after service of the
preliminary plat. The Board shall take said
recommendations into account, but shall have the
authority to proceed in the absence of such
recommendation or to disregard or modify such
recommendation and shall also consider the exceptions
permitted in § 32A-9 of this Code. Copies of all
recommendations shall be sent to the applicant by the
recommending professionals and boards.
(3) Upon receipt of a complete application for preliminary subdivision
or site plan approval, as defined herein and in accordance with the
rules and regulations of the Board, the Board shall schedule a date
of hearing and give due notice to the applicant, who shall, in
accordance with Chapter 32A of this Code and the Municipal Land
Use Act (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12), notify the surrounding property
owners of such hearing.
(4) The Board shall act upon a preliminary plat within the time period
prescribed in Chapter 32A of this Code and in accordance with the
Municipal Land Use Act.
(5) Preliminary approval of a major subdivision or site plan shall,
except as provided in Subsection B(6) of this section, confer upon
the applicant the following rights for a three-year period from the
date of the preliminary approval:
(a) That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including but not
limited to use requirements; layout and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions and offtract
improvements; and, in the case of a site plan, any
requirements for preservation of existing natural resources for
safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation, parking
and loading, for screening, landscaping and location of
structures and for exterior lighting, except that nothing herein
shall be construed to prevent the municipality from modifying
by ordinance such general terms and conditions of preliminary
approval as relate to public health and safety.
(b) That the applicant may apply for and the Planning Board may
grant extensions on such preliminary approval for additional
periods of at least one year, but not to exceed a total extension
§ 32B-7 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 32B-7
1:266
§ 32B-8. Final approval.
For final approval of a major subdivision and/or major site plan, the
procedure shall be as follows:
of two years, provided that if the design standards have been
revised by ordinance, such revised standards may govern.
(c) That the applicant may submit for final approval, on or before
the expiration date of preliminary approval, the whole or a
section or sections of the preliminary subdivision plat or site
plan, as the case may be.
(6) In the case of a subdivision or of a site plan for an area of 50 acres
or more, the Planning Board may grant the rights referred to in
Subsection B(5)(a) and (b) above for such period of time longer
than three years as shall be determined by the Planning Board to
be reasonable, taking into consideration the number of dwelling
units and the nonresidential floor area permissible under
preliminary approval, economic conditions and the
comprehensiveness of the development. The applicant may apply
for thereafter and the Planning Board may thereafter grant an
extension to preliminary approval for such additional period of time
as shall be determined by the Planning Board to be reasonable,
taking into consideration the number of dwelling units and the
nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary approval,
the potential number of dwelling units and the nonresidential floor
area of the section or sections awaiting final approval, economic
conditions and the comprehensiveness of the development;
provided, however, that if the design standards have been revised,
such revised standards may govern.
A. The approved preliminary plat and an application for final approval, in
triplicate and in a form approved by the Board, shall be submitted to the
proper administrative officer, together with the fee required by
§ 32A-29 of this Code.
B. The original cloth tracing and five white prints (blue- and black-onwhite)
of the final plat of the subdivision or site plan shall accompany
the application.
C. The final plat of the major subdivision or major site plan shall not differ
substantially from the preliminary plat as approved.
D. The final plat of a major subdivision or major site plan shall be drawn in
ink on tracing cloth at a scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet
and in compliance with all the provisions of the Map Filing Law78 and
with the plat details contained herein.
78.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 32B-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32B-8
1:267
E. The administrative officer shall make a record of the date of submission
to him of the final plat and complete application and shall forthwith
transmit the final plat and application to the Board.
F. Prior to final approval, the Board, upon the advice of the Borough
Engineer, shall determine:
(1) The nature of the improvements to be required as a condition of
final approval.
(2) The estimated value of the improvements installed or to be
installed in accordance with this chapter.
(3) The nature and amount of performance guaranties, if any, to be
required as a condition to final approval.
(4) The amounts to be deposited to reimburse the Planning Board and
Borough for costs incurred or to be incurred for legal, engineering
and other consultant reports, for recording fees and for any other
costs anticipated by the Board.
(5) Any other conditions or exceptions upon which final approval will
be granted.
G. Prior to final approval, the applicant shall submit to the Board:
(1) A developer's agreement, if required by the Board, setting forth the
obligations of the applicant in connection with the final approval.
Such agreement shall be prepared by the Attorney for the Board,
and the reasonable cost of drafting the same as set by the rules and
regulations of the appropriate Board shall be paid by the applicant.
(2) A performance guaranty in a form satisfactory to the Board and the
Borough, complying with this chapter and guaranteeing
performance of this developer's agreement if required by the Board
or guaranteeing any conditions which may be set forth in the
resolutions of the Board granting final approval.
(3) Maintenance guaranties, if any, for work completed prior to final
approval.
(4) Deeds for any easements, rights-of-way or public lands in a form
satisfactory to the Board's Attorneys.
(5) Funds to be deposited to reimburse the Board for costs incurred or
to be incurred for legal, engineering and other consultant reports,
for recording fees and for any other costs anticipated by the Board.
(6) Evidence of compliance with any other conditions imposed by the
Board.
H. Upon receipt of a complete application, as defined herein and in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the Planning Board, the
Board shall act on said application within the time period prescribed in
§ 32B-8 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 32B-8
1:268
Chapter 32A of this Code and in accordance with the Municipal Land
Use Act. The Planning Board shall approve, conditionally approve or
disapprove the final plat and report said action, whether it is approval,
conditional approval or disapproval, to the Mayor and Council. In case
of approval, the final plat shall be so certified. The applicant shall be
notified of the Board's action and the reasons therefor. In no event
shall final approval be granted unless the applicant submits proof that
no taxes or assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent
on the property for which the application for major subdivision and/or
major site plan is made.
I. Upon final approval by the Planning Board and after all required
signatures are placed on the original tracing, the administrative officer
shall request the Borough Engineer to have one cloth print and one
Mylar reproducible and 10 copies made of such final plat and file a copy
thereof with each of the following:
(1) The Secretary of the Board.
(2) The Borough Engineer.
(3) The Building Inspector.
(4) The Construction Official.
(5) The Tax Assessor.
(6) The Borough Clerk.
(7) The Board of Health.
(8) The Tax Collector.
(9) The Shade Tree Commission.
J. Major subdivision and/or major site plan as-built plans.
(1) After installation of the improvements required by this chapter, the
subdivider or applicant for site plan approval shall cause to be
prepared, signed and sealed by a licensed professional engineer or
land surveyor:
(a) A plan showing:
[1] The contours (at five-foot intervals for lands having slopes
averaging 10% or greater and at two-foot intervals for
lands of lesser average slopes) of the land as finally
graded.
[2] The location, as built, of all improvements required by this
chapter, including, without intending to limit the
generality hereof, the location of water mains, gas mains
and underground supply lines for light, power and
telephone service, and all of their appurtenances.
§ 32B-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32B-8
1:269
§ 32B-9. Plat details.
(b) Profiles, as built, of streets, storm sewers and sanitary sewers
and their respective appurtenances.
(c) Cross sections, as built, of streets.
(2) The plans, profiles and cross sections required by this subsection
are hereinafter referred to as "as-built plans."
A. Sketch plat for a site plan or minor subdivision approval. The sketch
plat shall be based upon an accurate survey; shall be prepared and
certified by a licensed New Jersey engineer, land surveyor, architect or
planner; shall be at a scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet; and
shall be designed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and
shall show or be accompanied by the following information:
(1) The name of development, North arrow, graphic scale, block and lot
number, and surrounding block and lot numbers, name and address
of the record owner and name and address of the developer.
(2) All distances in feet and decimals of a foot and all bearings of
boundary lines given to the nearest 10 seconds.
(3) The location of any existing buildings on the site and all other
structures, including walls, fences, culverts and adjacent streets,
with spot elevations of such buildings and structures. Structures to
be removed shall be indicated by dashed lines; structures to remain
shall be indicated by solid lines.
(4) The location and first-floor elevation of all proposed buildings and
other structures and the elevation of the finished grade at each
corner of all structures.
(5) Wooded areas, existing and proposed contours, with a contour
interval of two feet for slopes of 10% or less and a contour interval
of five feet for slopes over 10%.
(6) The location and design of any on-site parking areas or loading
areas, showing the size and location of spaces, bays, aisles and
barriers.
(7) The location, size, type and height of directional regulatory or
advisory signs or pavement markings.
(8) The location of driveways within 100 feet of the site boundaries.
(9) A locator map showing all road intersections within 500 feet.
(10) All lot lines and owners of lots within 200 feet of the site.
B. Preliminary plat, major subdivision and major site plan.
§ 32B-8 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 32B-9
1:270
(1) The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn or
reproduced by a licensed and certified New Jersey engineer, land
surveyor, architect or planner at a scale of not less than one inch
equals 50 feet. The preliminary plat shall be designed in
compliance with § 32B-10 of this chapter and shall show or be
accompanied by the following information, as well as the
information contained upon the sketch plat:
(a) All revisions shall be noted and dated.
(b) A key map showing the location of the tract with reference to
surrounding properties and existing street intersections.
(c) Title of the development, North arrow, scale, block and lot
number, name and address of the record owner, and the name
and address, license number and seal of persons preparing the
plat.
(d) A scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet. All distances
shall be in feet and decimals of a foot, and all bearings shall be
given to the nearest second.
(e) The names, as shown on the current tax records, of all owners
of the property within 200 feet of the subdivision, together
with the block and lot numbers of the property.
(f) The zoning district in which the parcel is located, together with
the zone boundaries included within the boundaries of the
parcel or within 200 feet therefrom.
(g) Survey data showing boundaries of the property, building or
setback lines, and lines of existing and proposed streets, lots,
reservations, easements and areas dedicated to public use,
including grants, restrictions and rights-of-way.
(h) Reference to any existing or proposed covenants, deed
restrictions or exceptions covering all or any part of the parcel.
A copy of such covenants, deed restrictions or exceptions shall
be submitted with the application.
(i) The distances, measured along the right-of-way lines of
existing streets abutting the property, to the nearest
intersections with other public streets.
(j) The location of existing buildings and all other structures,
including walls, fences, culverts and bridges, with spot
elevations of such buildings and structures. Structures which
are to remain or which are to be removed shall be clearly
indicated.
(k) The location of all existing and proposed storm drainage
structures and utility lines, whether publicly or privately
owned, with pipe sizes, grades and direction of flow, locations
§ 32B-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32B-9
1:271
of inlets, manholes or other appurtenances and appropriate
invert and other elevations. If any existing utility lines are
underground, the estimated locations of such utility lines shall
be shown.
(l) Existing and proposed contours with a contour interval of two
feet for slopes of less than 10% and an interval of five feet for
slopes of more than 10%. Existing contours shall be indicated
by dashed lines, and proposed contours shall be indicated by
solid lines.
(m) The location of existing rock outcrops, high points,
watercourses, depressions, ponds, marshes, wooded areas and
other significant existing features, including previous flood
elevations of watercourses, ponds and marsh areas, as
determined by survey.
(n) All proposed streets, with profiles, indicating grading and
cross sections, showing width of the roadway, location and
width of the curb, if any, and the location and size of utility
lines conforming to the standards and specifications of the
Borough.
(o) The location of all existing and proposed waterlines, valves and
hydrants, and all sewer line or alternative means of water
supply or sewage disposal and treatment.
(p) All site plans and major subdivisions shall be accompanied by a
plan sketch showing all existing drainage within 500 feet of
any boundary and all areas, such as paved areas, grassed
areas, wooded areas and any other surface area, contributing
to the calculations, and showing methods used in the drainage
calculations.
(q) Acreage, to the nearest tenth of an acre, of the tract to be
subdivided and the area, in square feet, of all lots.
(r) Positions of existing and proposed monuments.
(s) Open spaces, if any, to be dedicated for public parks or
playgrounds or other public use and the location and use of all
property reserved for the common use of all property owners.
(t) Soil percolation tests or soil log tests, or both, as required by
the Board of Health.
(u) Such other information or data as may be required by the
Planning Board or the County Planning Board for
determination that the details of the subdivision are in
accordance with the standards of this chapter and all other
ordinances of the Borough and all other applicable laws,
ordinances or resolutions.
§ 32B-9 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 32B-9
1:272
(2) In addition to the requirements of this section, the preliminary plat
of a site plan shall contain the following:
(a) The proposed use or uses of land and buildings, together with
the floor space of all buildings and the estimated number of
employees. If the precise use of the building is unknown at the
time of the application, an amended plan showing the proposed
use shall be required prior to issuance of a certificate of
occupancy.
(b) The means of vehicular access for ingress to and egress from
the site, showing, in particular, the size and location of
driveways and curb cuts; walkways; the proposed traffic
channels, if any; additional width, if any; and any other means
of controlling vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
(c) The location and design of any off-street parking areas or
loading areas, showing the size and location of bays, aisles and
barriers.
(d) The location, direction and type of illumination, and the power
and hours of operation of existing and proposed outdoor
lighting.
(e) The location and elevation plan of existing and proposed signs.
(f) The location and dimensions of proposed buffer areas.
(g) The proposed screening, landscaping and planting plan.
(h) Location and type of garage and refuse disposal facilities and
collection points for all recyclables. [Amended 3-28-1989 by
Ord. No. 639]
(i) Evidence of compliance with federal, state or county
requirements which may be applicable.
(j) Preliminary architectural plans and elevations shall
accompany the site plan submission.
(k) The locations and types of fire hydrants and sprinkler
connections as determined by the Fire Prevention Bureau and
the Borough Engineer.
(l) A description of trucking operations on the site; the number
and size of trucks used in the applicant's operation; the
number, size and frequency of trucks making deliveries; and
the time of loading and unloading operations.
(m) Such other information or data as may be required by the
Board for determining that the details of the site plan are in
accordance with the standards established by all pertinent
ordinances of the Borough.
§ 32B-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32B-9
1:273
§ 32B-10. Design standards.
(3) The Board shall have the power to waive submission of any of the
above items which are not applicable to a particular application.
C. Final plat, major subdivision and/or major site plan. The final plat shall
be drawn in ink on tracing cloth at a scale of not less than one inch
equals 50 feet and in compliance with all the provisions of N.J.S.A.
46:23-9.9 et seq. The final plat shall include all sketch plat and
preliminary plat information and be accompanied by the following:
(1) The date, name and location of the subdivision, the name of the
owner, graphic scale and reference meridian.
(2) The tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, street
names, easements and other rights-of-way, land to be reserved or
dedicated to public use, all lot lines and other site lines, with
accurate dimensions, bearings and deflection angles, and radii,
arcs and central angles of all curves, and the area of each lot in
square feet.
(3) The purpose of any easement of land reserved or dedicated to
public use shall be designated, and the proposed use of sites other
than residential shall be noted.
(4) Each block and lot shall be numbered, as designated by the
Borough Engineer.
(5) Minimum building setback lines on all lots and other sites where
designated by deed restrictions.
(6) The location and description of all monuments.
(7) The names of owners of adjoining lands.
(8) Certification by a licensed land surveyor of the State of New Jersey
as to accuracy of details of the plat.
(9) Certification by the Borough Engineer as to compliance with this
chapter and the preliminary approval of the Planning Board.
(10) When approval of a plat is required by any officer or body of the
Borough, county or state, approval shall be certified on the plat.
(11) Cross sections and profiles of streets, approved by the Borough
Engineer, shall accompany the final plat.
(12) Contours at five-foot intervals for slopes averaging 10% or greater
and at two-foot intervals for lands of lesser slope.
(13) Plans and profiles of storm and sanitary sewers.
(14) A certificate from the Tax Collector that all taxes and assessments
are paid to date.
§ 32B-9 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 32B-10
1:274
A. Subdivisions.
(1) Compliance required. The subdivider shall observe the following
requirements and principles of land subdivision in the design of
each subdivision or portion thereof.
(2) General. The subdivision plat shall conform to design standards
that will encourage good development patterns within the
Borough. Where either or both an Official Map or Master Plan has
or have been adopted, the subdivision shall conform to the
proposals and conditions shown thereon. The streets, drainage
rights-of-way, school sites, public parks and playgrounds shown on
an officially adopted Master Plan or Official Map shall be
considered in approval of the subdivision plats. Where not covered
by a Master Plan or Official Map, streets and drainage rights-ofway
shall be shown on the final plat in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55-1.2079 and shall be such as to lend themselves to the
harmonious development of the Borough and enhance the public
welfare in accordance with the following design standards.
(3) Streets.
(a) All streets shall be laid out and arranged so as to compose a
convenient system consistent with the Official Map, if any, and
the circulation element of the Master Plan and so oriented as
to permit, within the limits of practicality and feasibility, the
buildings constructed thereon to maximize solar gain.
(b) The arrangement of streets not shown on the Master Plan or
Official Map shall be such as to provide for the appropriate
extension of existing streets.
(c) Minor streets shall be so designed as to discourage through
traffic.
(d) Where the subdivision is adjacent to State Highway Route 17
or any of its overpasses, the subdivider shall convey to the
Borough all right of access to said highway or any of its
overpasses so as to prevent direct ingress and egress between
the lots contained in the subdivision and Route 17 or any of its
overpasses; and, in addition thereto, a strip of land 50 feet
wide adjacent to said Route 17 or any of its overpasses shall be
restricted to the planting of trees and shrubbery so as to
insulate and screen the subdivision from said Route 17 or any
of its overpasses. The subdivider shall deliver such deeds and
easements as may be necessary to accomplish the aforesaid
purposes.
79.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:55-1.20 was repealed by P.L. 1975, c. 291. See now N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 32B-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32B-10
1:275
(e) The right-of-way width shall be measured from lot line to lot
line and shall not be less than the fifty-foot width required in
this chapter. However, the right-of-way width for internal roads
and alleys shall be determined on an individual basis and shall
in all cases be of sufficient width and design to safely
accommodate the maximum traffic, parking and loading needs
and maximum access for fire-fighting equipment.
(f) No subdivision showing reserve strips controlling access to
streets shall be approved except where the control and
disposal of land comprising such strips have been deeded to
the governing body.
(g) Subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets that do not
conform to widths as shown on the Master Plan or Official Map
or the street width requirements of this chapter shall dedicate
additional width along either one or both sides of said streets.
If the subdivision is along one side only, 1/2 of the required
extra width shall be dedicated.
(h) Grades of streets shall not exceed 4%. No street shall have a
minimum grade of less than 6/10 of 1%.
(i) Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is
possible and in no case shall be less than 60°. The block
corners at intersections shall be rounded at the curbline with a
curb having a radius of not less than 20 feet.
(j) Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
prohibited.
(k) A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between
reverse curves on arterial and collector streets.
(l) When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any
one point more than 10° and not more than 45°, they shall be
connected by a curve with a radius of not less than 100 feet for
minor streets and 300 feet for arterial and collector streets.
(m) All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of
sufficient radius to provide a smooth transition and proper
sight distance.
(n) Dead-end streets (culs-de-sac) shall provide a turnaround at
the end with a fifty-foot radius and tangent whenever possible
to the right side of the street. If a dead-end street is of a
temporary nature, a similar turnaround shall be provided and
provisions made for future extension of the street and
reversion of the excess right-of-way to the adjoining properties.
All dead-end streets must have lots fronting on such street
whose dimensions and area shall not be less than the
requirements of Chapter 85, Zoning.
§ 32B-10 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 32B-10
1:276
(o) No street shall have a name which will duplicate or so nearly
duplicate as to be confused with the names of existing streets.
The continuation of an existing street shall have the same
name.
(p) All curbs shall be Belgian block, and all curbing on the site
shall, where necessary, be designed to remove barriers to the
handicapped.
(4) Blocks. Block length and width or acreage within bounding roads
shall be such as to accommodate the size of lot required in the area
by Chapter 85, Zoning, and to provide for convenient access,
circulation, control and safety of street traffic.
(5) Lots.
(a) Lot dimensions and area shall not be less than the
requirements of Chapter 85, Zoning.
(b) Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to
straight streets and radial to curved streets.
(c) Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing
streets, lots shall begin at such extra-width line, and all
setbacks shall be measured from such line.
(6) Public use and service areas.
(a) Easements along rear property lines or elsewhere for utility
installation may be required. Such easements shall be located
in consultation with the public utility companies or municipal
departments concerned and be of sufficient width to meet their
needs.
(b) Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse,
drainageway channel or stream, there shall be provided a
stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming
substantially to the lines of such watercourse and such further
width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the
purpose.
(c) Natural features such as trees, brooks and hilltops shall be
preserved whenever possible in designing any subdivision
containing such features.
(d) The subdivider may be required to set aside by public
dedication any specified areas for parks, recreation, drainage
rights-of-way or other public use, and such areas may or may
not be shown on a Master Plan as provided by the Municipal
Land Use Act.80
80.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 32B-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32B-10
1:277
(7) Within any development proposal for the construction of 50 or
more single-family units, the same shall include provisions for the
collection, disposition and recycling of recyclable materials
designated within Chapter 52, Recycling, and as required by state
statute. Plans for location, storage area and removal of all
recyclable materials must be prepared by the developer and
submitted for approval by the Municipal Recycling Coordinator.
Storage areas must also meet all local building and fire codes.
[Added 3-28-1989 by Ord. No. 639]
B. Site plans. The preparation of all site plans shall adhere to the following
design principles and criteria:
(1) Traffic circulation. The site plan shall provide a safe and efficient
circulation system for the movement of vehicles and pedestrians off
site and on tract. Circulation patterns vary greatly depending on
the type of use.
(2) Access driveways and internal roads.
(a) All entrance and exit driveways shall be located so as to afford
maximum safety and minimum disruption of traffic on the
street.
(b) The dimension of entrance and exit driveways and internal
roads shall be adequate to accommodate the volume and
character of vehicles anticipated to be using the site. The
required dimensions for driveways and interior roads shall be
as follows:
[1] Twelve feet minimum to 24 feet maximum for a one-way
operation.
[2] Twenty-four feet minimum to 34 feet maximum for a twoway
operation.
(c) Driveways serving a development having 50 or less parking
spaces shall use a one-and-one-half-inch-high depressed curb
and asphalt apron. Such driveway serving more than 50
parking spaces, however, shall use curb returns of not less than
a fifteen-foot radius.
(d) Any vertical curve on a driveway shall be flat enough to
prevent the dragging of any vehicle undercarriage.
(e) Driveway grades shall adhere to the following: 1% minimum to
12% maximum. A maximum slope of 2% for the first 20 feet
from the street line shall be maintained.
(f) Curb cuts to a public street shall not be closer than 100 feet to
the street line of an intersecting street or 10 feet to an adjacent
owner's property line, as extended.
§ 32B-10 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 32B-10
1:278
(g) The number of permitted driveways provided from a site shall
be related to the type of street and traffic volume thereon and
the number and location of other access points therefrom.
(h) Driveway pavement shall extend to the paved portion of the
street with which it connects and shall be constructed with a
minimum of four inches of stabilized base course and two
inches of FABC surface course, except for concrete pavement
and sidewalk.
(i) Driveways are to be curbed on both sides.
(j) No driveway shall be closer to any property line than 10 feet.
(k) Driveway pavement serving a truck loading area shall be
constructed of heavy-duty pavement of a minimum of six inches
of stabilized base course and two inches of FABC surface
course, or properly designed reinforced concrete.
(3) Off-street parking and loading areas.
(a) The number and size of all parking and loading spaces shall
meet the requirements of Chapter 85, Zoning.
(b) Any off-street loading space shall have a minimum width of 10
feet and a minimum length of 45 feet.
(c) Ingress to and egress from a parking or loading area shall be
paved and shall include turning areas to assure ease of
mobility, ample clearance and safety of vehicles and
pedestrians.
(d) Parking areas serving light-duty vehicles shall be constructed
with a minimum of four inches of stabilized base course and
two inches of FABC surface course and sufficiently drained so
as to prevent an accumulation of water on the site.
(e) A parking or loading area serving heavy-duty vehicles shall be
constructed with a minimum of six inches of stabilized base
course and two inches of FABC surface course and sufficiently
drained so as to prevent an accumulation of water on the site.
(f) A parking area shall be illuminated if used after sunset, and
such illumination shall provide a minimum of 0.5 lumen per
square foot throughout the area and shall be shielded from
adjoining streets or properties.
(g) Off-street parking and loading areas shall be designed to
prevent the maneuvering of vehicles into or out of parking or
loading spaces within any portion of any street.
(h) Parking dimensions shall meet the following standards:
§ 32B-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32B-10
1:279
Parking
Angle
(degrees) Stall Width
Minimum Aisle
Width
(feet)
45 8 feet 6 inches to 10 feet 0
inch
13
60 8 feet 6 inches to 9 feet 0
inch
18
9 feet 6 inches to 10 feet 0
inch
75 8 feet 6 inches to 9 feet 0
inch
20
9 feet 6 inches to 10 feet 0
inch
90 8 feet 6 inches to 9 feet 0
inch
24
9 feet 6 inches to 10 feet 0
inch
(i) Parking or loading space stripes shall be four inches wide
using white reflective paint. Hatch lines shall be on an angle of
45° and shall consist of stripes four inches wide using yellow
reflective paint two feet on center.
(j) All parking or loading areas are to be curbed.
(k) No paved area shall be closer to any property line than six feet
unless otherwise prohibited under Chapter 85, Zoning.
(l) Maximum grade permitted in parking areas shall be 4%.
(4) Drainage.
(a) Provision shall be made for safe and adequate drainage of the
surface runoff waters in and from the premises so that flooding
and erosion of the property and the property of others will be
prevented.
(b) Calculations based on thirty-year storm criteria with a storm
duration of one hour or other standards of county, state or
federal agencies, whichever standard is of higher requirement,
shall be used in the design of drainage facilities and shall be
submitted with the site plan.
(c) The drainage system shall be designed with the following
minimum requirements:
[1] Minimum drainpipe size shall be 15 inches inside
diameter.
§ 32B-10 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 32B-10
1:280
[2] All drainpipes shall be reinforced concrete pipe, Class III,
Wall B, and shall comply with current American Society for
Testing and Materials specifications.
[3] Manholes and inlets shall be constructed of precast
concrete blocks.
[4] Inlet frames and manhole covers shall be cast iron,
conforming to the specifications for grey iron castings.
Grating for inlets shall be of the stream-flow type.
[5] Headwalls or flared ends with riprap shall be constructed
at the inlet and outlet of all drains.
[6] All transitions in slope, horizontal direction, junctions and
change in pipe size shall be confined to manholes or catch
basins.
[7] Inlets shall be located and limited to a runoff area of not
more than 5,000 square feet.
[8] Pipes shall have a minimum slope of not less than 1/2%
and a minimum cover of three feet.
[9] All main buildings shall be designed with a positive gravity
foundation perimeter drain and slab-footing underdrains.
Said drains shall be of broken stone piped to a stream,
storm sewer or drainage course.
(5) Sewage disposal and water supply. The site plan shall provide for
adequate sewage disposal and water supply to meet the
requirements of the Borough's Sewer and Water Ordinances81 and
be constructed in accordance with Borough standards. The
proposed site plan shall have no adverse effect on existing
municipal utilities.
(6) Sidewalks.
(a) Sidewalks may be required for access from the main entrance
or entrances of the building to the street, driveway or parking
areas.
(b) Pedestrian sidewalks shall have a minimum paved width of four
feet and shall be constructed of concrete four inches thick.
(c) All sidewalks on the site shall be constructed in accordance
with the standards to remove barriers to the handicapped.
(7) Landscaping.
(a) The site plan shall include a landscape plan indicating the
landscaping to be installed and showing the size and species of
81.Editor's Note: See Ch. 56, Sewers, and Ch. 81, Water and Water Rates, respectively.
§ 32B-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32B-10
1:281
the trees and shrubs to be planted. It shall also indicate what
protection or devices will be used to preserve existing trees
during construction and the method of accomplishing grade
changes at existing trees.
(b) Portions of all front, rear and side yards which are not used for
required driveways, sidewalks, parking or loading, accessory
buildings or recreational areas shall be planted with trees,
shrubs, plants and lawns or ground cover in order to ensure
the attractiveness of the premises and the protection of the soil
thereon. Existing trees of four-inch caliper or over and any
other significant natural features shall, if located in the
landscape area, be indicated on said plan.
(c) Where nonresidential uses or areas abut a residential building,
there shall be provided, on the nonresidential lot or area
adjacent to the lot lines of the residential building, a planting
strip not less than six feet wide, consisting of suitable
shrubbery, hedges or fencing, or a combination thereof, to
shield effectively, the year around, undesirable, visual
exposure and so as to provide a protective screen from
incompatible uses and surroundings. In the event of a conflict
with Chapter 85, Zoning, as to the requirements for a buffer
area, said regulation shall control.
(d) Prior to any preliminary and/or final site plan approval, the
Board shall have received a report from the Shade Tree
Commission as to the adequacy of the landscape plan.
(e) The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus finds that
lack of street trees is causing increased drainage problems,
soil erosion and sedimentation, decreased fertility of the soil,
degradation of water resources, decreased groundwater
recharge, increased buildup of atmospheric carbon dioxide,
the establishment of a heat island effects and increased dust
and pollution. All of the above can negatively affect the value of
the properties in Ho-Ho-Kus and overall quality of life.
Therefore, the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus
finds that a street tree planting deposit is needed to ensure the
health, safety and welfare of its residents and to maintain a
high quality of life in the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus. [Added
5-26-2015 by Ord. No. 1039; amended 12-22-2015 by
Ord. No. 1045]
[1] Streets trees and plantings within the right-of-way of the
Borough, including Borough-owned parks and buildings,
are under the jurisdiction of the Shade Tree Commission.
The street planting deposit shall apply to any new house
constructed on a vacant parcel or on a lot where an
existing residence is demolished or the additional floor
area is increased by 25% as determined by the
§ 32B-10 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 32B-10
1:282
Construction Code Official and to all commercial
properties. The Shade Tree Commission shall inspect the
affected property and make a determination on the
requirement of a street tree planting deposit before a
building permit is issued. The Shade Tree Commission
shall be notified before a demolition permit is issued. Prior
notification would enable the Shade Tree Commission to
inspect the site to evaluate the existing street trees and
determine tree preservation and protection measures, if
required. [Amended 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. 1045-1]
[2] The Shade Tree Commission shall be notified by the
Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment upon
receipt of any application regarding Subsection E(1)
above. The Shade Tree Commission will review and
recommend street tree planting requirements within 15
business days. Plantings shall thereafter be done solely by
an independent contractor engaged by the Shade Tree
Commission and shall not be done by the owner or
developer. [Amended 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. 1045-1]
[3] The Shade Tree Commission requires that one tree be
planted every 30 feet to 50 feet of street curb with a
minimum of two trees per property or as deemed
necessary upon inspection by the Shade Tree Commission.
A deposit (currently $375) is required for each two-andone-
half-inch-caliper tree. The tree species shall be
determined by the Shade Tree Commission for each site,
and an inspection fee will apply.
[4] The estimate for street tree planting form is hereby
adopted and shall be on file in the office of the Borough
Clerk.
[5] Deposit; accounts.
[a] The street tree planting deposit shall be made prior to
the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. [Amended
12-22-2015 by Ord. No. 1045-1]
[b] The existing Ho-Ho-Kus Shade Tree Commission Ross
Trust Account shall continue until the funds therein
have been expended. At such time it will be closed.
[c] There is hereby established a Ho-Ho-Kus Shade Tree
Beautification Account. Developer funds currently
deposited and to be deposited therein shall be
earmarked for the purchase and planting of shade
trees and for beautification projects. Such funds are
intended to be separate from general operation funds
§ 32B-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32B-10
1:283
provided to the Commission by the Borough in its
annual budget.
(8) Garbage, refuse and outside storage.
(a) Provisions shall be made for the indoor or enclosed storage of
garbage and refuse.
(b) Outside storage, when permitted, shall only be permitted in
areas approved by the Board. Such areas shall, as nearly as
may be practicable, be shielded from public view and protected
by adequate fencing and/or screening.
(c) Within any development proposal for the construction of 25 or
more multifamily units and any commercial/industrial
development proposal for the utilization of 1,000 square feet or
more of land, the same shall include provisions for the
collection, disposition and recycling of recyclable materials
designated within Chapter 52, Recycling, and as required by
state statute. A plan for the location, storage area and removal
of all recyclable materials must be prepared by the developer
and submitted for approval to the Municipal Recycling
Coordinator. Storage areas must meet all local building and
fire codes. [Added 3-28-1989 by Ord. No. 639]
(9) Retaining walls. Retaining walls shall be designed in accordance
with New Jersey State Building Codes and shall be constructed to
meet the requirements of the Borough Engineer. Exposed surfaces
shall be faced with brick or native stone.
(10) Curbs.
(a) All curbs shall be Belgian block.
(b) All curbing on the site shall, where necessary, be designed to
remove barriers to the handicapped.
(11) Electric, telephone and cable television utilities. All new electric,
telephone or cable television lines shall be placed underground.
(12) In the event that the Board shall permit the location of a detention
or retention basin in a new development adjacent to an existing
residential development, no site grading or land disturbance in
conjunction with the construction of the basin shall be permitted
within 100 feet of any perimeter property line of the new
development which is adjacent to said existing residential
development.
(13) Every effort is to be made, when designing new structures or
remodeling existing structures, to assure the preservation of the
aesthetic historical character of the Borough, its building style and
land use.
§ 32B-10 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 32B-10
1:284
(14) Monotonous similarity shall be avoided to any other structures or
building located or proposed to be located in the vicinity in respect
to one or more of the following features of exterior design and
appearance:
(a) Substantially identical facade, disregarding color.
(b) Substantially identical size and arrangement of either doors,
windows, porticos, porches or garages or other openings or
breaks or extensions in the facade, including reverse
arrangements.
(c) Other substantially identical features, such as but not limited
to setbacks from street lines, heights, widths and lengths of
elements of building design and exterior materials and
treatments.
(15) Striking dissimilarity, visual discord or inappropriateness that will
not enhance the historical character of the Borough with respect to
other structures or buildings located or proposed to be located in
the vicinity in respect to one or more of the following features of
exterior design and appearance shall be avoidable:
(a) Facade, disregarding color.
(b) Size and arrangement of doors, windows, porticos, porches or
garages or other openings, breaks or extensions in the facade.
(c) Other significant design features, such as but not limited to
heights, widths, length or elements of design, exterior
materials and treatments, roof structures, exposed mechanical
equipment, service and storage areas, retaining walls,
landscaping, signs, light posts, parking areas, fences and
service areas.
(16) Visual offensiveness or other poor qualities of exterior design that
detract from the character of the Borough shall be avoided,
including but not limited to excessive divergences of the height or
levels of any part of the structure or buildings from the grade of the
terrain, harmony or discord of color or incompatibility of the
proposed structure, building, refurbishing, reconstruction,
alteration or addition with the terrain on which it is to be located
and the failure of the exterior design to complement and enhance
the natural beauty of its site in regard to landscape, topography,
surrounding structures and the scenic character of roadways when
visible from said roadways.
(17) Variation of minimum requirements. The Board, when acting upon
applications for preliminary or final site plan approval, shall have
the power to grant such exceptions from the requirements for site
plan approvals as set forth in § 32A-9 of this Code. If such exception
is granted, it shall be done by a resolution of the Board which sets
§ 32B-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32B-10
1:285
§ 32B-11. Improvements.
forth the reasons for the exception in the peculiar case and
demonstrates that the exception will not have an adverse effect
on surrounding properties, the neighborhood or the Borough in
general.
A. Required improvements.
(1) Prior to the granting of final approval of a major subdivision or
major site plan, the subdivider or site plan applicant shall have
furnished performance guaranties for the ultimate installation of
the following and shall have completed to the satisfaction of the
Mayor and Council any required on-site, off-site, on-tract or offtract
improvements as follows:
(a) Streets. Streets shall be as approved by the Board and
constructed in accordance with Borough ordinances.
(b) Street signs. Street signs shall be of an approved type subject
to the approval of the Chairman of the Road Committee for the
Borough.
(c) Sidewalks. If sidewalks are designated by the Planning Board,
construction should be in accordance with the Borough
ordinances.
(d) Streetlighting. Streetlighting shall have the approval of the
Borough and shall be designed in conjunction with the utility
company serving the particular area in question.
(e) Shade trees. Shade trees should be located and of such types
as specified by the Shade Tree Commission of the Borough of
Ho-Ho-Kus.
(f) Soil protection. No soil shall be removed from the site or used
as spoil except in accordance with the Borough ordinance
covering the same. Topsoil moved during the course of
construction shall be redistributed so as to provide cover to all
areas of the subdivision and shall be stabilized by seeding or
planting.
(g) Monuments. Monuments should be of the size and shape
required by N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.11, known as "An Act Concerning
the Approval and Filing of Maps," and shall be placed in
accordance with said statute.
(h) Water mains, fire hydrants, gas mains, culverts, storm sewers
and sanitary sewers, or other means of sewage disposal,
drainage structures, erosion control, sedimentation control
devices, public improvements of open space and retaining
walls shall be as approved by the Board.
§ 32B-10 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 32B-11
1:286
(i) Any other improvements required by the Board upon approval
of the preliminary plat.
(j) All of the above-listed improvements shall be subject to
inspection and approval by the Borough Engineer, who shall be
notified by the subdivider at least 48 hours prior to the start of
construction. No underground installation shall be covered
until inspected and approved by the Borough Engineer.
(2) Before granting final subdivision or site plan approval, the Board
shall require that the applicant shall have installed all on-tract
improvements or shall have furnished performance guaranties for
the installation of all on-tract improvements in accordance with
Borough specifications.
B. Off-tract improvements. Any subdivision or site plan which the Board
determines requires off-tract improvements as defined herein shall
comply with the provisions of this subsection:
(1) An off-tract improvement shall be one or more required
improvements which are necessary for the successful completion of
a development in the interest of furthering the public health, safety
and general welfare and where said improvements are located off
tract.
(2) An off-tract improvement shall be required where either the
existing facilities serving the area or subarea are already operating
at a deficient level of service or the inclusion of a new development
will make such present level of service deficient according to
engineering standards utilized in determining such levels of
service.
(3) The proportionate contribution of any such off-tract improvement
to the applicant shall be reasonably related to the relative benefit
or use of the total area so served.
(4) Under the conditions of this subsection, off-tract improvements
shall be limited to new or improved water distribution, sanitary
sewage disposal and distribution and stormwater and drainage
distribution facilities and easements therefor located outside the
property limits of the subdivision or development that are
necessitated or required by construction or improvements within
such subdivision or development, and all necessary appurtenances
thereto and utility easements, and to new or improved street and
right-of-way widths, traffic regulation and control devices,
intersection improvements, utility relocation where not provided
elsewhere and other traffic circulation and safety factors which are
directly related to the property or properties in question. Off-tract
improvements shall not include the improvement costs for an entire
utility system or street system or major segment thereof, including
sewage treatment plants, water supply or treatment facilities or
substantial street construction or improvements or other similar
§ 32B-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32B-11
1:287
undertaking, unless said improvement is significantly affected by
the property or properties in question.
(5) Each subdivision or site plan requiring authorization by the Board
shall be subject to a determination and finding as follows:
(a) That certain off-tract improvements are or are not necessary to
implement such subdivision.
(b) That, in instances where off-tract improvements are required,
the terms and conditions which shall be imposed upon the
applicant shall ensure the successful and reasonable
implementation of same.
(c) Regulations governing off-tract improvements shall be based
upon circulation and comprehensive utility plans pursuant to
the Master Plan or adopted utility or circulation plans of the
Borough or other governmental or utility authority.
(d) In the event that the Board determines that one or more
improvements constitute an off-tract improvement, the Board,
by resolution, shall notify the governing body of same
specifying the Board's recommendation relative to the
estimated cost of same, the applicant's pro rata share of the
cost and possible methods or means to implement same,
including but not limited to performance and maintenance
guaranties, cash contributions, developer agreements and
other forms of surety.
(e) Action by a Board relating to off-tract improvements shall be
deferred until the governing body has had an opportunity to
review the recommendations of the Board and has made a
determination as to the responsibility it shall accept. It is
clearly understood that the Borough is under no responsibility
to construct, install or provide off-tract improvements to
accommodate a subdivision or site plan approval.
(f) Where an applicant pays the amount determined as the pro
rata share under protest, he shall institute legal action within
one year of such payment in order to preserve the right to a
judicial determination as to the fairness and reasonableness of
such amount. No building permit shall be issued until the
expiration of said one-year period or until such time as the
applicant shall waive such provisions of this chapter.
(g) The Board shall not take any final action on a preliminary
subdivision or site plan until all aspects of such conditions have
been mutually agreed to by both the applicant and the
governing body and a written resolution to that effect by the
governing body has been transmitted to the Board.
§ 32B-11 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 32B-11
1:288
C. Procedure for determination and allocation of costs. In the event that
the Board shall determine that off-tract improvements are required in
connection with any subdivision or site plan, then prior to granting final
approval:
(1) The Board shall report to the Mayor and Council:
(a) The location, character and extent of the required off-tract
improvements;
(b) The Borough Engineer's estimate of the total cost of such offtract
improvements;
(c) The proposed allocation of said total cost determined in
accordance with the standards set forth in Subsection B.
(2) The Mayor and Council shall determine and report to the Board
whether the off-tract improvement will be constructed:
(a) By the Borough as a general improvement or as a local
improvement, or as a combination thereof; or
(b) By the developer with a formula specified by the Borough
providing for partial reimbursement if the improvement
specially benefits property other than that within the
subdivision or site plan.
(3) The Board shall require, as a condition for the approval of the final
plan:
(a) If the improvement is to be constructed by the Borough as a
general improvement, the developer shall deposit with the
Borough Treasurer an amount equal to the difference, if any,
between the estimated cost of the improvement and the
estimated total amount by which all properties, including the
subdivision to be serviced by the improvement or site plan, will
be specially benefited by the improvement;
(b) If the improvement is to be constructed by the Borough as a
local improvement, the developer shall deposit with the
Borough Treasurer, in addition to the amount specified in
Subsection C(3)(a), the estimated amount by which the
subdivision or site plan will be specially benefited by the
improvement; or
(c) If the improvement is to be constructed by the developer, he
shall file with the Borough Clerk a performance guaranty
meeting the requirements of § 32B-12 of this chapter in the full
estimated cost of the improvement.
D. Standards for allocating cost.
§ 32B-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32B-11
1:289
(1) In determining the allocation of costs for off-tract improvements as
between the developer, other property owners and the Borough,
the Board shall be guided by the following factors:
(a) The total estimated cost of the off-tract improvements.
(b) The increase in market values of the lands affected and any
other benefits conferred.
(c) The needs created by the application.
(d) Population and land use projections for the land within the
general area of the subdivision or site plan and other areas to
be served by the off-tract improvements.
(e) The estimated time for construction of the off-tract
improvements.
(f) The condition and periods of usefulness of the improvements
which may be based upon the criteria of N.J.S.A. 40A:2-22.
(2) Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the Board may
take into account the following specific factors:
(a) With respect to street, curb, gutter, sidewalk, shade trees,
streetlights, street signs and traffic light improvements, the
Board may consider:
[1] Traffic counts.
[2] Existing and projected traffic patterns.
[3] Quality of roads and sidewalks in the area.
[4] Such other factors as it may deem relevant to the need
created by the subdivision or site plan.
(b) With respect to drainage facilities, the Board may consider:
[1] The relationship between the area of the subdivision or
site plan and the area of the total drainage basin of which
the subdivision or site plan is a part.
[2] The proposed use of land within the subdivision or site
plan and the amount of land area to be covered by
impervious surfaces on the land within the subdivision or
site plan.
[3] The use, condition or status of the remaining land area in
the drainage basin.
(c) With respect to water, gas and electric supply and distribution
facilities, the Board may consider the use requirements of the
use proposed for the subdivision or site plan and the use
§ 32B-11 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 32B-11
1:290
§ 32B-12. Performance guaranty.
requirements of all other properties to be benefited by the
improvements.
(d) With respect to sewerage facilities, the Board may consider:
[1] The anticipated volume of effluent from the use proposed
for the subdivision or site plan and the anticipated volume
of effluent from all other properties to be benefited by the
improvement.
[2] The types of effluent anticipated and particular problems
requiring special equipment or added costs.
E. Deposits. Any money received by the Borough Treasurer for off-tract
improvements to be constructed or installed by the Borough pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter shall be deposited in a suitable
depository therefor and shall be used only for the improvements for
which they are deposited or improvements satisfying the same purpose.
If construction of improvements for which the Borough is responsible
has not commenced within five years from the date of deposit, the
amount deposited with any income thereon shall be returned to the
developer or his successor in interest.
F. Actual costs. Upon completion of any improvement constructed by the
Borough as a general or local improvement, the total cost of such
improvement shall be determined by the Borough Treasurer. The
difference between the actual cost as so determined and the estimated
cost shall be computed. The developer or his successor in interest shall
make remittance to the Borough if the actual cost exceeds the
estimated cost or shall receive a refund from the funds deposited with
the Borough if the estimated cost exceeds the actual cost, in an amount
which bears the same relationship to the difference between the actual
and estimated costs as the amount deposited by the developer for his
proportionate share of the estimated cost bears to the total estimated
cost. Any sum payable by the developer or his successor in interest may
be levied and collected by the Borough in the same manner as is
provided by law for the levy and collection of real estate taxes.
G. Successors in interest. In the absence of an express provision in a deed
or deeds of conveyance, it shall be presumed that the fee owners of all
lots in the subdivision or site plan at the date any deposit or portion
thereof is returned or additional charge is made pursuant to
Subsections C and D are the lawful successors in interest to the
developer, and that each such fee owner shall be charged with or
entitled to receive a pro rata share, based on lot area, of any funds to be
returned or additional charge to be made pursuant to this subsection.
Upon payment of any such sums to said fee owners, the Borough shall
be released of liability to any other person.
§ 32B-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32B-12
1:291
A. No final site plan or subdivision plat shall be approved by the Board
until the completion of all such required improvements have been
certified to said Board by the Borough Engineer, unless the applicant
shall have filed with the Borough a performance guaranty sufficient in
amount to cover the cost of all such on-site and off-site improvements or
uncompleted portions thereof as estimated by the Borough Engineer
and assuring the installation of such uncompleted improvements on or
before an agreed date.
B. To insure the installation and maintenance of improvements, the Board
may require:
(1) The furnishing of a performance guaranty in favor of the Borough
in an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of installation for
improvements it may deem necessary or appropriate, including
streets, street signs, grading, pavement, gutters, curbs, sidewalks,
lighting, shade trees and landscaping materials, surveyors'
monuments as shown on the final map and required by the Map
Filing Law, P.L. 1960, c. 141,82 water mains, fire hydrants, culverts,
storm sewers, sanitary sewers or other means of sewage disposal,
drainage structures, erosion control and sedimentation control
devices, public improvements of open space, retaining walls and
other off-site improvements as may be required herein, and, in the
case of site plans only, other on-site improvements and guaranties,
provided that no more than 10% of the total performance guaranty
shall be required to be in cash, and the balance shall be in the form
of a bond from a bonding company approved by the Mayor and
Council and Borough Attorney.
(2) The furnishing of a maintenance guaranty to be posted with the
Mayor and Council for a period not to exceed two years after final
acceptance of the improvements, in an amount not to exceed 15%
of the cost of the improvement. In the event that other
governmental agencies or public utilities automatically will own the
utilities to be installed or the improvements are covered by a
performance or maintenance guaranty to another governmental
agency, no performance or maintenance guaranty, as the case may
be, shall be required for such utilities or improvements.
C. The Borough Engineer shall review the improvements required by the
Board which are to be bonded and itemize their cost. Said itemization
shall be the basis for determining the amount of performance guaranty
and maintenance guaranty required by the Board. The Borough
Engineer shall forward his estimate of the cost of improvements to the
applicant within 30 days of the date of receipt of a request sent by
certified mail for said estimate.
D. The time allowed for installation of the improvements for which the
performance guaranty has been provided may be extended by the
82.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 32B-12 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 32B-12
1:292
Mayor and Council by resolution. As a condition or as part of any such
extension, the amount of any performance guaranty shall be increased
or reduced, as the case may be, to an amount not to exceed 120% of the
cost of the installation as determined as of the time of the passage of
the resolution.
E. If the required improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with the performance guaranty, the developer and surety, if
any, shall be liable thereon to the Borough for the reasonable cost of the
improvements not completed or corrected, and the Borough may, either
prior to or after the receipt of the proceeds thereof, complete such
improvements.
F. Upon substantial completion of all required appurtenant utility
improvements and the connection of same to the public system, the
developer may notify the Borough in writing, by certified mail
addressed in care of the Borough Clerk, of the completion or substantial
completion of improvements and shall send a copy thereof to the
Borough Engineer. Thereupon, the Borough Engineer shall inspect all
improvements of which such notice has been given and shall file a
detailed report, in writing, with the Mayor and Council, indicating
either approval, partial approval or rejection of such improvements,
with a statement of reasons for any rejection. The cost of the
improvements as approved or rejected shall be set forth.
G. The Mayor and Council shall either approve, partially approve or reject
the improvements, on the basis of the report of the Borough Engineer,
and shall notify the developer, in writing, by certified mail, of the
contents of said report and the action of said Board with relation
thereto not later than 65 days after receipt of the notice from the
developer of the completion of the improvements. Where partial
approval is granted, the developer shall be released from all liability
pursuant to its performance guaranty, except for that portion
adequately sufficient to secure provision of the improvements not yet
approved, provided that 30% of the amount of the performance
guaranty posted may be retained to ensure completion of all
improvements. Failure of the Mayor and Council to send or provide
such notification to the developer within 65 days shall be deemed to
constitute approval of the improvements, and the developer and surety,
if any, shall be released from all liability pursuant to such performance
guaranty for such improvements.
H. If any portion of the required improvements is rejected, the Board may
require the developer to complete such improvements, and, upon
completion, the same procedure of notification, as set forth in this
section, shall be followed.
I. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to limit the right of the
developer to contest by legal proceedings any determination of the
Mayor and Council or the Borough Engineer.
§ 32B-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32B-12
1:293
§ 32B-13. Additional deposits.
§ 32B-14. Interpretation; variances.
These rules, regulations and standards shall be considered the minimum
requirements for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare
of the citizens of the Borough. Any action taken by either Board under
the terms of this chapter shall give primary consideration to the abovementioned
matters and to the welfare of the entire community. Nothing
herein contained shall be construed to prohibit or prevent the use of higher
or more restrictive standards or requirements than may appear in any
lawfully applicable statutes, ordinances, regulations, rules, deeds,
restrictions or covenants. However, if the subdivider can clearly
demonstrate that, because of peculiar conditions pertaining to this land,
the literal enforcement of one or more of these regulations is impracticable
or will exact undue hardship, either Board may permit such variance or
variances as may be reasonable and within the general purpose and intent
of the rules, regulations and standards established by this chapter and the
Municipal Land Use Act.83
J. The developer shall reimburse the Borough for all reasonable
inspection fees paid to the Borough Engineer for the foregoing
inspection of improvements, provided that the Borough may require of
the developer a deposit for all or a portion of the reasonably anticipated
fees to be paid to the Borough Engineer for such inspection.
A. In connection with a major subdivision or major site plan, after
preliminary approval by the Planning Board and before any work is
undertaken by the applicant, the applicant shall deposit with the
Borough Clerk of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus an amount equal to 5% of
the estimated cost of installing the improvements required by the
Planning Board in connection with such major subdivision or site plan
as determined by the Borough Engineer, to cover the cost of periodic
inspection as the improvements are made, including engineering fees
and legal fees in connection therewith. If at any time the amount on
deposit shall fall below the sum of $100, the applicant shall deposit an
additional amount as determined by the Borough Engineer
representing 5% of the estimated cost to complete the improvements in
accordance with the final plat of such major subdivision or site plan.
B. There shall be deposited $250 for each stone monument to ensure
placing of such monument after grading has been completed.
C. All deposited funds shall be disbursed from the trust account of the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus by the Borough Treasurer upon submission of
properly certified Borough vouchers detailing the services rendered.
D. All such deposited funds in excess of the payments made therefrom
shall be refunded after the time of approval of the improvements by the
Borough Engineer and Mayor and Council.
§ 32B-12 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 32B-15
1:294
§ 32B-15. Violations and penalties; civil remedies.
A. Violations and penalties.
(1) If, before final subdivision or site plan approval has been granted,
any person, as owner or agent, transfers or sells or agrees to
transfer or sell, except pursuant to an agreement expressly
conditioned on the final subdivision or site plan approval, any land
which forms a part of a subdivision or site plan for which Borough
approval is required by this chapter, such person shall be subject to
a penalty not to exceed $1,000, and each lot disposition so made
may be deemed a separate violation.
(2) Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the terms of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed
$1,000 for each offense. Each day that a violation occurs or is
committed shall constitute a separate offense.
B. Civil remedy for unlawful building. In case any building or structure is
erected, constructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained or any
building, structure or land is used in violation of this chapter, the Mayor
and Council, the Construction Official and Building Subcode Official or
an interested party, in addition to other remedies, may institute any
appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion,
maintenance or use; to restrain, correct or abate such violation; to
prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land; or to prevent
any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises.
C. Civil remedy for unlawful sale of land.
(1) In addition to the other remedies set forth in this chapter, the
Mayor and Council, the Construction Official and the Building
Subcode Official may, in the event of a sale, transfer or agreement
which violates Subsection A of this section, institute and maintain
an action:
(a) For injunctive relief.
(b) To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to
such contract of sale if a certificate as to approval of the
subdivision of land shall not have been issued for such
conveyance.
(2) In any such action, the transferee, purchaser or grantee shall be
entitled to a lien upon the portion of the land from which the
subdivision was made that remains in the possession of the
developer or his assigns or successors, to secure the return of any
deposit made or purchase price paid, and also to a reasonable
search fee, survey expense and title closing expense, if any. Any
83.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 32B-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32B-15
1:295
§ 32B-16. Applicability of Municipal Land Use Act.
Whenever the definitions, terms or provisions of the Municipal Land Use
Act84 are inconsistent with the definitions, terms or provisions of this
chapter, the provisions of the Municipal Land Use Act shall govern,
including, without limitation, the time periods therein provided and any
governing statutory procedural requirements.
Chapter 32C
LANDSCAPER REGISTRATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land subdivision and site plan review — See
Ch. 32B.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 47.
Snow, ice, grass and weeds — See Ch. 61.
Zoning — See Ch. 85.
§ 32C-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to require certain landscape contractors to
register with the Borough to ensure that the Borough knows the name
of such landscape contractors performing services within the Borough to
assist resident's seeking to avoid those who engage in improper or
unscrupulous business practices, since the Borough determines that it is in
the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of its residents for this
protective measure.
§ 32C-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
following meanings:
EXEMPT LANDSCAPE CONTRACTOR — A landscape contractor that is
registered as a home improvement contractor pursuant to the Contractors'
Registration Act, N.J.S.A. 56:8-136 et seq., and its regulations ("the Act").
FOR HIRE — To demand and/or accept payment or compensation for
completion of services.
LANDSCAPE and LANDSCAPING — To be in the business, occupation or
trade of mowing lawns, trimming shrubs and applying pesticides and/or
fertilizers. For purposes of this definition, the planting of flowers, shrubs
such action must be brought within two years after the date of the
recording of the instrument of transfer, sale or conveyance of said
land, or within six years if unrecorded.
84.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 32B-15 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 32C-2
1:296
and/or trees or the laying of sod and establishment of a lawn is not
landscaping.
LANDSCAPE CONTRACTOR — Any individual or entity, whose existence
is recognized by law, including, but not limited to, any partnership,
corporation (for profit, nonprofit or municipal and its agencies), firm,
association, or any combination of the foregoing, which is engaged in the
business of providing landscape services for hire.
§ 32C-3. Registration required; exemption.
§ 32C-4. Applications for registration; registration fee; suspension
or revocation of registration; disclaimer. [Amended 3-28-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-03]
A. Any landscape contractor for hire shall not landscape or engage in
landscaping on any public or private property within the Borough
without first registering with the Municipal Clerk on forms to be
supplied by the Borough.
B. An exempt landscape contractor is not subject to these regulations;
provided, however, that such contractor, before engaging in any home
improvements, shall file its home improvement registration with the
Municipal Clerk before engaging in any home improvement work as
defined under the Act85 and its applicable regulations.
A. Every registration shall be issued and renewed on an annual basis,
effective February 1 of each year, upon payment of an annual fee to the
Borough in the amount of $50. An exempt landscape contractor shall
not be required to pay a fee.
B. Landscape contractors for hire shall have 30 days from the effective
date hereof to register, which registration shall be effective until
February 1 of the year following adoption. Exempt landscape
contractors shall file their home improvement registration within 30
days of the effective date hereof, which shall remain valid until
February 1 of the year following adoption.
C. The Borough Council may, upon recommendation of the Borough
Engineer or Borough Superintendent of Public Works, or designee of
one or both, after notice and an opportunity for a hearing, suspend or
revoke any registration for violation of law or related Borough
ordinances, or for good cause, which is shown to be prejudicial to the
public health, safety or welfare. When the Borough Engineer or
Borough Superintendent of Public Works, or designee of one or both,
has reasonable cause or belief that an emergency affecting the public
health, safety or welfare so requires, said official may temporarily
suspend any registration for a period not to exceed one week or until
the Borough Council can be convened to consider said suspension.
85.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 56:8-136 et seq.
§ 32C-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32C-4
1:297
§ 32C-5. Violations and penalties.
For each violation of this chapter, the violator shall be subject to such fines
and other penalties as provided in § 1-16, General penalty, of this Code.
Repeat offenders shall be subject to additional fines and other penalties as
provided in § 1-16 of this Code.
§ 32C-6. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such
inconsistency.
§ 32C-7. Severability. [Amended 3-28-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-03]
If any portion of this chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate
the remainder of this chapter but shall be confined in its effect to the
provision directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall
have been rendered.
§ 32C-8. When effective. [Amended 3-28-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-03]
This chapter shall take effect after final passage and publication as required
by law.
Chapter 33
LIBRARY
§ 33-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the enforcement of the
following rules and regulations adopted by the Trustees of the Free Public
Library of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus (hereinafter referred to as "library")
by establishing penalties and procedures for the adjudication of any alleged
violations of the rules and regulations in the Municipal Court of the
Borough.
§ 33-2. Failure to return material.
No person shall detain or fail to return any book, periodical, pamphlet,
artistic reproduction, phonograph recording, audiovisual material or any
other article borrowed on a card issued by the library (hereinafter referred
to as "library card") contrary to the rules and regulations of said library or
a member library of the Bergen County Co-operative System or any similar
D. The Borough makes no guarantee or representation regarding the
fitness, knowledge or qualification of any person that is registered by
the Borough to engage in landscaping for hire.
§ 32C-4 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 33-2
1:298
system (hereinafter referred to as "member library") after delinquency
notices have been issued and after 30 days have elapsed from the date
of posting, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a final notice
demanding return thereof, addressed to said person at the last address
furnished to the library.
§ 33-3. Destruction of material.
No person shall willfully or maliciously cut, tear, deface, disfigure, damage
or otherwise destroy any book, periodical, pamphlet, artistic reproduction,
phonograph recording, audiovisual material or any other article, or any part
thereof, which is owned by, in the custody of or is borrowed from the library
or a member library.
§ 33-4. Removal of material.
No person shall remove any book, periodical, pamphlet, artistic
reproduction, phonograph recording, audiovisual material or any other item
or article from the library building without complying with the rules,
regulations and procedures of said library for borrowing such items or
articles.
§ 33-5. Library cards.
No person with intent to defraud shall register or furnish a false name or
address or use any other library card other than the one issued to said
person for the purpose of borrowing any book or other material from the
library or member library.
§ 33-6. Enforcement.
The Library Director is authorized to file a complaint in the Municipal Court
under the following conditions:
A. A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
B. Notice by letter.
(1) A certified letter, return receipt requested, has been sent by the
library administration, as a final notice, after six weeks have
elapsed since the original due date, informing the borrower that,
unless the material borrowed is returned or any fines are paid
within 30 days, a summons will be issued under the provisions of
this chapter.
(2) In the case of a minor, the letter or complaint shall be directed to
the parents or guardians of the minor involved.
§ 33-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-7
1:299
§ 33-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or refuses to comply with the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not to exceed
$500.
Chapter 33A
LIGHTNING WARNING SYSTEM
§ 33A-1. Installation authorized.
A lightning warning system is hereby authorized to be installed at the
locations set forth in § 33A-2.
§ 33A-2. Locations.
The lightning warning system shall be installed and be applicable to the
following locations:
Block Lot Address
302 1 Northfield, 617 Hollywood Avenue
705 6 Ho-Ho-Kus School, 70 Lloyd Road
§ 33A-3. Posting of signs.
Warning signs substantially in the form attached hereto and incorporated
herein are authorized to be posted at appropriate places at the locations set
forth in § 33A-2.
§ 33A-4. Closing of fields.
Pursuant to the lightning warning system, if a siren sounds and/or a strobe
light is flashing, the field is closed. No person shall remain or continue field
activities when a field is closed.
§ 33A-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any provisions
herein shall, after conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not to exceed
$1,000 or imprisonment for a term of not more than 90 days, or both.
§ 33A-6. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such
inconsistency.
§ 33-7 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 33A-7
1:300
§ 33A-7. Severability.
If any portion of this chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate
the remainder of this chapter, but shall be confined in its effect to the
provision directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall
have been rendered.
§ 33A-8. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect after final passage and publication as required
by law.
Chapter 34
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Improper disposal of waste — See Ch. 32.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 47.
Public scavengers — See Ch. 48.
Recycling — See Ch. 52.
Solid waste — See Ch. 64.
§ 34-1. Definitions. [Amended 11-28-1989 by Ord. No. 648]
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER — Any used or consumed substance or waste material which has
been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber, paper or
other natural or synthetic material, or any combination thereof, including
but not limited to any bottle, jar or can or any top, cap or detachable tab of
any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar, match or any flaming
or glowing material or any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish, grass
clippings or other packaging or construction material, but does not include
the waste of the primary processes of mining or other extraction processes,
logging, sawmilling, farming or manufacturing.[Amended 2-28-2006 by
Ord. No. 906]
LITTER RECEPTACLE — A container suitable for the depositing of litter.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.[Amended 2-28-2006 by Ord. No. 906]
PUBLIC PLACE and PUBLIC BUILDING — To be construed so as to
severally mean any and every public place or building within the Borough
which is within the jurisdiction and control of the municipality, which is or
§ 33A-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-1
1:301
may be in general use by all citizens and in which all have an equal right of
passage at will.
REFUSE — All putrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including
garbage, street cleanings and dead animals.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid or liquid wastes, consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as papers, wrappings,
cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, glass, bedding, crockery, gasoline, oil or
other chemical wastes, abandoned automobiles, dismantled automobiles
and parts thereof, scrap metal, junk, machinery and solid market and
industrial wastes, building materials and similar materials.
STREET — To be construed so as to include highways, roads, avenues,
boulevards, courts, public lanes, alleys, sidewalks, footpaths and all other
public highways for vehicular or pedestrian travel.
§ 34-2. Prohibited conduct. [Amended 2-28-2006 by Ord. No. 906]
§ 34-3. Dumping regulations.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discard or dump along any street or
road, on or off any right-of-way, any household or commercial solid waste,
rubbish, refuse, junk, vehicle or vehicle parts, rubber tires, appliances,
furniture or private property, except by written consent of the owner of said
property, in any place not specifically designated for the purpose of solid
waste storage or disposal.
§ 34-4. Storage of bulky household waste.
It shall be unlawful for any residential property owner to store or permit
storage of any bulky household waste, including household appliances,
furniture and mattresses, in areas zoned residential, except in a fully
enclosed structure or during days designated for the collection of bulky
items.
§ 34-5. Storage of tires.
It shall be unlawful for any residential property owner to store or permit
the storage of tires in areas zoned residential, except in a fully enclosed
structure or on days designated for the collection of tires.
§ 34-6. Vehicle parking and storage.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard or otherwise
place any litter of any nature upon public or private property other than
in a litter receptacle or, having done so, to allow such litter to remain.
B. Whenever any litter is thrown or discarded or allowed to fall from a
vehicle or boat in violation of this chapter, the operator or owner or
both of the motor vehicle or boat shall also be deemed to have violated
this chapter.
§ 34-1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 34-6
1:302
§ 34-7. Securing of vehicle loads.
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be driven, moved, stopped or parked
on any highway unless such a vehicle is constructed or loaded to prevent
any of its load from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping
therefrom. Any person operating a vehicle from which any glass or objects
have fallen or escaped, which could cause an obstruction, damage a vehicle
or otherwise endanger travelers or public property, shall immediately cause
the public property to be cleaned of all glass or objects and shall pay the
costs therefor.
§ 34-8. Construction sites.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent or contractor in charge of a
construction or demolition site to permit the accumulation of litter before,
during or after completion of any construction or demolition project. It shall
be the duty of the owner, agent or contractor in charge of a construction
site to furnish containers adequate to accommodate flyable or nonflyable
debris or trash at areas convenient to construction areas and to maintain
and empty the receptacles in such a manner and with such a frequency as
to prevent spillage of refuse.
§ 34-9. Open or overflowing containers.
It shall be unlawful for any residential or commercial property owner to
permit open or overflowing waste disposal bins on his or her property.
§ 34-10. Maintenance of sidewalks and curbs.
It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or person in
charge of any structure to keep and cause to be kept the sidewalk and
curb abutting the building or structure free from obstruction or nuisances
of every kind and to keep sidewalks, areaways, backyards, courts and alleys
free from litter and other offensive material. No person shall sweep into
or deposit in any gutter, street, catch basin or other public place any
accumulation of litter from any public or private sidewalk or driveway.
Every person who owns or occupies property shall keep the sidewalk in
front of his or her premises free of litter. All sweepings shall be collected
and properly containerized for disposal.
A. It shall be unlawful for any residential property owner to park or permit
the parking of any vehicle on his or her residential lawn.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or permit the keeping on
streets, vacant lots and residential lawns, except in a fully enclosed
structure, any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer which is missing
tires, wheels, an engine or any essential parts; which displays extensive
body damage or deterioration; which does not display a current, valid
state license; or which is wrecked, disassembled or partially
disassembled.
§ 34-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-11
1:303
§ 34-11. Litter in streams and ditches.
No person shall throw, put or place or cause to be thrown, put or placed
in any stream or ditch in the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus any litter, substance,
matter or thing whatsoever whereby the free and unobstructed use of the
stream or ditch may be in any way impeded or interfered with or whereby
the same may be rendered unsightly, unsanitary or polluted.
§ 34-12. Placement of receptacles.
§ 34-13. Violations and penalties.
A. Litter receptacles and their servicing are required at the following
public places which exist in the municipality, including:
(1) Sidewalks used by pedestrians in active retail commercially zoned
areas such that, at a minimum, there shall be no single linear
quarter mile without a receptacle.
(2) Buildings held out for use by the public, including schools,
government buildings and railroad and bus stations.
(3) Parks.
(4) Drive-in restaurants.
(5) All street vendor locations.
(6) Self-service refreshment areas.
(7) Construction sites.
(8) Gasoline service stations islands.
(9) Shopping centers.
(10) Parking lots.
(11) Campgrounds and trailer parks.
(12) Marinas, boat moorage and fueling stations.
(13) Boat launching areas.
(14) Public and private piers operated for public uses.
(15) Beaches and bathing areas.
(16) At special events to which the public is invited, including sporting
events, parades, carnivals, circuses and festivals.
B. The proprietors of these places or the sponsors of these events shall be
responsible for providing and servicing the receptacles such that
adequate containerization is available.
§ 34-11 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 34-13
1:304
§ 34-14. Placing litter in streets and public places. [Added
11-28-1989 by Ord. No. 64886]
§ 34-15. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions hereof
are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency, and, specifically,
former Chapter 34 of the Code of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus is hereby
repealed.
§ 34-16. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon passage and publication as required by
law.
Chapter 35
A. Any person or entity who shall violate any of the provisions of this
chapter or any order promulgated hereunder shall, after a summon is
issued under the terms hereof, upon conviction, be punished as follows:
(1) For a first offense, by a fine not to exceed $50.
(2) For a second offense, by a fine not to exceed $100.
(3) For a third or any subsequent offense, by a fine not to exceed $250
or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 90
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
B. Each violation of any of the provisions of this chapter and each day that
each such violation shall continue shall be deemed to be a separate and
distinct offense.
A. No person shall throw, put or place or cause or permit to be thrown, put
or placed into, upon or within any street, public place, parking lot or
public building any substance, matter or thing whatsoever whereby the
safe, free or unobstructed use of the same by the public may be in any
way impeded or interfered with or whereby the same may be rendered
unsightly in appearance; provided, however, that nothing herein
contained shall prohibit the deposit of any such material in any public
or private receptacles approved by the Borough Council for such
purpose.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed or to
hire another person to place any advertisement, handbill or unsolicited
material of any kind in or on any street, sidewalk, building or vehicle
within the community in such manner that it may be removed by natural
forces.
86.Editor's Note: Pursuant to the Borough, the addition of this section required the
renumbering of former §§ 34-14, Repealer, and 34-15, When effective, as §§ 34-15 and
34-16, respectively.
§ 34-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 34-16
1:305
(RESERVED)
Chapter 35A
MOBILE TELEPHONES
§ 35A-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ENGAGE IN A CALL — Talking into or listening on a handheld mobile
telephone, but shall not include holding a mobile telephone to activate,
deactivate or initiate a function of such telephone.
HANDHELD MOBILE TELEPHONE — A mobile telephone with which a user
engages in a call using at least one hand.
HANDS-FREE MOBILE TELEPHONE — A mobile telephone that has an
internal feature or function or that is equipped with an attachment or
addition, whether or not permanently part of such mobile telephone, by
which a user engages in a call without the use of either hand, whether or
not the use of either hand is necessary to activate, deactivate or initiate a
function of such telephone.
IMMEDIATE PROXIMITY — The distance that permits the operator of a
mobile telephone to hear telecommunications transmitted over such mobile
telephone, but shall not require physical contact with such operator's ear.
MOBILE TELEPHONE — The device used by subscribers and other users of
wireless telephone service to access such service.
USING — Holding a mobile telephone to, or in the immediate proximity of,
the user's ear.
WIRELESS TELEPHONE SERVICE — Two-way real-time voice
telecommunications service that is interconnected to a public switched
telephone network and is provided by a commercial mobile radio service.
§ 35A-2. Prohibited uses.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall operate a
motor vehicle upon a public street or highway while using a mobile
telephone to engage in a call while such vehicle is in motion.
B. An operator of a motor vehicle who holds a mobile telephone to, or in
the immediate proximity of, his or her ear while such vehicle is in
motion is presumed to be engaging in a call within the meaning of this
section. The presumption established by this subsection is rebuttable
by evidence tending to show that the operator was not engaged in a
call.
§ 34-16 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 35A-2
1:306
§ 35A-3. Exceptions.
Section 35A-2A, B and C of this chapter shall not apply to:
§ 35A-4. Violations and penalties.
A violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $250.
Chapter 36
MUNICIPAL COURT
§ 36-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established, in and for the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, a
Municipal Court, to be known as the "Municipal Court of the Borough of Ho-
Ho-Kus."
§ 36-2. Seal.
Said Municipal Court shall have a seal which shall bear the impress of the
name of the Court.
§ 36-3. Compensation of Judge and Administrator. [Amended
11-24-2009 by Ord. No. 956]
The compensation of the Municipal Court Judge and Municipal Court
Administrator shall be fixed and paid by the Mayor and Council of the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus in the manner provided by law.
C. The provisions of this section shall not be construed as authorizing the
seizure or forfeiture of a mobile telephone, unless otherwise provided
by law.
A. The use of a mobile telephone for the sole purpose of communicating
with any of the following regarding an emergency situation: an
emergency response operator; a hospital, physician's office or health
clinic; an ambulance company or corps; a fire department, district or
company; or a police department.
B. Any of the following persons while in the performance of their official
duties: a police officer or peace officer; a member of a fire department,
district or company; or the operator of an authorized emergency
vehicle.
C. The use of a hands-free mobile telephone.
§ 35A-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-4
1:307
§ 36-4. Qualifications of Judge; appointment; term; vacancies.
[Amended 11-24-2009 by Ord. No. 956]
The Court shall have a Judge, who shall be known as the "Municipal Judge"
and who shall have the qualifications set forth in the statute providing for
the establishment of municipal courts. He shall be appointed by the Mayor,
with the advice and consent of the Council, and shall serve for a term of
three years from the date of his appointment and until his successor is
appointed and qualified. Any appointment to fill a vacancy not caused by the
expiration of term shall be made for the unexpired term only.
§ 36-5. (Reserved)87
§ 36-6. Oath of Judge. [Amended 11-24-2009 by Ord. No. 956]
Each Judge of said Municipal Court shall, before entering upon the duties of
his office, take and subscribe an oath in substantially the same manner as
provided in the Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey.
§ 36-7. Annual salary of Judge. [Amended 11-24-2009 by Ord. No.
956]
The Judge of said Court shall be compensated by an annual salary, which
shall be fixed by ordinance or resolution adopted by the governing body of
the municipality and shall be in lieu of any and all other fees.
§ 36-8. Municipal Court Administrator. [Amended 11-24-2009 by
Ord. No. 956]
The Court shall have an Administrator, who shall be known as the
"Municipal Court Administrator of the Municipal Court of the Borough
of Ho-Ho-Kus." The Municipal Court Administrator shall be appointed by
the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council. The Municipal
Court Administrator shall serve for a term of three years from the date of
appointment and until a successor is appointed and qualified. The Municipal
Court Administrator shall receive such compensation as the governing body
shall fix in a manner provided by law. The Municipal Court Administrator
shall, before entering upon the duties of the office, take and subscribe
the usual oath or affirmation required to be taken by public officials. The
Municipal Court Administrator shall attend the Municipal Court sessions
and the examinations, trials and proceedings therein. The Municipal Court
Administrator shall perform such other duties and services pertaining to
the Municipal Court and business thereof as the Municipal Court may
require. The Municipal Court Administrator shall maintain compliance with
certification requirements pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2B:12-11. Additionally, the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus and the Municipal Court shall maintain compliance
with Title 2B, Chapter 12, of the Revised Statutes. The Municipal Court staff
shall comply with New Jersey Rules of Court.
87.Editor's Note: Former § 36-5, First Magistrate; term of office, was repealed 11-24-2009 by
Ord. No. 956.
§ 36-4 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 36-9
1:308
§ 36-9. Jurisdiction.
The territorial jurisdiction of said Municipal Court shall be the territory
embraced within the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus. The Court shall have such
jurisdiction as provided by the statutes of New Jersey and the ordinances of
the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
§ 36-9.1. Representation by Municipal Public Defender. [Added
6-25-1996 by Ord. No. 763; amended 11-24-2009 by Ord. No. 956]
Each individual applying for representation by a Municipal Public Defender
shall be required to pay an application fee of not less than $50 and not
more than $200. The Municipal Court may waive any required application
fee, in whole or in part, if the Court determines, in its discretion, that
the application fee represents an unreasonable burden on the individual
seeking representation. The assessment of the application fee is to be based
on the income eligibility guidelines for indigent services issued by the
Supreme Court. The assignment of the Municipal Public Defender shall be
in accordance with the New Jersey Rules of Court based on the guidelines
for determining a consequence of magnitude.
§ 36-10. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon final passage, approval and
publication in the manner prescribed by law.
Chapter 38
OFFENSES, MISCELLANEOUS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 4.
§ 38-1. Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages in public.
A. No person shall consume any alcoholic beverages within the limits of
the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus or have in his possession any opened
alcoholic beverage container with unconsumed alcoholic beverage
therein while in or on a public street, lane, roadway, avenue, sidewalk,
public parking place, park, playground recreation area, school
buildings or grounds or any other public or quasi-public place; or in any
public conveyance; or in a private motor vehicle while the same is in
motion or parked in any public street, lane or public parking lot or other
public or quasi-public place; or while upon any private property not his
own without the express permission of the owner or other person
having authority to grant such permission.
§ 36-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-1
1:309
§ 38-1.1. Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages by
underage persons. [Added 4-22-2003 by Ord. No. 871]
§ 38-2. Loud or unnecessary noises.
§ 38-3. Commercial contractors; prohibited hours and days. [Added
10-23-1990 by Ord. No. 66888]
B. Notwithstanding anything hereinabove contained, the Mayor and
Council of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus may authorize the possession or
consumption of alcoholic beverages in any designated park or other
public place under its jurisdiction at the designated time or times in
connection with a special event which shall have been authorized by a
resolution of the Mayor and Council.
A. Any person under the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages who
knowingly possesses or consumes any alcoholic beverages in or on any
school property, public conveyance, public place or place of public
assembly or on private property shall be in violation of this section.
Upon conviction, such underage person shall be subject to a fine of
$250 for the first offense and $350 for any subsequent offense; at the
discretion of the court, perform community service for a period not to
exceed 180 days; at the discretion of the court, have a New Jersey
driving privilege suspended or postponed for six months; and, if
considered necessary by the court, be referred to an alcoholic
treatment program at the defendant's expense.
B. This section shall not apply to persons under the legal age to purchase
alcoholic beverages who possess or consume alcoholic beverages in the
presence of and with the permission of the parent or legal guardian of
said person, provided that said guardian is of the legal age to purchase
alcoholic beverages, or if alcoholic beverage is being consumed in any
religious observance, ceremony or rite. The section shall not apply to
possession of an alcoholic beverage by an underage person employed
by an alcoholic beverage licensee in the course of performing
employment duties. As used in this section, "guardian" means a person
who has qualified as a guardian of the underage person pursuant to
testamentary or court appointment; "relative" means the underage
person's grandparent, aunt or uncle, sibling or any other person related
by blood or affinity.
A. The making, creation or permitting of any unreasonably loud,
disturbing or unnecessary noise in the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus is hereby
prohibited.
B. The making, creating or permitting of any noise of such character,
intensity or duration as to be detrimental to the life, health or welfare of
any individual or which either steadily or intermittently annoys,
disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, peace or safety of
any individual is hereby prohibited.
§ 38-1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 38-3
1:310
§ 38-4. Parks and public lands; hours.
§ 38-5. False alarms. [Amended 2-26-2002 by Ord. No. 847]
The summoning of the Police Department to any premises in the Borough
by a burglar or fire alarm system activated either through inadvertency or
as a result of a malfunction and not by an intruder more than three times in
a calendar year is prohibited.
§ 38-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any section or part of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, forfeit and pay a fine not to exceed $500 or be imprisoned for a
term not to exceed 90 days, or both, for each and every offense.
Chapter 39
OFFICIAL MAP
A. No commercial contractor or business shall perform any work or
service other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday, and 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Saturday,
except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and
safety, and then only with a permit from the Construction Code Official,
which permit may be granted for a period of three days or less while the
emergency continues.
B. No commercial contractor or business shall perform any work or
service on Sundays, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of
public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the
Construction Code Official, which permit may be granted for a period of
three days or less while the emergency continues.
A. No person shall enter or remain at any park or other lands designated
for municipal purposes, as set forth in the Official Map of the Borough
of Ho-Ho-Kus, between 1/2 hour after sunset and 1/2 hour before
sunrise; provided, however, that this regulation shall not apply to any
normal function or activity of the Borough, its boards or departments.
B. Notwithstanding anything hereinabove contained, the Mayor and
Council of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, by resolution, may authorize
special events to take place in any parks or other lands designated for
municipal purposes under its jurisdiction beyond the hours set forth
herein.
88.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former §§ 38-3 through 38-5 as §§ 38-4
through 38-6, respectively.
§ 38-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-1
1:311
§ 39-1. Establishment and adoption.
The map filed in the office of the Borough Clerk of the Borough of Ho-Ho-
Kus in the County of Bergen upon the introduction of this chapter, entitled
"Official Map, Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, Bergen County, New Jersey, Scale
one inch equals 300 feet, November 25, 1969," prepared by William H.
Schwanewede Associates, Borough Engineer, 201 The Plaza, Teaneck, New
Jersey, with Appendix "A" thereto, entitled "Flood Control Basin Map for
the Saddle River in the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, Bergen County, New Jersey,
Scale one inch equals 100 feet, November 1968," prepared by William H.
Schwanewede Associates, Borough Engineer, 201 The Plaza, Teaneck, New
Jersey, is hereby established and adopted as the Official Map of the Borough
of Ho-Ho-Kus pursuant to the authority and within the meaning of the
"Official Map and Building Permit Act (1953)" (N.J.S.A. 40:55-1.30 et seq.).89
§ 39-2. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon final adoption and publication according
to law.
§ 39-3. Repealer.
All ordinances and parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith be and the
same are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
Chapter 39A
OUTDOOR CAFES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 4.
Littering — See Ch. 34.
Zoning — See Ch. 85.
§ 39A-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a procedure and authorize rules
and regulations thereunder for the licensing of outdoor cafes in the General
Business Zone of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
§ 39A-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed in this section:
89.Editor's Note: Said Act, previously codified as N.J.S.A. 40:55-1.30 through 40:55-1.42, was
repealed by L. 1975, c. 291, § 80. See now N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 et seq.
§ 39-1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 39A-2
1:312
OUTDOOR CAFE — Any eating establishment where food and other
refreshments are served upon the public right-of-way, namely the sidewalks
immediately in front of any restaurant, cafe, cafeteria or place of business
where food and/or other refreshments are served.
SIDEWALK — That area of the public right-of-way reserved for pedestrian
traffic from the curb to the front line of the building housing an eating
establishment.
§ 39A-3. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, corporation,
association or organization of any kind (hereinafter collectively referred
to as "person") to create, establish, operate, maintain or otherwise be
engaged in the business of conducting an outdoor cafe upon the sidewalks
of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus unless such person shall hold a currently valid
license issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter.
§ 39A-4. Application procedure. [Amended 6-25-2013 by Ord. No.
1023]
Application for the license required hereunder shall be made to the Zoning
Officer and shall be signed by the applicant. The application shall contain
the following information:
A. The name, residence address and telephone number of each individual,
owner, partner or, if a domestic corporation, the names, residence
addresses and telephone numbers of the directors and officers owning a
ten-percent or greater interest in the corporation and the chief
operating executive of the corporation and if a nondomestic
corporation, the name, residence address and telephone number of the
managing officer for service of process within the State of New Jersey
and a copy of the qualification of said nondomestic corporation to
conduct business in the State of New Jersey.
B. A copy of the trade, corporate, business or fictitious name upon which
the applicant intends to do business pursuant to this chapter.
C. The address and description of each place where the applicant intends
to establish or operate an outdoor cafe.
D. The name and address of the person owning the premises, if other than
the applicant, and the consent of the owner of the premises to the
application.
E. A sketch of the proposed cafe which will reasonably identify all tables,
chairs, umbrellas, furnishings and fixtures intended to be located at the
cafe site. The sketch will also provide the following information:
(1) The location of any doors leading from the eating establishment to
the outdoor cafe. No such doors may be obstructed in any manner.
§ 39A-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39A-4
1:313
§ 39A-5. Review of application. [Amended 6-25-2013 by Ord. No.
1023]
The Zoning Officer will review the application for completeness and
compliance with the terms of this chapter. If the application is complete,
the Zoning Officer will act upon the same within 10 business days of the
submittal of the application or within 10 business days after the application
becomes complete. If the application is not complete, the Zoning Officer
will so notify the applicant within 10 business days of the submission and
specifically detail the areas in which the application lacks compliance with
the requirements of this chapter.
§ 39A-6. Issuance of license. [Amended 6-25-2013 by Ord. No. 1023]
If the application complies with this chapter, the Zoning Officer shall issue
a license strictly subject to the terms and conditions of this chapter.
§ 39A-7. Transferability of license.
The license is personal to the applicant, and any change or transfer of
ownership of the outdoor cafe shall terminate the license and shall require
a new application and a new license in conformance with all of the
requirements of this chapter.
§ 39A-8. Consent to inspection.
Acceptance of the license by the applicant shall operate as a consent to
the health, fire, police and building officials of the Borough to inspect the
outdoor cafe for continued compliance with the terms and conditions of this
chapter and any federal, state, county or local law, ordinance or regulation
affecting the same.
§ 39A-9. Indemnification. [Amended 6-25-2013 by Ord. No. 1023]
No license required by this chapter shall be granted to any person to
operate an outdoor cafe until such person shall have filed with the Zoning
Officer a statement agreeing to indemnify and hold harmless the Borough
(2) The number of feet and location of unobstructed space permitting
free passage of pedestrian traffic around or through each outdoor
cafe. There shall be a minimum of five feet of unobstructed paved
surface of the sidewalk available for pedestrian traffic.
(3) The location of the place where any food or drink is intended to be
prepared.
(4) The location of all fire hydrants, parking meters, utility poles,
benches, handicap ramps or any other fixtures permanently located
on the sidewalk in front of the eating establishment or within 10
feet thereof on either or any side.
F. An application fee of $100.
§ 39A-4 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 39A-9
1:314
of Ho-Ho-Kus, its agents, servants, representatives or employees from any
or all claims, damages, judgment costs or expenses, including attorneys'
fees, which they or any of them may incur or be required to pay because
of any personal injury, including death, or property damage suffered by any
person or persons as a result of or related in any way to the operation and
maintenance of the outdoor cafe for which the license is issued.
§ 39A-10. Insurance requirements. [Amended 6-25-2013 by Ord. No.
1023]
§ 39A-11. Revocation or suspension of license.
Any license issued hereunder is issued solely as a revocable license which
shall be subject to suspension or revocation by the Borough Administrator
for failure of any licensee to comply with this chapter or for violation of
any other applicable federal, state, county or municipal law, regulation or
ordinance. Such revocation or suspension by the Borough Administrator
shall be upon written notice personally delivered to the licensee, which
A. No license required by this chapter shall be granted to any person to
operate an outdoor cafe until such person shall have first filed with the
Zoning Officer a comprehensive general liability policy issued to such
person by a public liability insurance company authorized to do
business in the State of New Jersey affording the coverages set forth
below in the amounts specified. Such insurance policy shall name the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, 333 Warren Avenue, Ho-Ho-Kus, New Jersey, its
agents, servants, officers, representatives and employees as additional
insureds with respect to the operation and maintenance of the outdoor
cafe in the following amounts:
(1) Bodily injury, each person: $300,000.
(2) Bodily injury, each accident: $1,000,000.
(3) Property damage, each person: $300,000.
(4) Property damage, each accident: $1,000,000.
B. The insurance coverage required by this section shall at all times be
maintained for the full amount. The policy of insurance required by this
section to be filed with the Zoning Officer shall contain a clause
obligating the company issuing the same to give not less than 30 days'
written notice to the Borough Clerk before cancellation or amendments
of any of the terms thereof. Notice of cancellation shall not relieve the
company issuing such policy of liability for any injury or claim arising
before the cancellation becomes effective. The cancellation of any such
policy shall have the immediate effect of suspending the license of such
person to operate the outdoor cafe covered thereby until a new policy
complying the provisions of this section is filed with the Zoning Officer
and a letter in writing confirming the new effective date of the license is
issued by the Zoning Officer.
§ 39A-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39A-11
1:315
notice shall set forth the grounds for such revocation or suspension. If the
licensee wishes to contest or appeal such suspension or revocation, the
licensee shall file a written notice of appeal setting forth the grounds for
the appeal, which appeal shall be filed with the Borough Clerk no later than
10 days prior to the public meeting of the Mayor and Council at which the
matter will be heard and considered. At the public hearing before the Mayor
and Council, the Borough Administrator will present evidence supporting
the grounds for suspension or revocation of the license. The licensee will
then be permitted to present evidence and witnesses in support of its
case. At the hearing, the licensee may be represented by an attorney.
At the conclusion of the hearing, or as soon thereafter as is reasonable,
the Mayor and Council may determine whether or not the suspension
or revocation imposed was appropriate, whether or not such suspension
should be continued or whether or not sufficient grounds exist to
permanently revoke the license. The operation of an outdoor cafe after any
suspension or revocation of the license is unlawful, and every day that such
violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct defense.
§ 39A-12. Maintenance requirements.
Each licensee is responsible for keeping the area of the outdoor cafe and the
adjacent walks and streets free and clear of any debris or litter occasioned
by the cafe. Areas must be cleaned as needed and at the time that business
is closed and at the beginning of each business day, but not later than 9:00
a.m.
§ 39A-13. Signs.
No signs shall be permitted in the area of the outdoor cafe except those
signs authorized under Chapter 85, Zoning, of the Code of the Borough of
Ho-Ho-Kus. Outdoor umbrellas located in the outdoor cafe shall be exempt
from the Sign Ordinance of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
§ 39A-14. Alcoholic beverages.
If the applicant is the holder of an alcoholic beverage control license
pursuant to the laws of the State of New Jersey, it shall be the applicant's
responsibility to cause the alcohol beverage control license to be amended
to include the premises utilized for outdoor cafe purposes in order to serve
alcoholic beverages therein.
§ 39A-15. Hours of operation.
No outdoor cafe shall open for business prior to 8:00 a.m., nor remain open
for business after 11:00 p.m. All persons occupying the outdoor cafe shall
vacate the same no later than 11:30 p.m.
§ 39A-11 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 39A-16
1:316
§ 39A-16. Months of operation.
Outdoor cafes shall be permitted to operate from April 1 to October 31 in
any calendar year. The license, when issued, shall be valid for one season.
The application fee set forth herein shall be paid annually.
§ 39A-17. Attachment of equipment to Borough property
prohibited.
No tables, chairs or other equipment used in the outdoor cafe shall be
attached, chained or in any manner affixed to any tree, post, sign, curb
or sidewalk or property of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus within or near the
licensed area.
§ 39A-18. Duty of licensee to vacate.
The licensee agrees, at the end of the license period or in the event that
the license is temporarily or permanently suspended or revoked, that the
licensee will, at his own cost and expense, vacate the sidewalk space and
promptly remove any property placed thereon. Failure to do so on five days'
written notice shall grant to the Borough the right to remove any property
on the sidewalk, and the licensee agrees to reimburse the Borough for the
cost of removing and storing the same.
§ 39A-19. Table service.
Table service is required.
§ 39A-20. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
be subject to a fine not exceeding $100 for each offense or imprisonment
for a period not exceeding 90 days, or both, at the discretion of the court
imposing the sentence pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-5. Each day a violation
occurs or is committed shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 39B
PAINTBALL GUNS AND DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hunting and firearms — See Ch. 31.
§ 39B-1. Discharge on public property prohibited; private property
restrictions.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged an apparatus
commonly known as a "paintball gun" or any air guns, pellet guns or
§ 39A-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39B-1
1:317
any other instrument which propels projectiles in and about any public
property, including but not limited to public parks, playgrounds, open space,
recreation facilities or any other public facility within the Borough. Any
discharge of a paintball gun, air gun, pellet guns or any other instrument
which propels projectiles in or about private property within the Borough
shall be performed only with the consent of the property owner and in
a manner as to ensure that the aforesaid device and all projectiles are
confined to the limits of the private property where discharged therefrom.
§ 39B-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000 or imprisonment for a term
of not more than 90 days, or both.
§ 39B-3. Repealer.
All other ordinances of the Borough, or parts thereof, which are in conflict
with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
§ 39B-4. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or word
contained in this chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason
whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this
chapter, which shall remain in full force and effect, and, to this effect and to
this end, the provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable.
§ 39B-5. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon passage and publication as required by
law.
Chapter 40
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Transient merchants — See Ch. 75A.
§ 39B-1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 39B-5
1:318
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 9-25-1962 by Ord. No. 390]
§ 40-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prevent fraud, crime and unethical and
dishonest business practices. The fees to be charged for the issuance of
licenses are not to be considered as revenue but are charged for the
purpose of covering the expense of investigating and regulating the conduct
of the licensees.
§ 40-2. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any peddler, solicitor or canvasser as hereinafter
defined to engage in such activity within the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus without
first obtaining a license therefor in accordance with the provisions of this
article.
§ 40-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PEDDLER, SOLICITOR or CANVASSER — Includes any person, whether a
resident of the Borough or not, who goes from house to house, place to
place or street to street, soliciting or taking or attempting to take orders
for the sale of services, goods, wares, merchandise, real estate or personal
property of any nature for future delivery, or for services to be performed
in the future, whether or not the individual has, carries or exposes for
sale a sample of the product, and whether or not he is collecting advance
payment, or who engages in any of the foregoing activities from a stationary
location on the street or public place. "Canvassing" shall further be defined
as door-to-door delivery of circulars, visitations, or other means, where the
canvasser or his or her employers have not been invited or requested by
the owner, lessee, sublessee, assignee, managing agent or other person
having the right of ownership or possession or to sell, rent, or lease any real
property.[Amended 10-25-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-10]
PERSON — Shall mean and include an individual, firm, partnership or
corporation.
§ 40-4. Application for license. [Amended 10-27-1992 by Ord. No.
707]
Applicants for a license under this article must file with the Borough Clerk
a sworn application, in writing (in duplicate), on a form to be furnished by
the Borough Clerk, which shall give the following information:
§ 40-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-4
1:319
A. The name and physical description of the person applying and desiring
to solicit funds or to peddler, solicit or otherwise canvass. [Amended
10-23-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-09]
B. Whether the person applying is a natural person, partnership,
corporation, association or limited liability company, and: [Amended
10-23-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-09]
(1) If a natural person, the business and residence address and
telephone number must be given.
(2) If a partnership, the name of all partners and the principal business
address and telephone number of each partner must be given.
(3) If a corporation, the person applying must state whether it is
organized under the State of New Jersey or is a foreign corporation
and must state the mailing address, the business location, the
telephone number, the name of the individual in charge of the local
office of such corporation and the names of all officers and
directors or holders of 10% or more of the stock of or interest in
said corporation or trustees of said corporation and, if a foreign
corporation, the place of incorporation.
(4) If an association, the application statement shall show the
association's principal business address and telephone number, if
any, and shall show names and principal business or residence
addresses and telephone numbers of all members of the
association, unless they exceed 10 in number, in which case the
application shall so state, and the person applying may
alternatively list the names and principal business or residence
addresses and telephone numbers of the officers and directors who
are trustees of the association. If the association is part of a
multistate organization or association, the mailing address and
business location of its central office shall be given in addition to
the mailing address and business location of its local office.
(5) If a limited liability company, the names of all members, the
principal business address and telephone number of the limited
liability company and the state where such company is organized.
C. The name, address, date of birth, social security number and complete
driver's license information of the person or persons who will be
conducting the solicitation or otherwise peddling, soliciting or
canvassing.
D. A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be
sold or services to be performed and an explanation of the intended use
of the funds towards that purpose.
E. The name, mailing address, telephone number, social security number
and driver's license information of all individuals who will be in direct
charge or control of the solicitation of funds or of the peddling,
§ 40-4 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 40-4
1:320
soliciting or canvassing, but who otherwise will not take active part in
going from door to door and from street to street.
F. The time period within which the solicitation of funds or the peddling,
soliciting or canvassing is to be conducted, giving the date of the
commencement and the termination of the effort.
G. If a vehicle or vehicles are to be used in the solicitation, whether
charitable or noncharitable, a description of the same, including the
year, make and model, together with a license plate number,
registration certificate information and liability insurance information
or other satisfactory means of identification.
H. The names of any other municipalities in which the person applying has
peddled, solicited or canvassed within the previous 12 months.
I. A statement to the effect that if a license is granted, such license will
not be used as or represented to be an endorsement of the products,
services or activities of the licensee by the Borough or any of its officers
or employees.
J. The names of any officer, director, trustee, partner, stockholder,
peddler, solicitor, canvasser or member who has been convicted of a
felony or a misdemeanor or found liable in a civil action involving any
solicitation or transaction or enterprise found to be fraudulent within
the past 10 years, the nature of the offense or liability, the state where
the conviction or judgment occurred and the year of such conviction or
judgment. [Amended 10-23-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-09]
K. If the person applying is unable to provide any of the foregoing
information, an explanation of the reason why such information is not
available.
L. Signature. The application must be signed by the applicant if the person
applying is an individual; if the person applying is a partnership, by a
partner in charge; if the person applying is a corporation, association or
limited liability company, by an officer or member authorized to execute
such application. [Amended 10-23-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-09]
M. If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with
credentials establishing the exact relationship, and three photographs
of the applicant taken within 60 days immediately prior to the date of
filing of the application, which picture shall be two inches by two
inches, showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and
distinguishing manner.
N. The fingerprints of the applicant and the names of at least two reliable
property owners of the County of Bergen and State of New Jersey who
will certify as to the applicant's good character and business
respectability; in lieu of the names of references, such other available
evidence as to the good character and business responsibility of the
applicant as will enable an investigator to properly evaluate such
§ 40-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-4
1:321
§ 40-5. Investigation and issuance of license. [Amended 10-27-1992
by Ord. No. 707]
character and business responsibility. [Amended 10-23-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-09]
A. Upon receipt of such application, the Borough Clerk shall review the
same to determine if all information required by this article has been
provided on the application form. In the event that it has not, the
Borough Clerk shall notify the person applying that the application does
not provide complete information as required by the chapter and
specifically point out the information that has not been furnished and
which is required before a license can be issued.
B. Within 24 hours of receipt of a complete application, the Borough Clerk
shall forward the original to the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall
cause to be made an investigation of the information supplied on the
application and shall determine if the requirements of this article have
been met. [Amended 10-23-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-09]
(1) The Chief of Police, following his investigation and determination,
shall then return said application to the Borough Clerk, endorsing
thereon:
(a) That the application meets the requirements of this article; or
(b) That the application does not meet the requirements of this
article, and, in such case, the Chief of Police shall specify on
each application the reasons why the application does not meet
the requirements of the chapter.
(2) In reaching such determination, the Chief of Police shall be
governed by, but not necessarily be limited to, the following
criteria:
(a) Misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application.
(b) Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral
turpitude.
(c) A judgment of liability in a civil action involving any
solicitation, transaction or enterprise found to be fraudulent
within the last 10 years.
(d) Evidence that the applicant's activities have caused a breach of
the peace or unethical or dishonest business practices or have
been a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the
public.
(e) Evidence of fiscal irresponsibility or immoral character.
§ 40-4 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 40-5
1:322
§ 40-6. Separate licenses required; transferability.
A separate license must be obtained for every agent or employee working
for any person. Such license shall not be transferable from the person to
whom issued to any other person.
§ 40-7. Fees. [Amended 5-22-1979 by Ord. No. 534; 11-26-1991 by
Ord. No. 691; 10-27-1992 by Ord. No. 707]
The license fee shall be paid to the Borough Clerk as follows:
§ 40-8. Exhibition of license; form. [Amended 10-27-1992 by Ord.
No. 707]
(f) If the applicant has prior arrests, failure to list any prior
arrests on the application form.
C. Upon receipt from the Chief of Police, the Borough Clerk shall, as to
those applications that meet the requirements of this article, and upon
obtainment of the prescribed fee, execute and deliver to the applicant
his license. As to those applications that do not meet the requirements
of this article, the Borough Clerk shall deny the applicant a license in
accordance with the terms of this article.
D. Licenses shall be issued no later than seven days after receipt of a
complete application. [Added 10-23-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-09]
A. A charge of $50 shall be paid with the submission of the application to
cover the cost of processing each application ($25) and issuance of the
license ($25). This shall apply to each individual who makes application
for said license.
B. (Reserved)90
C. No license fee shall be prorated for any portion of the year. Licenses
shall not be transferable and shall expire at the end of the calendar
year.
A. All persons holding such a license must carry it on their person and
shall exhibit the same upon request of any resident at any time when
engaged in the activities regulated herein.
B. The Borough Clerk shall prescribe the form for said license. However,
each said license shall bear the signature of the Borough Clerk, the
name and address of the person registering, his or her license number,
the name of the person or agent and the issuance and expiration date of
the license. In addition, each license shall have prominently printed
thereon: "This license is not an endorsement of the products, services
90.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B, regarding fingerprinting fees, was repealed
10-23-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-09.
§ 40-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-8
1:323
§ 40-9. Regulations.
§ 40-10. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to the following:
or activities of the licensee by the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus or its officers
or employees."
A. No licensee, nor any person on his behalf, shall shout, cry out, blow a
horn, ring a bell or use any sound device, including any loud-speaking
radio or sound-amplifying system, upon any of the streets, parks or
other public or private places in the Borough without the prior approval
of the Ho-Ho-Kus Police Department.
B. The equipment used or employed by peddlers, hawkers and vendors of
ice cream, foods, beverages, confections and other related commodities
shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary manner and shall be subject
to the inspection of the Board of Health.
C. No licensee shall have any exclusive right to any one place upon any
sidewalk or any street, and he shall not be permitted to operate in any
congested area where his operation might impede or inconvenience the
public. For the purpose of this article, the judgment of a police officer
exercised in good faith shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the
area is congested or the public impeded or inconvenienced.
D. No person covered by this article shall sell or attempt to sell in
accordance with the terms this article before 10:00 a.m. or after sunset,
Monday through Saturday, or at any time on Sundays. The aforesaid
time limitation shall not apply to persons who are expressly invited into
homes by the occupant thereof. [Amended 10-23-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-09]
E. No vehicle shall be parked upon any public street at a fixed location for
the purpose of displaying or selling wares or merchandise.
F. No licensee shall violate §§ 40-18 to 40-20 of the Code, Ordinance No.
2016-10. [Added 10-23-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-09]
G. No licensee shall conduct himself in such manner as to become
objectionable to or annoy an occupant of any house. [Added
10-23-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-09]
H. No licensee shall call at any private residence which has a sign bearing
words to the effect that peddlers, solicitors or canvassers are not
invited. [Added 10-23-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-09]
I. No licensee shall attempt to peddle, solicit, canvass or distribute
merchandise or printed material without first having identified himself
as a peddler, solicitor or canvasser licensed with the Borough and
displaying his license. [Added 10-23-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-09]
§ 40-8 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 40-10
1:324
A. Employees of any public utility which is subject to regulation by the
State Board of Public Utility Commissioners; provided, however, that
such employee shall, at all times while he is working in the Borough,
display the identification badge or card issued by his employer.
B. The selling of any article at wholesale to dealers in such articles or the
delivery of milk, eggs, bread, newspapers or other necessary and
perishable articles of food or merchandise of a type commonly delivered
on a house-to-house basis at intervals of less than eight days.
C. Any person holding a special license for peddling, soliciting or
canvassing issued under the laws of the State of New Jersey or the
United States government, except that said person shall be subject to
the rules and regulations set forth in § 40-9 hereof.
D. Certain nonprofit organizations.
(1) Any nonprofit, religious, charitable, civic or veterans organization,
service club, volunteer fire or ambulance corps desiring to solicit or
have solicited in its name, by other than a profit-making
organization, money, donations or financial assistance of any kind
or desiring to sell or distribute any item of literature for which a fee
is charged, provided that they receive written approval of the
Borough Council and there is filed an application, in writing, with
the Borough Clerk containing the following information:
(a) The name and address of the organization.
(b) The purpose for which the special permit is requested.
(c) The names and addresses of the officers and directors of the
organization.
(d) The period during which solicitation is to be carried on and the
names and addresses of all persons intending to solicit/
canvass. [Amended 10-27-1992 by Ord. No. 707]
(e) The person responsible for any action in the Borough of Ho-Ho-
Kus shall advise the Chief of Police with whatever details he
may require prior to such action.
(2) The application shall be forwarded to the Chief of Police, who shall,
after investigation, endorse the application, and after approval by
the Borough Council, the application shall be returned to the
Borough Clerk, who shall issue a special permit, without charge,
for a specified period. The permit shall be issued to all persons
intending to solicit and/or canvass. [Amended 10-27-1992 by
Ord. No. 707]
(3) All persons who intend to solicit and/or canvass herein must carry
the special permit on their person and shall exhibit the same upon
request of any resident at any time when engaged in the activities
regulated herein. [Added 10-27-1992 by Ord. No. 707]
§ 40-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-10
1:325
§ 40-11. Revocation of license.
E. The requirements of § 40-7B of this article requiring the payment of a
license fee shall not apply to persons engaged in interstate commerce.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to determine whether or not
any such person is engaged in interstate commerce. All other provisions
of this article shall, however, be complied with by persons engaged in
interstate commerce.
F. Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary pertaining
to the permitted hours of solicitation and fingerprinting, such
provisions shall not apply to political solicitation and canvassing, nor to
persons or groups soliciting or canvassing on behalf of political persons
or groups. Such solicitation shall be permissible between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., daily and no fingerprinting shall be required.
Such persons or organizations shall comply with the provisions of
Subsection D hereof. This amendment is intended to assure compliance
by the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus with the mandate of the Supreme Court of
the United States as set forth in recent cases. [Added 7-28-1987 by
Ord. No. 608; amended 10-23-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-09]
A. Licenses issued under this article may be revoked by the Mayor and
Council, after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes:
(1) Misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application.
(2) Misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on activities regulated herein.
(3) Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
(4) Conducting the licensed business in an unlawful manner, in
violation of this article or in such a manner as to cause a breach of
the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general
welfare of the public.
(5) Conviction of violating §§ 40-18 to 40-20 of the Code, Ordinance
No. 2016-10. [Added 10-23-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-09]
B. Notice of hearing for revocation of a license shall be given, in writing,
setting forth the grounds of complaint and the time and place of
hearing. Such notice shall be served personally upon the licensee or
mailed by registered letter to the licensee at his last known address at
least five days prior to the date set for hearing.
C. A license may be suspended for not more than two weeks by the Chief of
Police without a hearing. No fees shall be returned for any unexpired
period of a license, whether revoked or not.
§ 40-10 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 40-12
1:326
§ 40-12. Appeal.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police or the Borough
Clerk in the denial of an application for a license as provided in § 40-5 of
this article shall have the right of appeal to the Mayor and Council. Such
appeal shall be taken by filing with the Council, within 14 days after notice
of the action complained of has been mailed to such person's last known
address, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds of appeal. The
Council shall set a time and place for hearing on such appeal, and notice of
such hearing shall be given to the applicant in the same manner as provided
in § 40-11B of this article for notice of hearing on revocation. The decision
and order of the Council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive.
§ 40-13. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus
to require any person seen peddling, soliciting or canvassing and who is
not known by such officer to be duly licensed to produce his license and
to enforce the provisions of this article against any person found to be
violating the same.
§ 40-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed $200 or by
imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both.
§ 40-15. Severability.
If any of the provisions of this article or its application to any person or
circumstances shall be held invalid, the remainder of the chapter or the
application of the provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not be
affected.
§ 40-16. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of this
article are hereby repealed.
§ 40-17. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon final passage and publication as provided
by law.
§ 40-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-17
1:327

ARTICLE II
Canvassing or Soliciting for Sale or Rental of Property
[Adopted 10-25-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-10]
§ 40-18. Do-not-knock registry.
Any owner or occupant of real property within the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus
who refuses to be canvassed or solicited for the sale or rental of his or
her property may enroll in the Borough's "no-knock" registry established
pursuant to the provisions promulgated by the Borough Administrator,
which are incorporated herein by reference.
§ 40-19. Discrimination prohibited.
No person shall engage in the following acts:
A. Promote, influence, or attempt to promote or influence a property
owner, occupant, or tenant to list for sale, sell or remove from a lease
real property by referring to race, color, sexual orientation, ethnicity, or
religious affliction of neighbors, prospective buyers or other occupants
or prospective occupants of real property.
B. Induce directly or indirectly, or attempt to induce directly or indirectly,
the sale or listing for sale of real property by representing that the
presence or anticipated presence of persons of any particular race,
religion, or national origin in the area has resulted or may result in:
(1) The lowering of property values.
(2) A change in the racial, religious, or ethnic composition of the block,
neighborhood, or area in which the property is located.
(3) An increase in criminal or antisocial behavior in the area.
(4) A decline in the quality of the schools serving the municipality.
C. Make any representations (or misrepresentation) concerning the listing
or sale of the anticipated listing for sale or the sale of any real property
in any residentially zoned areas for the purpose of inducing or
attempting to induce the sale or listing for sale of other real property in
such area.
D. Place a sign purporting to offer for sale any property that is not actually
for sale or rental.
E. Advertise for sale or rental property which is nonexistent or which is
not actually for sale or rental.
F. Engage in or hire or conspire with others to commit acts or activities of
any nature, the purpose of which is to coerce, cause panic, incite
unrest, create or play upon fear with the purpose of inducing or
attempting to induce the sale or listing for sale of real property.
§ 40-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 40-19
1:329
§ 40-20. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, corporation or entity convicted of violating any provision
of this article shall be subject to such fines and penalties as described in
Chapter 1, § 1-16, General penalty, of the Borough Code, with such penalty
being determined within the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge.
§ 40-21. Severability.
If any section, sentence or any other part of this article is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or
invalidate the remainder of this article but shall be confined in its effect to
the section, sentence or other part of this article directly involved in the
controversy which such judgment shall be rendered.
§ 40-22. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this article are hereby repealed, but only to the extent of such
inconsistencies.
G. To solicit or canvass any owner whose name and property address is
included on the list maintained by the Borough Clerk of persons
requesting that they not be canvassed or solicited.
H. To engage in any economic reprisal or any other form of intimidation
against any person because that person has filed a complaint, testified,
assisted or participated in any manner in any investigation, proceeding
or conference under the terms of this article.
I. To aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce any person to engage in any of the
practices forbidden by this article or to obstruct or prevent any person
from complying with the provisions of this article.
J. Refer, directly or indirectly or by implication to race, color, creed,
ethnicity, or sexual orientation in any advertisement or solicitation
offering real property for sale or rental.
K. Solicit or attempt to solicit the sale or rental or the listing for sale or
rental of real property without furnishing in written form to the owner
or occupier of such real property the name of the person or
organization soliciting such sale, rental or listing.
§ 40-19 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 40-22
1:330
Chapter 41
(RESERVED)
Chapter 42
PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Borough personnel — See Ch. 10.
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 16A.
Defined contribution retirement
program — See Ch. 16B.
Salaries — See Ch. 53.
Education for government officials — See Ch.
95.
§ 42-1. Personnel policies.
A. The Mayor and Council, by the adoption of this chapter, declares it to be
the policy of the Borough to establish fair and equitable standards for
the benefit of the employees of the Borough and to provide for the
proper administration of the governmental affairs of the Borough. The
Mayor, Borough Administrator, Personnel Officer and a Council member
will review and update annually the Risk Management Loss Control
Policy and the Employee Handbook. All employees are subject to and
shall comply with the Local Government Ethics Law.91 A copy of the
pertinent provisions of this law will be maintained on file with the
Personnel Officer. In its personnel notices and practices, it is the aim of
the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus:
(1) To seek and obtain for each position the best qualified person
available, without regard to race, creed, color or national origin.
(2) To provide all employees with proper supervision, instruction and
working conditions, so that they may render the best possible
service.
(3) To base promotion and job security on ability, performance
experience, character and job attitudes.
(4) To make the best possible use of employee skills and abilities.
(5) To consider qualified Borough employees first when there is an
opportunity for advancement.
(6) To expect each employee consistently to perform to the best of their
ability, to be conscientious in their work, to conduct themselves
appropriately and to treat others with respect and courtesy.
91.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.1 et seq.
§ 40-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-1
1:331
(7) To stimulate the self-betterment of each employee and to
encourage them to seek all possible means of increasing their value
to the community.
(8) To pay fair and adequate salaries or wages for each position and in
return to expect a consistently good job.
(9) To impress on employees that at all times they are serving the
taxpayers of the community.
(10) To promote in each employee a feeling of pride and job satisfaction
in the service of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
B. Declaration of policies. The Mayor and Council, by the adoption of this
chapter, declares it to be the policy of the Borough to establish fair and
equitable standards for the benefit of the employees of the Borough and
to provide for the proper administration of the governmental affairs of
the Borough.
(1) The Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus Policy on Discrimination and
Harassment.
(a) The Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus is desirous of promoting and
maintaining a working environment whereby all employees,
regardless of title and level of employment, are treated with
respect and courtesy. Discrimination or disrespectful behavior
by and toward another employee will not be tolerated.
(b) Discrimination, harassment or disrespect on the basis of race,
color, national origin, religion, marital status, political
affiliation, sex or sexual preference, age or disability are
prohibited by federal, state and Borough policies.
(2) Reporting of discrimination/harassment/wrongful acts.
(a) All employees have a right to formally or informally report any
and all statements, acts or behavior by a co-employee,
supervisory personnel or elected officials which is deemed or
perceived by the affected employee to be an improper
employment practice.
(b) Employees who may lodge a complaint can be assured that
their complaint will be taken seriously and will receive a
prompt and thorough investigation. Furthermore, employees'
complaints will be treated, to the extent possible, in a
confidential manner; however, anonymity or confidentiality
cannot be guaranteed if action is to be taken against the
alleged wrongdoer since the accused may be entitled to
confront the accuser as a matter of due process.
C. Applicability. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all employees
of the Borough. Refer to the Employee Organizational Chart for
applicability as to position and benefits.
§ 42-1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 42-1
1:332
§ 42-1.1. Adoption by resolution; enforcement. [Added 4-25-2006 by
Ord. No. 911]
§ 42-2. Personnel practices.
(1) Exempt personnel. The personnel of the Borough hereinafter
designated shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
(a) All members of citizen boards and committees.
(b) All Borough Engineers, Borough Attorney, Borough Auditor.
(c) Board of Adjustment Attorney, Planning Board Attorney.
(d) Animal Control Officer and any other contract employees.
(e) Positions involving seasonal or part-time employment,
including summer help.
(f) Volunteer personnel and personnel appointed to serve without
compensation.
(g) Professional consultants or counsel rendering professional
services.
(h) All members of the Council and the Mayor.
A. The governing body shall hereafter, by resolution, adopt and amend
from time to time personnel policies and procedures, including rules
concerning the hiring and termination of employees, terms and
conditions of employment and regulations required to comply with
applicable federal and state employment-related law. The personnel
policies and procedures adopted pursuant to said resolution(s) shall be
applicable to all employees of the Borough; however, if there is a
conflict between said personnel policies and procedures and any duly
adopted and lawful collective bargaining agreement, personnel services
contract or federal or state law, the terms and conditions of that
contract or law shall prevail, but in all other cases, the personnel
policies and procedures adopted pursuant to this chapter shall prevail.
B. The Personnel Officer shall be responsible to implement and enforce
the personnel policies and procedures adopted hereafter by resolution
authorized pursuant to this section.
A. Notification of job openings. Whenever a new position is created or
whenever a vacancy occurs which necessitates the hiring of a new
employee, the head of that department shall notify the Borough
Personnel Officer, in writing, and include the appropriate written job
description. The Personnel Officer shall have the authority to advertise
the job opening in any periodical or media he or she believes is most
likely to attract qualified applicants. The appointment shall be made to
the applicant whose attributes and qualifications best meet the
§ 42-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-2
1:333
Borough's needs. Original job applications shall be kept on file with the
Borough Personnel Officer.
B. Application for employment. An applicant for employment by the
Borough shall file an application provided by the Borough. The
application shall be filed with the Personnel Officer. The Personnel
Officer shall retain the original application and forward the copy to the
appropriate department head. The application shall become a part of
the personnel file of the applicant upon employment by the Borough.
(1) The department head will conduct a preliminary interview with
each applicant, and, if the department head concludes that the
applicant meets the qualifications for the opening, the applicant
will be referred to the Personnel Officer, who will conduct a
reference investigation and check of previous employment. If such
information if favorable, the Personnel Officer will arrange for the
applicant to be interviewed by the Borough Administrator.
(2) If the Borough Administrator and department head are in
agreement that the applicant is suitable to hire, the department
head will request the Personnel Officer to arrange a physical
examination for the applicant if required for the position.
(3) Following a favorable report on the physical examination, the
appointment of the applicant will be referred to the Borough
Council for final action, including the amount of salary to be paid.
(4) If approved by the Council, the Personnel Officer will so notify the
applicant, advise him or her of the starting date and arrange for the
applicant to report to the personnel office to complete the
necessary employment formalities. The Personnel Officer will
check all papers for completeness and set up a personnel file for
the employee.
(5) Each new employee shall be advised that they are on trial or
probation for the first six months of employment and shall be so
advised when appointed.
(6) Temporary and extra employees, when first employed, will
complete an application for employment, and a personnel file will
be set up in the personnel office.
C. Employment.
(1) Appointments. All employees, officers and department heads of the
Borough shall be appointed and/or promoted by the governing
body. No person shall be employed under the provisions of this
chapter unless the necessary budget appropriation for the office or
position has been adopted by the Mayor and Council in the
municipal budget and is specified in the Salary Ordinance.92
92.Editor's Note: See Ch. 53, Salaries.
§ 42-2 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 42-2
1:334
D. Physical examination. The Borough may require an applicant for
employment, prior to employment, to successfully pass a physical
examination and a drug and alcohol test consistent with the ADA to
assure that the work required to be performed will not cause injury to
the employee and that the person is physically fit to meet the
requirements of the employment. The Mayor and Council may require a
periodic physical examination of an employee's ability to perform the
duties of employment satisfactorily. All physical examinations shall be
performed at the expense of the Borough by a physician designated by
the Borough.
E. Hours of employment.
(1) Employees of the Borough shall ordinarily be required to work five
days a week from Monday to Friday. All full-time permanent
employees of the Borough shall work 35 to 40 hours per week, 52
weeks per year. Hours of employment shall be determined by the
Personnel Officer in conjunction with the department head when
not specified in the Salary Ordinance. The department head of each
department shall schedule the lunch period for each employee of
the department, provided that the lunch period shall not exceed
one hour. The schedule shall be arranged in a manner that will
require the Borough Hall to be open to the public continuously from
8:30 a.m. until 5:00 p.m., and the Department of Public Works from
7:00 a.m. to 3:30 p.m.
(2) All employees shall report in when coming on duty, including after
lunch and when called back for overtime; and report out when
going off duty, including before lunch and after overtime.
(Lunchtime and overtime requirements will not apply to
department heads.)
(3) All time records of nonsupervisory personnel shall be approved by
their supervisors. All supervisors' and department heads' records
shall be approved by the Personnel Officer.
(4) All changes in the approved Borough office hours must be
authorized in advance by the Mayor and Council by resolution.
(5) Employees other than department heads who work in excess of 40
hours in the workweek will be paid overtime at the rate of 1.5 times
their hourly rate. In computing overtime compensation, the nearest
1/2 hour shall be the smaller fraction of the hour to be reported.
(6) Overtime work will be kept to a minimum and, except in cases of
emergency, must be authorized in advance by the department head.
Records will be kept of all overtime and filed with the Personnel
Officer biweekly.
(7) Employees, with the exception of department heads, who incur an
undue amount of overtime in order to maintain certain services
may be granted equal time off in lieu of overtime compensation at
§ 42-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-2
1:335
such time as is arranged with and approved by the department
head. In exceptional instances when time off in lieu of overtime
payments cannot be taken because of necessary work, the
appropriate overtime payments may be granted by the Mayor and
Administrator.
F. Time and attendance.
(1) Accurate and complete time and attendance records will be
maintained by each departmental unit of the Borough. The head of
the department will certify to the accuracy of the time and
attendance records to the Personnel Officer.
(2) All Borough employees are to be at their assigned posts, ready for
work, as specified by the department head, unless on vacation, on
leave of absence or absent for good cause.
(3) Being punctual is of the utmost importance; consequently, any
lateness and the reason for it will be noted on the time record.
Recurring or chronic lateness will be referred to the Borough
Council for appropriate action.
G. Salary and benefits.
(1) The Mayor and Council shall determine the salary of every
employee subject to the provisions of this chapter by the adoption
of a Salary Ordinance annually.93 The Mayor and Council shall fix
the method of payment of salary in the Salary Ordinance to be
adopted. Where salary ranges are provided in the ordinance, actual
salary may be set by resolution.
(2) Employees other than department heads who work in excess of
their normal workweek may be granted equal time off in lieu of
overtime compensation. Such time must be arranged and approved
by the department head. There is separate pay for covering evening
meetings.
H. Performance evaluations are required to be submitted on an annual
basis by June 30 of each calendar year using the form adopted by the
Mayor and Council. [Amended 3-28-2000 by Ord. No. 824]
I. Holidays.
(1) Employees subject to the provisions of this chapter shall be entitled
to 13 paid holidays per year. The following official holidays with pay
shall be observed by the Borough: New Year's Day, Martin Luther
King Day, Abraham Lincoln's Birthday, Presidents' Day, Good
Friday, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus
Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day, the Friday after Thanksgiving
93.Editor's Note: See Ch. 53, Salaries.
§ 42-2 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 42-2
1:336
§ 42-3. Vacations.
Day and Christmas Day, unless otherwise specified by union
contract.
(2) In the event that a holiday occurs on a Sunday, it shall be observed
on the following Monday. In the event that a holiday occurs on a
Saturday, it shall be observed on the preceding Friday. If an
employee is required to perform services for the Borough on a
holiday, the employee shall be compensated as set forth in
Subsection E, Hours of employment. When a holiday occurs during
an employee's vacation or sick leave, the employee shall use the
holiday in place of the vacation or sick day.
(3) The Mayor and Council may, by resolution, grant such additional
holidays as deemed appropriate and may substitute any of the days
in the year in place of official holidays listed above.
(4) The above provisions relating to holidays shall not apply to
policemen regularly assigned to duty on these holidays. However,
all holidays must be taken during the current year and may not be
accumulated.
J. Abolishment of office or position. The Mayor and Council may abolish
an office or position and reduce the number of personnel employed by
the Borough for reasons of economy or efficiency.
K. Exempt personnel. The personnel of the Borough hereinafter
designated shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
(1) All members of citizen boards and committees.
(2) All Borough Engineers, Borough Attorney, Borough Auditor.
(3) Board of Adjustment Attorney, Planning Board Attorney.
(4) Animal Control Officer and any other contract employees.
(5) Positions involving seasonal or part-time employment, including
summer help.
(6) Volunteer personnel and personnel appointed to serve without
compensation.
(7) Professional consultants or counsel rendering professional
services.
(8) All members of the Council and the Mayor.
A. Annual vacations with pay are authorized for full-time or permanent
employees, except those subject to labor agreements with the Borough,
on the following basis:
§ 42-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-3
1:337
(1) During the first calendar year (January 1 through December 31) of
service, or part thereof, the employee shall be entitled to five
workdays as vacation if employed before April 1. Thereafter as
follows:
During Calendar Year of
Service Vacation Days
2 through 5 10
6 13
7 14
8 15
9 16
10 and 11 17
12 and 13 18
14 and 15 19
16 and 17 20
18 and 19 21
20 or more 22
(2) In the event of resignation or retirement, vacation days shall be
prorated.
B. Military leave. Any full-time employee who is a member of the National
Guard, Naval Militia, Air National Guard, or a reserve component of any
of the Armed Forces of the United States and is required to engage in
field training shall be granted a military leave of absence with pay for
the period of such training as is authorized by law. The paid leave of
absence shall be in addition to his or her vacation.
C. Employees, subject to the approval of the department head, may take
vacation leave from time to time during the fiscal year in half days,
provided that the department head shall advise the personnel officer by
written memorandum of said vacation arrangement prior to the
employee taking said vacation. Employees shall be required to take the
annual vacation allotted to each employee during the fiscal year. The
practice of banking vacation time by using compensation time for
vacation time is prohibited unless approval is authorized in advance by
resolution of the Borough Council. [Amended 2-24-2009 by Ord. No.
944]
D. If an official holiday falls during an employee's vacation period, an
additional day of vacation will be granted in lieu of the holiday.
E. No more than five vacation days may be carried over from one year to
the next. [Amended 3-28-2000 by Ord. No. 824]
F. Temporary or part-time employees are not eligible for vacation benefits.
§ 42-3 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 42-3
1:338
§ 42-4. Absences.
G. In order that employees may receive the maximum benefit from their
vacations, not more than five days of vacation may be taken one or two
days at a time.
H. All vacations must be scheduled and approved by the department head
or supervisor. It is his or her responsibility to schedule individual
vacations so that activities of the Borough will be carried on with a
minimum of interruption and inconvenience. Employees with seniority
will be given first preference in assignment of vacations. All vacations
over two weeks in length must be approved by the Personnel Officer or
Mayor and Council.
I. Unless specifically authorized by the Borough Council in advance, extra
compensation will not be allowed in lieu of unused vacation leave.
J. Upon the death of an employee, the Borough will pay to an individual
designated in writing by the employee and filed with the Borough
Administrator, or the estate if no written designation has been filed, any
unused vacation for the calendar year in which the death of the
employee occurs.
K. The department head shall annually arrange a vacation schedule for
each employee of the department. The department head shall file a
vacation schedule with the Personnel Officer. The department head may
alter the vacation schedule during the fiscal year, if necessary for the
efficient operation of the department. The department head shall file
the altered vacation schedule with the Personnel Officer. An employee
subject to the provisions of this chapter shall be entitled to no credit for
all full-time service in computing the years of service, if said service had
been interrupted by resignation. Requests for vacation must have
department head approval.
A. Absences from duty are classified "illness," "excused absences,"
"absence without leave" or "vacations" and are to be so noted on the
time report. All authorized leaves of absence will be recorded, together
with the reason for the same.
B. It is the responsibility of each employee to notify their department head
without delay if they will be absent from or delayed in reaching their
assigned post. If unable to reach the department head, the Personnel
Officer should be notified. Failure to report when absent is a serious
offense which cannot be tolerated and may lead to disciplinary action or
dismissal by the Borough Council.
C. In the event of a death in the employee's immediate family or the death
of a close relative residing with the employee, the department head may
grant up to a three-day leave of absence with pay. For the purpose of
this chapter, "member of the immediate family" is interpreted as
§ 42-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-4
1:339
§ 42-5. Sick leave.
meaning father, mother, husband, wife, child, sister, brother or close
relative residing with the employee.
D. A leave of absence without pay may be requested by any employee who
will submit, in writing, all facts bearing on the request to their
department head and Council Committee, who will forward the request
to the Borough Council with their recommendations. The Borough
Council will consider each case on its merits and, without establishing a
precedent, make such decision as its judgment dictates at the next
scheduled Council meeting. No leave of absence without pay will be
granted for more than six months.
A. "Sick leave" is hereby defined to mean absence from post of duty of an
employee because of illness, accident or exposure to contagious
disease.
B. Absence of an employee on account of sickness or disability in their
immediate family which necessitates them remaining home to care for
the patient may be charged as sick leave when substantiated and
approved by their department head.
C. In all cases of reported illness or disability, the Borough reserves the
right to send a medical physician to examine and report on the
condition of the patient to the Mayor and Council.
D. When the absence on account of illness or disability does not exceed
three successive workdays, the employee's statement of the cause may
be accepted without a supporting statement from their attending
physician.
E. Every absence on account of illness or disability in excess of three
workdays must be certified by a written statement from the attending
physician, using the form provided by the Borough for that purpose.
The Borough also reserves the right to waive this requirement or to
require the employees to be examined and certified as fit for duty
before returning to work by a medical physician designated by the
Borough Council.
F. During protracted periods of illness or disability, the Borough may
require interim reports on the condition of the patient at weekly periods
from the attending physician and/or physician designated by the
Borough Council. When under medical care, employees are expected to
conform to the instructions of the attending physician if they wish to
qualify for salary payment during such period of illness of disability.
G. Payment of wages. [Amended 3-28-2000 by Ord. No. 824]
(1) The rules which follow apply to the payment of salaries or wages
during periods of illness or disability of full-time or permanent
employees. Temporary employees are not entitled to compensation
§ 42-4 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 42-5
1:340
for such absence. Full-time or permanent employees of the
Borough shall be entitled to the following periods of sick leave with
full pay, with the provision, however, that in the event that said sick
leave is not used in any one year, up to 20 days of such leave may
accumulate for use in future years, up to a maximum of 135 days'
accumulated sick leave:
(a) Six months to five years of continuous service: per annum sick
leave of 10 workdays.
(b) Five to 10 years of continuous service: per annum sick leave of
20 workdays.
(c) Ten or more years of continuous service: per annum sick leave
of 30 workdays.
(2) No employee shall be entitled to take sick pay in lieu of sick leave,
with the exception of a member who retires after 25 years of
service. Such a member shall, upon retirement, be entitled to a
lump sum payment for accumulated sick days at their rate of salary
existing at the time of retirement as follows:
(a) Full pay for sick days accumulated to a maximum of 135 days,
provided that no sick leave was taken during the calendar year
prior to retirement.
(b) In the event that sick leave was taken during the calendar year
prior to retirement, the number of sick days taken as sick leave
shall be deducted from the maximum sick days accumulated
(maximum 135 days) to determine the number of days to which
compensation will be received as a lump sum retirement
payment.
H. Sick leave with pay will not be allowed under the following conditions:
(1) If the employee, when under medical care, fails to carry out the
orders of the attending physician.
(2) If, in the opinion of the medical physician designated by the
Borough Council, the employee is ill or disabled because of selfimposed
contributory causes or actions occasioned by bad habits.
(3) If, in the opinion of the medical physician designated by the
Borough Council, the disability or illness is not of sufficient severity
to justify the employee's absence from duty.
(4) If, in the opinion of the medical physician designated by the
Borough Council, the employee on sick leave can be assigned to
other temporary Borough work of dissimilar nature than their
regular job and the employee refuses to perform the same.
§ 42-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-5
1:341
§ 42-6. Absence due to disability caused in performance of duties.
(5) If the employee does not cooperate with the medical physician
designated by the Borough Council and permit examination at the
Borough's convenience relative to their return to Borough work.
I. The recommendations of the medical physician designated by the
Borough Council, as well as those of the attending physician, as to the
justification of the absence from duty on account of disability or illness,
or of the fitness of the employee to return to duty, shall be considered
by the Borough Council. In the event that there is a disagreement, the
Borough Council will then make a decision in the matter.
J. If an employee is in need of frequent and/or weekly and/or biweekly
medical sessions and requests to be excused early, or at any time during
the work day, from assigned duties, then such requests must be made,
in writing, from the medical doctor or the physiotherapist or the
appropriate certified health care provider who is providing the
treatment. Such request must state the approximate time frame for the
appointments, the approximate number of visits required and that the
appointments could not be held at any other time and why. Employees,
at times, are faced with a decision regarding elective surgery. Elective
surgery should be scheduled for departmental nonpeak periods, and
the dates must be preapproved by the department head.
K. An employee shall be entitled to no credit for unused sick time for prior
services, if the employee's service to the Borough has been previously
terminated for any reason.
A. An employee who is certified as absent on account of a disability or
accident caused in the usual course of their employment and directly in
line of duty shall not have such absence charged against their sick
leave. All other provisions regarding absence on account of sickness or
disability apply.
B. If the injury is sufficiently severe to keep an employee off duty and they
have given notice of the disability or accident in accordance with this
chapter and the applicable laws and regulations, they shall receive
payment of such amount so that the payment from the Borough, made
together with payments received under the Workers' Compensation
Act, will equal their regular salary for the first three months and 1/2
their regular salary for the next three months, provided that they are
receiving payments under the Workers' Compensation Act. Should the
injury extend beyond six months and the employee is then unable to
return to work, the employee, at their option, may use sick leave and/or
vacation time.
C. Nothing herein contained shall be considered to be in derogation of or
restrictive of any statute now in effect limiting the period during which
municipal employees may be compensated for leave on account of
§ 42-5 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 42-6
1:342
§ 42-7. Tenure.
Any employee hired prior to the effective date of this chapter who acquires
five or more years of consecutive service with the Borough shall not be
removed from Borough employment except for good cause shown after a
fair and impartial hearing, but shall continue to be employed during good
behavior and efficiency. This provision shall not apply to any employee who
is employed for a fixed term or who is given tenure of office by statute or
other ordinance. This section shall not apply to any employee hired after the
effective date hereof.
§ 42-8. Probation.
Any employee who is employed by the Borough shall be on probation for a
period of six months after the date of their employment, unless otherwise
covered by contract. In the event that the Borough Council is not satisfied
with such employee for any reason whatsoever, such employee may be
discharged at any time within such period.
§ 42-9. Disciplinary procedures.
disability or illness, but these provisions are to be construed and
administered in conjunction therewith.
D. An employee who is injured while working must make an immediate
report of such injury to their department head. All injuries, no matter
how slight, must be reported within eight hours. If the employee is
injured to such an extent that they require medical attention, the
employee shall immediately go to an authorized doctor/medical facility
for treatment. Department heads shall be responsible for notifying the
Personnel Officer and Borough Clerk. The Borough Clerk shall notify
the insurance company and the certifying agent of the appropriate
retirement system (where applicable) of all injuries reported by
employees under their supervision and shall make certain that the
proper written reports are made.
E. An employee shall reimburse the Borough for moneys he or she may
receive as workers compensation from any legal settlement or
judgment against the person(s) or entities responsible for the injury.
F. In the event that an employee shall sustain an injury which renders him
unable to return to work for the first three months thereafter, the
employee shall receive his regular net salary from the Borough, less any
amounts received from worker's compensation benefits, disability, nofault
or any other type or insurance coverage. For the next three
months thereafter, he shall receive 1/2 of his net salary from the
Borough, less any amounts received from workers' compensation
benefits, disability, no-fault or any other type of insurance coverage. To
the extent that any such salary benefits have been paid by the Borough,
the Borough shall have a lien against any recovery, whether by way of
settlement or verdict, against any person responsible for said injury.
§ 42-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-9
1:343
A. It shall be the policy of the Borough that employee discipline be part of
an orderly sequential process having as its guiding principles the
following:
(1) It shall be nondiscriminatory in the broadest sense.
(2) It shall be fair and equitable.
(3) It shall be part of an orderly, written process and provide due
process to all employees.
(4) No person shall be subject to discipline in retaliation for having
reported, in good faith, wrongdoing by another. This policy shall be
administered in accordance with the New Jersey "Whistleblower's
Law," i.e., New Jersey Conscientious Employee Protection Act,
N.J.S.A. 34:19-1 et seq.
(5) The procedure set forth in this chapter shall be required prior to
any disciplinary action against an employee, but any violations or
omissions of said procedure not affecting an employee's
substantive rights shall not bar said disciplinary action.
B. Any employee may be suspended with pay by the Borough
Administrator for cause until such times as the matter can be fully
investigated and determined. Any employee may appeal a disciplinary
action imposed under this section to the Borough Council.
(1) Any employee may be suspended from office by the Borough
Council or any department head for cause until such time as the
matter can be fully investigated and determined.
C. Causes. The causes sufficient for disciplinary action shall include but
not be limited to the following:
(1) Neglect of duty.
(2) Poor performance.
(3) Absence without leave or failure to report after authorized leave
has expired or after such leave has been disapproved or revoked.
(4) Insubordination or serious breach of discipline.
(5) Violation of alcohol and/or drug program.
(6) Conviction of a criminal act.
(7) Disobedience of the department rules, regulations and directives.
(8) Conduct unbecoming a public employee.
(9) Violation of sexual harassment section.94
94.Editor's Note: See § 42-1B.
§ 42-9 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 42-9
1:344
D. All disciplinary actions against Borough employees, except for
employees who are governed by a separate ordinance or contract and
employees whose removal or suspension is controlled by a separate
statute of the State of New Jersey, shall proceed as follows:
(1) When a department head believes that an employee is not
conforming to the letter or spirit of the Borough policies and rules
or to specific instruction given them or has acted improperly, the
department head should first privately discuss the matter with the
employee concerned in order to obtain the employee's view of the
matter.
(2) The department head and the Personnel Officer should, if possible,
then obtain assurance that there will not be a repetition of the
incident, or they may exercise disciplinary action as follows:
(a) Informal private, verbal reproof by supervisor.
(b) Written memorandum of censure from supervisor sent to the
Borough Administrator.
(c) Refer to Borough Administrator.
E. Procedure.
(1) Informal. An employee may be sent home for the balance of a day
and suspended for an additional period not exceeding five
additional days without pay by the department head and the
Borough Administrator in the event of an offense set forth in
Subsection C. Any other form of discipline involving loss of pay
shall be commenced through formal proceedings as herein
provided for. An employee disciplined informally as above may
appeal as hereinafter provided for to have the lost days of pay
restored and the informal disciplinary action expunged from or
modified within the employee's personnel file.
(2) Formal procedures.
(a) Complaint.
[1] An employee charged with any of the violations set forth
above shall be notified, in writing, of the violation within
30 days of the awareness of the same by the governing
body or superior of the alleged violation, which charge
shall state the specific facts of the violation, including
dates and time of the offense, and said charges shall be
signed by the departmental superior or Personnel Officer
proffering the charge against an employee. An employee
may be suspended until disposition of the charge prepared
against them in a formal complaint.
[2] In the event that it appears to the Borough Administrator
desirable to do so, the matter may be referred to the
§ 42-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-9
1:345
appropriate committee of the Borough Council for review
and/or such action taken as to warranted by the facts. No
employee who has tenure shall be removed from office
or employment without just cause, and then only after
written charge or charges of the cause of complaint shall
have been proffered against such officer or employee,
signed by the person or persons making such charge or
charges and filed with the Borough Administrator.
(b) Hearing.
[1] An employee shall be entitled to a full hearing on all
charges before the Mayor and Council. The hearing shall
be a formal proceeding. The employee shall receive notice
by certified mail of the date, time and place of said
hearing. The Personnel Officer shall fix a date, time and
place of said hearing within 30 days after the filing of
formal charges against said employee. The employee may
request the hearing to be held in a public session in
accordance with the Open Public Meetings Act (N.J.S.A.
10:4-6 et seq.).
[2] A written report of the charge or charges shall be privately
examined by the Borough Council upon reasonable notice
to the person charged, it being the intent of this chapter to
give every person against whom a charge or charges for
any cause may be proffered a fair trial upon said charge or
charges and every reasonable opportunity to make their
defense.
[3] All charges shall be heard by the Mayor and Council sitting
as the authority to make a determination of said charges.
Testimony of all witnesses shall be taken under oath. The
Borough Attorney or other attorney designated by the
governing body shall prosecute the charges against the
employee, and the employee may be represented by
counsel at the hearing at his or her own expense. The
Personnel Officer may order that a stenographic record be
made of the proceedings, or the employee may request, in
writing, that a stenographic record be made, at the
employee's expense, provided that the employee or his or
her counsel shall inform the Personnel Officer, in writing,
at least one week prior to the date set for the hearing.
(c) Determination.
[1] The governing body shall, after completion of the hearing,
make a determination, in writing, within 10 days after the
completion of the hearing. The Personnel Officer shall
notify the employee, in writing, of said action.
§ 42-9 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 42-9
1:346
§ 42-10. Termination of service.
§ 42-11. Retirement.
§ 42-12. Administrative records.
[2] Disciplinary actions against employees shall be in the
following forms:
[a] Formal reprimand from Mayor and Council.
[b] Suspension from duty without pay.
[c] Transfer or demotion.
[d] Termination or such other action as the Borough
Council deems appropriate under the circumstances.
(d) Appeal. Any employee may appeal a disciplinary action
imposed under Subsection C of this section to the Council.
A. All employees will, when leaving the service of the Borough, complete
and sign the termination receipt when receiving their final
compensation. This receipt will be filed in the employee's personnel file
as evidence of the satisfaction of all claims against the Borough.
B. Upon termination of service, no cash payment for unused sick leave will
be made.
A. All qualified Borough employees must be enrolled in the Public
Employees Retirement System Plan of New Jersey or the Police and
Firemen's Retirement System and are subject to the requirements and
provisions of the plans. The employee's contribution to the plan is
deducted from the salary paid to such qualified employee and remitted
to the state, as prescribed by law. The Borough contribution for such
employees is determined by and subsequently remitted to the state in
accordance with the provisions of the law.
B. Borough employees having completed the required number of years of
service and having attained the specified age may apply for retirement
as provided for by the plans. An employee having attained the age
mandatory to retire under the plans must apply for retirement under
the plans.
C. All information regarding the retirement plans may be obtained from
the office of the Personnel Officer.
A. No part of the pay due an employee for work done shall be withheld
from their check except as required by law or as authorized in writing
by the employee.
§ 42-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-12
1:347
§ 42-13. Medical insurance.
B. Employees may not accept donations or other gratuities, contributions,
etc., that would in any sense put the employer under obligation to the
person or persons making the donations, etc.
C. Engaging in private employment by any full-time employee in off-duty
time is not encouraged, and such work will not be permitted in cases
where its performance conflicts with the Borough's interest and/or
reduces the employee's ability to adequately perform their duty of
employment with the Borough.
D. The Borough Council reserves the right to add, change, interpret or
eliminate personnel policies, practices and rules whenever it appears to
be in the best interest of the Borough to do so.
E. A separate personnel file will be established and maintained for each
employee of the Borough.
F. Personnel files are confidential records and will be maintained in the
office of the Borough Administrator in a locked file, and nothing shall be
removed therefrom. The files will be in two groups: active, representing
employees on the payroll; and closed, for employees no longer in the
services of the Borough.
G. Each active personnel file will contain the following information:
summary of personnel actions, including a record of salary increases,
promotions, transfers, etc., and will contain correspondence
memoranda or other pertinent material directly concerning the
employee.
A. The Borough shall furnish to each eligible employee medical insurance
coverage for the employee and members of their immediate families,
and the entire premium shall be paid by the Borough.
B. The Borough shall furnish to each eligible employee dental insurance
coverage for the employee and members of their immediate families,
and the entire premium shall be paid by the Borough.
C. Subject to and consistent with N.J.S.A. 40A:10-23, when an employee
retires on a regular retirement or disability retirement under the New
Jersey Public Employees Retirement System, such eligible employee
shall be entitled to a maximum of $1,500 per annum from the Borough
of Ho-Ho-Kus to pay for his or her own medical insurance program. In
the event that the employee who is retired is employed by another
employer where medical insurance is supplied, then during such
employment the retiree is not eligible to receive this benefit. The
retiree shall provide the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus annually with a
certification indicating such lack of coverage and also a certification of
purchase of the aforementioned medical insurance on his or her own.
This benefit shall terminate 10 years after the member's retirement.
This benefit will commence upon retirement and end 10 years after
§ 42-12 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 42-13
1:348
§ 42-14. Severability. [Amended 9-23-2014 by Ord. No. 1032]
If any portion of this chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate
the remainder of this chapter but shall be confined in its effect to the
provision directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall
have been rendered.
§ 42-15. Repealer. [Amended 9-23-2014 by Ord. No. 1032]
All other ordinances of the Borough, or parts thereof, which are in conflict
with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
§ 42-16. When effective. [Amended 9-23-2014 by Ord. No. 1032]
This chapter shall take effect upon passage and publication as required by
law.
Chapter 43
PET WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cats — See Ch. 13.
Dogs — See Ch. 18.
Hazardous waste materials — See Ch. 28.
Improper disposal of waste — See Ch. 32.
§ 43-1. Purpose.
This chapter establishes requirements for the proper disposal of pet solid
waste in the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus so as to protect public health, safety and
welfare and prescribes penalties for failure to comply.
§ 43-2. Definitions; word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein, unless their use
in the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
IMMEDIATE — The pet solid waste is removed at once, without delay.
retirement, whether used or not. This subsection is only applicable to
employees of the Borough hired before the effective date hereof. It
is not applicable to employees hired after the effective date of this
subsection. [Amended 9-23-2014 by Ord. No. 1032]
§ 42-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-2
1:349
OWNER/KEEPER — Any person who shall possess, maintain, house or
harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or not the
owner of such pet.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PET — A domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance animal)
kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SOLID WASTE — Waste matter expelled from the bowels of the pet;
excrement.
PROPER DISPOSAL — Placement in a designated waste receptacle, or other
suitable container, and discarding in a refuse container which is regularly
emptied by the municipality or some other refuse collector, or disposal into
a system designed to convey domestic sewage for the proper treatment and
disposal.
§ 43-3. Disposal requirements.
All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly
dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited on any property, public or
private, not owned or possessed by that person.
§ 43-4. Exemptions.
Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability assistance animal
shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter while such animal is
being used for that purpose.
§ 43-5. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department and/or Health
Officer of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
§ 43-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000.
§ 43-7. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this chapter is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this chapter to be
unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause or reason shall not affect
any other portion of this chapter.
§ 43-2 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 43-8
1:350
§ 43-8. Repealer.
All other ordinances of this Borough, or parts thereof, which are in conflict
with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
§ 43-9. When effective.
This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption and
any publication as may be required by law.
Chapter 44
PLUMBING CODE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Illicit connections — See Ch. 31A.
Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
55.
Sewers — See Ch. 56.
Water and water rates — See Ch. 81.
§ 44-1. Code established.
A code regulating the installation, maintenance, repair and control of
buildings, and the connection thereof with outside sewers, cesspools or
other receptacles, regulating the practice of plumbing and the issuance
of licenses to practice plumbing is hereby established pursuant to the
provisions of P.L. 1948, c. 275.95 A copy of said code is annexed thereto and
made a part hereof without the inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ 44-2. Title.
The said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Plumbing Code of New Jersey (1953)."
§ 44-3. Copies on file.
Three copies of the said "Plumbing Code of New Jersey (1953)," similarly
marked, have been placed on file in the office of the Clerk of this
municipality upon the introduction of this chapter and will remain on file in
such office for the use and examination of the public.
§ 44-4. Fees.
In connection with the provisions of this chapter and the code hereby
established and adopted as part hereof, the following fees shall be charged
and received:
95.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 26:3-31.1 et seq.
§ 43-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-4
1:351
§ 44-5. Master plumber's license.
When an application for a master plumber's license is made by a qualified
person who is a member or an officer of a firm, corporation or partnership,
said person shall be named as a constituted representative of the business,
and all plumbing work done shall be under the direct supervision of the
licensed man. When said licensed man no longer has a recognized place in
the business mentioned or severs his connections with same, said master
plumber's license becomes void.
§ 44-6. Permit to install plumbing in certain types of buildings.
A permit shall be required to install plumbing, as provided under Section
7-7, including Section 7-7-4, of the code, for all dwellings, schools, public
buildings, manufacturing plants and warehouses (N.J.S.A. 26:3-33).
§ 44-7. Permit issued to owner.
When a permit is issued to an owner to install plumbing work as provided
under Section 14-1.2 of the code, said owner shall comply with all the
requirements of the code applicable to master plumbers.
A. For the examination of any applicant as master plumber, $50; for the
examination of any applicant as journeyman plumber, $2.
B. For the issuance and annual renewal of a license as master plumber,
$10; for the issuance and annual renewal of a license as journeyman
plumber, $1.
C. For the issuance of a courtesy master plumber's license, $10.
D. For the filing of plans for proposed plumbing work, $2.
E. For the issuance of a permit for proposed plumbing construction,
alteration or plumbing work, $2; for each fixture or the replacement of
a fixture proposed in the approved plan for construction or alteration,
$1 per fixture.
F. For each reinspection of plumbing caused by the failure of a licensee to
comply with the provisions of the code or permit issued, $2.
G. For the inspection of gas piping, per outlet, $1.
H. For the inspection of a water heater and tankless heater, $2.
I. For the issuance of a permit and inspection for the new house sewer
connection to the street, $10.
J. For the issuance of a permit and inspection for renewal of the house
sewer connections to the street, $5.
K. For a percolation test for a new septic tank, $10.
§ 44-4 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 44-8
1:352
§ 44-8. Permit issued to member of firm.
When a permit is issued to a person or a member of a firm, corporation
or partnership to install plumbing work, appliances or any equipment that
is to be connected to the water and sewer system, as provided by under
Section 14.1.3 of the code, said person or member of the firm, corporation
or partnership shall first comply with all requirements and regulations of
the code applicable to a master plumber.
§ 44-9. Courtesy license.
A master plumber may receive a courtesy license with one plumbing permit
if he is qualified under Section 14.8.1 and complies with Section 14.11.1.
Upon completion of said plumbing installation, the courtesy license
becomes void. The plumbing bond will continue in effect for one year.
§ 44-10. Pipe size, depth and material.
When a permit is issued for plumbing work under Section 9.4.1, pipe size for
all horizontal lines of building drains and sewers, where one or more water
closets are connected inside of the building, shall be not less than four
inches in size. Care must be taken on the depth of a basement in conjunction
with the level of the septic tank or sewer in the street for the outgoing sewer
pipe. The pipe from the building to the septic tank or street sewer is to be of
not less than four-inch extra-heavy cast-iron soil pipe or four-inch transite
pipe in five-foot lengths.
§ 44-11. Rules and regulations of Board of Health.
The Board of Health may adopt such rules and regulations which it deems
necessary in connection with this chapter and the code established
hereunder which do not conflict therewith.
§ 44-12. Public utilities.
Nothing in this chapter contained shall apply to any public utility subject to
regulation by the Board of Public Utility Commissioners of the State of New
Jersey, nor to any of the employees while engaged in the ordinary conduct of
its business A permit shall be obtained by such utility for the installation of
new equipment and plumbing connections, but no permit shall be necessary
with regard to maintenance or repair.
§ 44-13. Copper pipe.
When a permit is issued for plumbing work under Section 3-4, all waste,
vents and water pipes of copper shall not be less in weight than Type "L."
§ 44-14. Repealer.
All ordinances and parts of ordinances inconsistent with any of the
provisions of this chapter and the code established hereunder are hereby
§ 44-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-14
1:353
repealed to the extent of such inconsistency and otherwise shall remain in
full force and effect.
§ 44-15. Severability.
In the event that any section, sentence or clause of this chapter or code
shall be declared unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction,
such declaration shall not in any manner prejudice the enforcement of the
remaining provisions.
§ 44-16. Right of entry.
Any officer of the Health Department or Plumbing Inspector shall have
the right, upon identifying himself, to enter in or upon premises at any
reasonable hour of the day or night to determine or ascertain whether a
nuisance exists or whether the provisions of this chapter are being followed
and obeyed.
§ 44-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, owner or lessees, or occupants, firm or corporation
violating any of the provisions of this chapter or the "Plumbing Code of New
Jersey (1953)," made a part hereof, shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a
penalty of not less than $2 nor more than $100 for each offense.
§ 44-18. When effective.
This chapter and the code established therein shall take effect 30 days after
the first publication of the chapter in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 26:3-69.6.
Chapter 46
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel rules and regulations — See Ch. 42. Salaries — See Ch. 53.
§ 44-14 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 44-18
1:354
ARTICLE I
Establishment
§ 46-1. Police Department established.
A Police Department is hereby established in the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus
under the name of the "Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus Police Department."
§ 46-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-1
1:355

ARTICLE II
Formation and Rank
§ 46-2. Composition; vacancies; compensation; duties. [Amended
3-23-2010 by Ord. No. 961]
§ 46-3. Chief of Police; powers and duties. [Amended 11-25-2014 by
Ord. No. 1033]
The Borough shall appoint a Chief of Police who shall have all of the powers
set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118 and who shall be directly responsible to the
"appropriate authority" for the efficiency and routine day-to-day operations
of the Police Department.
A. Composition. The Ho-Ho-Kus Police Department shall consist of the
following personnel to be appointed to these positions by the Mayor and
confirmed by the Borough Council in accordance with § 46-6:
[Amended 6-26-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-07]
(1) Not more than one Chief of Police.
(2) Not more than one Captain.
(3) Not more than one Lieutenant.
(4) Not more than six Sergeants.
(5) Not more than nine patrol officers.
B. Vacancies. Designation of the foregoing members shall not make
appointment thereto at any time mandatory, and vacancies therein may
occur from time to time.
C. Review of Table of Organization. There shall be review of the Ho-Ho-
Kus Police Department Table of Organization at least every two years by
the Chief of Police, Police Commissioners and Municipal Attorney to
ensure that it meets the needs of the Borough, its residents, businesses
and visitors and is in compliance with all relevant statutes and judicial
decisions. Failure to conduct such a review shall not render this section
invalid.
D. Compensation. The compensation for each member of the Ho-Ho-Kus
Police Department shall be set forth in the annual Salary Ordinance and
the implementing salary resolution.96
E. Duties. The duties and responsibilities of the members of the Police
Department are set forth in the "Police Department of the Borough of
Ho-Ho-Kus Manual of Rules and Regulations," dated March 2003, as
adopted pursuant to § 46-20 herein.
96.Editor's Note: See Ch. 53, Salaries.
§ 46-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-4
1:357
§ 46-4. Seniority. [Amended 6-23-1987 by Ord. No. 606]
Seniority in the Department is established first by rank and second by time
served in rank.
§ 46-5. Shifts; officer in charge. [Amended 6-23-1987 by Ord. No.
606]
A shift designates one of the basic time units for assignment of personnel,
usually specified in terms of eight-hour periods. The senior ranking officer
on duty on any shift shall be in charge of the Department during the shift
unless relieved by an officer of higher rank, who shall thereupon sign entry
in the blotter to that effect.
§ 46-4 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 46-5
1:358
ARTICLE III
Appointments
§ 46-6. General procedure.
Appointments to the Police Department shall be made by the Mayor, upon
the recommendation of the Chief and confirmation by the Borough Council.
§ 46-7. Physical examination.
Applicants for appointment to the Police Department shall be required to
take and pass a physical examination.
§ 46-8. Personnel qualifications. [Amended 6-23-1987 by Ord. No.
606]
A. No person shall be appointed as a regular member of the Police
Department unless such person: [Amended 2-24-2004 by Ord. No.
884]
(1) Is a citizen of the United States and a resident of the State of New
Jersey for at least one year prior to the date of appointment.
(2) Is in good mental and bodily health.
(3) Is able to read, write and speak the English language well and
intelligently.
(4) Is free from conviction of a crime and has a clear criminal case
history (CCH) and must clear a complete background investigation.
(5) Is of good moral character.
(6) Is a graduate of a two-year college, preferably with a degree in law
enforcement or a related field, or has completed at least 1/2 of the
credits of a four-year college program, preferably with a degree in
law enforcement or a related field.
(7) Possesses a valid New Jersey state driver's license without record
of suspension or revocation in any state.
(8) Having been a member of the United States Armed Forces, shall
present evidence of honorable discharge.
(9) Successfully completes the State Basic Training Academy within
one year of employment.
(10) Successfully passes medical and psychological examinations by
medical personnel selected by the Mayor and Council.
(11) Meets the requirements of appointment as policeman under
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-122 and other applicable laws of the State of New
Jersey.
§ 46-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-8
1:359
§ 46-9. Promotions. [Amended 3-23-2010 by Ord. No. 961;
6-27-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-08]
B. Preference may be given to residents of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus for
an initial appointment to the Police Department as authorized by
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-123.1a.
A. General.
(1) So as to provide all eligible candidates for promotion with fair
notice and equal access to the promotional process, and to identify
the most qualified members of the department for promotion to
leadership positions within the department, the following
promotional process shall be employed for promotions to all
superior positions (Sergeant, Lieutenant, and Captain), other than
the Chief of Police.
(2) The promotional process shall be governed by state law and in
compliance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-129, which provides that a
promotion of any member or officer of the Police Department to a
superior position shall be made from the membership of the
department and due consideration shall be given to the length and
merit of his/her service and preference shall be given according to
seniority in service. The Chief of Police shall be responsible for the
administration of the promotional process.
B. Promotion to rank of Sergeant.
(1) Eligibility. No person shall be eligible for promotion to the rank of
Sergeant unless the candidate has served as a police officer with
the Ho-Ho-Kus Police Department for at least five years, and
possesses a minimum of an associate's degree (AA) or its
equivalent, i.e., a minimum of 60 college credits, preferably in a
social science, although not required.
(2) The testing process for the above position will consist of the
following:
(a) Written examination. Written examination administered by the
New Jersey State Association of Chiefs of Police ("Chief's
Association") or such other written examination approved by
the governing body and administered by the Chief of Police.
[1] The written examination shall account for 50% of a
candidate's total promotional score, up to a maximum of
50 total points.
[2] Each candidate's total point score for the written
examination shall be computed by taking a candidate's
score on the written exam (which exam shall have 100
points as its maximum score) and multiplying same by
50%. By way of example, a candidate receiving a score of
§ 46-8 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 46-9
1:360
80 points on his/her written examination shall receive 40
total points for the written examination element of the
promotional process (80 x 50% = 40 total points).
[3] To be eligible to proceed to the oral examinations by the
Interview Panel and the appropriate authority, a candidate
must achieve a minimum score of 70 points out of said
maximum of 100 points on the written examination (i.e., at
least 35 total points).
[4] If the number of vacancies in the rank is equivalent to the
number of applicants to the position, a written
examination is still required. Promotion to the rank of
Sergeant will be subject to passing the exam with a score
of at least 35 total points.
(b) Oral examination administered by an interview panel (the
"Interview Panel") comprised of the following persons: the
Chief of Police, the Borough Administrator, one member of the
Public Safety Committee and one command staff member
designated by the Chief of Police.
[1] Only those candidates who have achieved a score of 70
points or greater (out of the maximum of 100 points) on
the written examination shall be permitted to sit for an
oral examination by the Interview Panel (i.e., at least 35
total points). Oral examinations by the Interview Panel
shall take place after the receipt of the written
examination scores.
[2] The Interview Panel's oral examination and assessment
(which examination and assessment shall have 100 points
as its maximum score) shall account for 25% of the
candidate's total promotional score, with 25 total points
being the highest possible score for such oral examination
and assessment. By way of example, a candidate receiving
a score of 80 points on his/her oral examination by the
Interview Panel shall receive 20 total points for the
Interview Panel's oral examination element of the
promotional process (80 x 25% = 20 total points). The oral
examination and assessment by the Interview Panel shall
include an evaluation of the following criteria:
commendations, employee reviews, disciplines and early
intervention summaries, annual performance evaluations,
merit, overall performance, demonstrated ability and
accomplishments, efforts supporting department goals
and objectives, in-service education and specialized
schools, specialized job assignments, responsibilities,
subsequent performance, attitude and demeanor,
education, military experience, leadership ability,
initiative, productivity, attitude toward peers, supervising
§ 46-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-9
1:361
officers' recommendations, motivation and morale,
previous job performance, loyalty to the department and
community, experience and career development training.
The Interview Panel shall utilize the same criteria for each
of the candidates who are interviewed for the open
position(s).
[3] Candidates will be interviewed by the appropriate
authority, or its designee, after the completion of the oral
examination by the Interview Panel and after the
appropriate authority's receipt of the results of the
Interview Panel's oral examination. The Chief of Police
shall be available to the appropriate authority during such
process, and may sit in on such process, for advice and
counsel. However, the scoring of this portion shall be
computed by the appropriate authority only. This
evaluation shall have 100 points as its maximum score and
shall account for 25% of the candidate's total promotional
score, with 25 total points being the highest possible
score. By way of example, a candidate receiving a score of
80 points shall receive 20 total points (80 x 25% = 20 total
points).
[4] Due consideration shall be given to the eligible candidate
for promotion based upon length of service and merit of
service, and preference shall be given according to
seniority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-129.
C. Promotion to rank of Lieutenant and Captain.
(1) Eligibility. No person shall be eligible for promotion to the rank of
Lieutenant or Captain unless the candidate has served as a
Sergeant for the Ho-Ho-Kus Police Department for three years.
(2) The selection process will consist of the following:
(a) Oral examination administered by an Interview Panel (the
"Interview Panel") comprised of the following persons: the
Chief of Police, the Borough Administrator, one member of the
Public Safety Committee and one command staff member
designated by the Chief of Police.
[1] The oral examination and assessment by the Interview
Panel (which examination and assessment shall have 100
points as its maximum score) shall account for 60% of the
candidate's total promotional score, with 60 total points
being the highest possible total score for the Interview
Panel's oral examination and assessment. By way of
example, a candidate receiving a score of 80 points on his/
her oral review and assessment by the Interview Panel
shall receive 48 total points for the Interview Panel oral
§ 46-9 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 46-9
1:362
review and assessment element of the promotional process
(80 x 60% = 48 total points).
[2] The oral examination and assessment by the Interview
Panel shall include an evaluation of the following criteria:
commendations, employee reviews, disciplines and early
intervention summaries, annual performance evaluations,
merit, overall performance, demonstrated ability and
accomplishments, efforts supporting department goals
and objectives, in-service education and specialized
schools, specialized job assignments, responsibilities,
subsequent performance, attitude and demeanor,
education, military experience, leadership ability,
initiative, productivity, attitude toward peers, supervising
officers' recommendations, motivation and morale,
previous job performance, loyalty to the department and
community, experience and career development training.
The Interview Panel shall utilize the same criteria for each
of the candidates who are interviewed for the open
position(s).
[3] Candidates will be interviewed by the appropriate
authority, or its designee, after the completion of the oral
examination by the Interview Panel and after the
appropriate authority's receipt of the results of the
Interview Panel's oral examination. The Chief of Police
shall be available to the Mayor and Council during such
process, and may sit in on such process, for advice and
counsel. However, the scoring of this portion shall be
computed by the appropriate authority only. This
evaluation shall have 100 points as its maximum score and
shall account for 40% of the candidate's total promotional
score, with 40 total points being the highest possible
score. By way of example, a candidate receiving a score of
80 points shall receive 32 total points (80 x 40% = 32 total
points).
[4] Due consideration shall be given to the eligible candidate
for promotion based upon length of service and merit of
service, and preference shall be given according to
seniority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-129.
D. Procedure for conduct of promotional process.
(1) The Chief of Police shall obtain permission from the governing body
to hold a promotional examination process. After having received
such approval, the Chief of Police, or such other person as
designated by the governing body, shall provide a written
announcement of the promotional process to all eligible personnel.
§ 46-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-9
1:363
(2) The announcement shall include the eligibility requirements for the
position and shall include a description of the promotional process
and should indicate to the candidates the format, length, and
duration of any examinations, together with a description of any
other portions of the promotional process, and the date by which
they must submit a written request to participate in the
promotional process.
(3) Candidates for promotion, in order to participate in the
promotional process, shall be required to submit a written request
to participate in such process and a current resume to the Chief of
Police, or his designee, prior to the closing date set forth in the
announcement.
(4) No person shall be eligible to participate in the promotional
process unless (s)he has submitted a written request to participate
in such process and current resume prior to the deadline set forth
by the Chief of Police.
E. Eligibility list.
(1) After the expiration of the time for filing an appeal as set forth
below, and after the disposition of any such appeal, the Chief of
Police shall submit an eligibility list to the appropriate authority
following the promotional process for final determination.
(2) The appropriate authority will authorize the Chief of Police to
maintain this eligibility list for a period of two years (24 months), in
the event that vacancies fall within that time. The period will start
upon the passing of the resolution promoting the officer(s) to the
new rank.
F. Approval of appropriate authority. The appropriate authority shall have
the final decision on all promotions after consultation with the Chief of
Police.
G. Appeal of process.
(1) Within 10 days of the notification to each candidate of his/her
ranking, a candidate may file a written appeal directed to the Chief
of Police. Said written appeal must contain the reason(s) or
justification for the appeal. As part of any appeal, any candidate
may review his or her evaluation or any other internal document
pertaining to the candidate that was utilized in the promotional
process.
(2) The Chief of Police will assess the request for appeal and make a
determination as to how the request will be addressed, on a caseby-
case basis. Scores on the written examination shall be final and
not subject to appeal. If the Chief determines the appeal should
move forward, any appeals of the oral examinations or other
section of this procedure shall be decided by the governing body,
§ 46-9 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 46-9
1:364
within 10 days from the filing of the appeal. The governing body
shall make a written decision on the appeal, together with a brief
statement of the reasons therefor. All decisions by the governing
body on appeal shall be final.
§ 46-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-9
1:365

ARTICLE IV
Tenure of Office
§ 46-10. Probationary period; confirmation of appointment.
[Amended 8-2-1981 by Ord. No. 559; 2-26-2002 by Ord. No. 848]
All members of the Police Department, after having been appointed and
qualified, shall severally hold their respective offices during good behavior
and efficiency in the performance of their duties; provided, however, that
all original appointments shall be for a probationary period of one year,
which probationary period may be extended upon recommendation of the
Chief of Police and confirmation thereof by the Borough Council. Thereafter,
such appointments may become absolute upon confirmation by the Borough
Council.
§ 46-11. Removal for political reasons prohibited.
No member of the Police Department, after his appointment shall have
become absolute, shall be removed from office or employment in the Police
Department for political reasons.
§ 46-12. Disciplinary actions. [Amended 11-25-2014 by Ord. No.
1033]
Discipline of employees and police officers will be imposed consistent with
New Jersey State statutes and the rules and regulations of the Ho-Ho-Kus
Police Department. The Chief of Police or designee will proffer the written
charges as provided in the New Jersey Statutes and the Police Department's
rules and regulations. Police officers and employees may also be subject to
discipline for violating other statutes, ordinances and policies.
§ 46-13. Designation of appropriate authority. [Amended 8-28-1990
by Ord. No. 662; 11-25-2014 by Ord. No. 1033]
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, the Mayor and Borough Council of
Ho-Ho-Kus is hereby designated as the appropriate authority and is hereby
vested with the powers and duties of an appropriate authority as delegated
by law.
§ 46-14. Rules and regulations. [Amended 11-25-2014 by Ord. No.
1033]
The appropriate authority shall, from time to time as may be necessary,
adopt and amend the rules and regulations for the government and
discipline of the Police Department and employees thereof. Said rules and
regulations may fix and provide for the enforcement of such rules and
regulations and the enforcement of penalties for the violation of such rules
and regulations. All employees of the Police Department shall be subject to
such rules and regulations and penalties.
§ 46-15. (Reserved)97
§ 46-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-15
1:367
97.Editor's Note: Former § 46-15, Optional disciplinary action, was repealed 2-26-2002 by
Ord. No. 849.
§ 46-15 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 46-15
1:368
ARTICLE V
Absences
§ 46-16. Excused absences.
No member of the Police Department shall have an excused absence from
duty for any time unless authorized by the Chief or, in his absence, the next
ranking officer of the Police Department on duty.
§ 46-17. Inability to report due to illness or injury.
If a member is unable to report for duty or continue on duty due to illness
or injury, he shall immediately report his disability to the Chief or, in his
absence, the ranking officer of the Police Department on duty so that he can
be excused and arrangements can be made for a substitute. Such member
shall follow the procedure prescribed by the Personnel Ordinance.98
§ 46-18. Medical examination of absentee.
The Chief or a member of the Police Committee may order a member
to submit to a medical examination at any time it seems necessary or
desirable.
98.Editor's Note: See Ch. 42, Personnel Rules and Regulations.
§ 46-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-18
1:369

ARTICLE VI
Outside Employment
§ 46-19. Regulations.
Outside employment shall be governed by the provisions of the Personnel
Ordinance of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.99
99.Editor's Note: See Ch. 42, Personnel Rules and Regulations.
§ 46-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-19
1:371

ARTICLE VIA
Off-Duty Police Officers
[Added 12-19-2006 by Ord. No. 919]
§ 46-19.1. Contracted off-duty employment.
A. Purpose. For the convenience of those persons and entities which
utilize the services of off-duty law enforcement officers of the Ho-Ho-
Kus Police Department and to authorize the outside employment of
Borough police while off duty, the Borough hereby establishes a policy
regarding the use of said officers.
(1) Members of the Police Department shall be permitted to accept
police-related employment for private employers or school districts
only during off-duty hours and at such time as will not interfere
with the efficient performance of regularly scheduled or emergency
duty of the Borough.
(2) Any person or entity wishing to employ off-duty police shall first
obtain the approval of the Chief of Police, which approval shall be
granted if, in the opinion of the Chief, such employment would not
be inconsistent with the efficient functioning and good reputation
of the Police Department and would not unreasonably endanger or
threaten the safety of the officer or officers who are to perform the
work.
B. Escrow accounts.
(1) Except as provided hereinafter, any person or entity requesting the
services of an off-duty law enforcement officer in the Ho-Ho-Kus
Police Department shall estimate the number of hours such law
enforcement services are required, which estimate shall be
approved in writing by the Chief of Police, and shall establish an
escrow account with the Borough Treasurer by depositing an
amount sufficient to cover the rates of compensation and
administrative fees set forth hereinafter for the total estimated
hours of service.
(2) If the amount required to be deposited with the Borough pursuant
to Subsection B(1) hereinabove exceeds $20,000, an escrow
deposit of $20,000 shall be required. Said twenty-thousand-dollar
deposit shall be maintained until such time as the amount required
to be deposited for all remaining services on any given project shall
be less than $20,000, and then such lesser amount shall be
required to be maintained.
(3) Prior to posting any request for services of off-duty law
enforcement officers, the Chief of Police or his designee shall verify
that the balance in the escrow account of the person or entity
requesting services is sufficient to cover the compensation and fees
for the number of hours specified in the request for services. The
§ 46-19.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-19.1
1:373
Chief of Police shall not post a request for services from any person
or entity unless all fees and compensation required in the manner
described above have been deposited with the Borough Treasurer.
No officer shall provide any such services for more hours than are
specified in the request for services.
(4) In the event the funds in such an escrow account should be
depleted, services of off-duty law enforcement officers shall cease,
and requests for further or future services shall not be performed
or posted until additional funds have been deposited in the escrow
account in the manner prescribed above.
(5) The person or entity requesting such services shall be responsible
for ensuring that sufficient funds remain in the escrow account in
order to avoid any interruption of services.
(6) Houses of worship, nonprofit entities and local public schools shall
be exempt from the requirements for the posting of an escrow
deposit.
(7) Any person or entity who performs services of an emergent nature
and who cannot post an escrow deposit prior to commencing work
shall post such deposit within 72 hours after such work has been
performed. Failure to comply with this requirement shall constitute
a violation of this article and subject such person or entity to the
penalties pursuant to § 46-19.2 of this article.
C. Request for services. All requests to the Borough for the services of offduty
law enforcement officers in the Ho-Ho-Kus Police Department for a
period of one week or longer shall be forwarded to the Chief of Police
for posting at least 10 days before such services are required. Any law
enforcement officers, when so employed by the Borough, shall be
treated as an employee of the Borough; provided, however, that wages
earned for outside employment shall not be applied toward the pension
benefits of law enforcement officers so employed.
D. Rates of compensation; administrative fees; payment for services.
[Amended 12-20-2011 by Ord. No. 1002]
(1) Rates of compensation for contracting the services of off-duty law
enforcement officers shall be based on a rate equal to that of time
and one-half of the contractual hourly rate for the individual officer
being compensated. An additional fee of 20% of the rate as
calculated above is hereby established to cover administrative
costs, overhead and out-of-pocket expenses of the Borough.
(2) Use of a Borough police vehicle shall be billed at the rate of $30 per
hour.
E. Insurance requirements.
§ 46-19.1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 46-19.1
1:374
§ 46-19.2. Violations and penalties.
Any person or entity who employs a police officer while off duty to perform
services without first having complied with the requirements of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000 or imprisonment for a term of
not more than 90 days, or both. In addition, the Judge may order restitution,
as appropriate.
(1) No person or entity shall employ a police officer for extra duty
without having first filed with the Borough Clerk a certificate of
comprehensive general liability insurance in the amount of not less
than $1,000,000 for one person and $2,000,000 for any one
occurrence with respect to injuries and damages sustained or
caused by police officers while performing such extra duty.
(2) No certificate of insurance required by this subsection shall be
deemed filed with the Borough Clerk unless it has been first
approved by the Borough's Risk Manager. All policies of insurance
evidenced by any certificate filed hereunder shall be maintained by
the person or entity employing such police officer in full force and
effect at all times while any police officer is so employed. The
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus and its Police Department shall be named as
additional named insureds for liability purposes.
(3) Any person or entity which employs a police officer for extra duty
shall defend, indemnify and save harmless the Borough and its
police officers against and from any and all claims, suits, damages,
costs and attorneys' fees to which the Borough and its police
officers may be put by any negligent act or omission by such person
or entity in connection with or arising from the work being
performed herein.
§ 46-19.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-19.2
1:375

ARTICLE VII
Police Manual
§ 46-20. Adoption of manual; conflicting provisions. [Amended
6-23-1987 by Ord. No. 606]
A. The Ho-Ho-Kus Police Department manual entitled "Police Department
of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus Manual of Rules and Regulations," dated
March 2003, be and the same is hereby adopted. The provisions of the
police manual may be amended from time to time by resolution of the
Borough Council. Copies of the police manual as adopted are on file in
the office of the Borough Administrator and the Police Department.
[Amended 4-22-2003 by Ord. No. 870]
B. In the event that the same general subject is covered by the provisions
of this chapter and the provisions of the police manual, both provisions
shall be enforced unless a conflict exists therein, in which event the
provisions of this chapter shall prevail and shall supersede the
provisions of the police manual.
§ 46-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-20
1:377

ARTICLE VIII
Validity
§ 46-21. Severability.
Should any part of this chapter be held invalid, it shall not affect the
remainder thereof.
§ 46-22. Repealer.
All previous ordinances for the establishment, regulation and control of
the Police Department in the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, Bergen County, New
Jersey, are hereby repealed.
§ 46-23. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon final passage and publication as provided
by law.
§ 46-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 46-23
1:379
Chapter 47
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sidewalks, curbs and streets — See Ch. 58.
Snow, ice, grass and weeds — See Ch. 61.
Trees in highways — See Ch. 76.
Uniform Construction Code
Department — See Ch. 77.
Zoning — See Ch. 85.
§ 46-23 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 46-23
1:380
ARTICLE I
Title and Purpose
§ 47-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Property Maintenance Code of the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus" and may be referred to in this chapter as the
"Property Maintenance Code" or as "this code."
§ 47-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this code is to:
A. Provide for the public health, safety and welfare.
B. Avoid, prevent and eliminate hazards to the public health or safety.
C. Avoid, prevent and eliminate conditions which, if permitted to exist or
continue, will depreciate or tend to depreciate the value of adjacent or
surrounding properties.
D. Preserve property value in the Borough.
E. Prevent the physical deterioration or progressive downgrading of the
quality of housing facilities in the Borough.
F. Maintain the value and economic health of the commercial properties
and businesses that serve and help to support the Borough and it
citizens.
G. Prevent and eliminate physical conditions in or on property which
constitute nuisances and are thereby potentially dangerous or
hazardous to the life, health and safety of persons on or near the
premises where such conditions exist.
H. Establish minimum standards governing the maintenance and condition
of land, buildings, structures and premises in the Borough of Ho-Ho-
Kus.
I. Fix responsibilities and duties therefor upon owners, lessees, operators
and occupants of property.
J. Provide for administration and enforcement.
K. Fix penalties for the violation of this code.
§ 47-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-2
1:381

ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 47-3. Definitions.
For the specific purposes of this code, the following terms, whenever used
herein or referred to in this code, shall have the respective meanings
assigned to them hereunder unless a different meaning clearly appears
from the context:
EXTERIOR OF PREMISES — Those portions of a building or structure which
are exposed to public view or are visible from adjoining or adjacent lots,
including all outside surfaces and appurtenances thereto; and the open land
space of any premises outside of any building or structure erected thereon.
OCCUPANT — Any person residing, living or sleeping in or on the premises
or having actual possession, use or occupancy of a dwelling premises or
rooming unit, or any person or entity in possession of or using any premises,
or part thereof, whether or not the owner thereof and regardless of the
duration of time of such possession, use or occupancy.
OPERATOR — Any person, persons or entity, not the owner, who has charge,
care or control of a dwelling or premises, or a part thereof, with or without
the knowledge, consent or authority of the owner.
OWNER — Any person, persons or entity who shall have legal or equitable
title in any form whatsoever to any premises or part thereof or who shall
have charge, care or control of any lot, premises, building, structure or
part thereof, as owner or agent of the owner, or as a fiduciary, trustee,
receiver, guardian, lessee or mortgagee, in possession regardless of how
such possession was obtained. Any person, group of persons or entity who is
a lessee, sublessee or assignee of a lessee of any part or all of any building
with land shall be deemed to be a co-owner with the lessor for the purposes
of this chapter and shall have responsibility over the portion of the premises
so sublet, leased or assigned.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, right-of-way or multiples thereof,
including the building(s) or structure(s) thereon.
§ 47-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-3
1:383

ARTICLE III
Compliance; Application of Other Laws
§ 47-4. Compliance with regulations required.
Every residential and nonresidential building, structure, lot and the
premises or part of the premises on which it is situated in the Borough
of Ho-Ho-Kus, previously or presently used or intended to be used for
dwelling, commercial, business, recreational, service, transportation,
institutional, religious, charitable, quasi-public, professional or industrial
occupancy, and uses accessory thereto, shall comply with the provisions of
this code, whether or not any such building or structure shall have been
constructed, altered or repaired before or after the enactment of this code,
and irrespective of any permits or licenses which may have been issued for
the use or occupancy of such building or for the installation or repair of
equipment or facilities prior to the effective date of this code. Vacant lots,
lands and premises are also required to comply with the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 47-5. Conflicting provisions.
In any case where the provisions of this code impose a higher or stricter
standard than that set forth in any other ordinance or regulation of the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, or under the laws or regulations of the State of New
Jersey or its agencies, then the standards as set forth herein shall prevail,
but if the provisions of this code impose a lower or lesser standard than any
other regulation or ordinance of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus or of the laws
and regulations of the State of New Jersey or any of its agencies, then the
higher standard contained in any such other ordinance, regulation or law
shall prevail.
§ 47-6. Compliance with other ordinances.
Compliance with this code shall not constitute a defense against any
violation of any other ordinance of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus applicable to
any structure or premises, nor shall any one act of compliance constitute a
defense against any subsequent or other violation of this code.
§ 47-7. Owners, operators and occupants to comply independently.
Owners, operators and occupants shall have all the duties, obligations and
responsibilities prescribed in this code, and no such person or entity shall
be relieved of any such duty, obligation or responsibility hereunder, nor be
entitled to assert as a defense against any charge made against him or
them for a violation of this code the fact that another owner, operator or
occupant or any other third person or entity is also responsible therefor and
in violation thereof.
§ 47-8. Application of building provisions; security deposit.
[Amended 12-16-1997 by Ord. No. 790]
§ 47-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-8
1:385
§ 47-9. Application of zoning provisions.
Nothing contained in this code or any requirement of compliance herewith
shall be deemed to alter, impair or affect the application of Chapter 85,
Zoning, or zoning laws of the municipality.
§ 47-10. Existing remedies.
Nothing in this code shall be deemed to abolish or impair existing remedies
of the municipality or its officers or agencies relating to the removal or
demolition of any buildings or structures which are deemed to be
dangerous, unsafe or unsanitary.
A. Any alterations to buildings, structures or appurtenances thereto, or
changes of use therein, which may be caused directly or indirectly by
the enforcement of this code shall be done in accordance with all
applicable sections of the Building Code of the municipality.100
B. There is hereby established a security deposit for any alterations to
buildings, structures or appurtenances thereto or changes of use
therein which may be caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement
of this code. The security deposit shall be based upon the estimated
cost of the work. The fee shall be in the amount of 1% of estimated cost,
up to and including $100,000. Above $100,000, the fee shall be in the
amount of 0.5% of estimated cost, provided that the minimum fee shall
be $500 and the maximum fee shall be $3,000. The estimated cost shall
be determined in accordance with § 77-7B(1)(b).
100. Editor's Note: See Ch. 77, Uniform Construction Code Department.
§ 47-8 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 47-10
1:386
ARTICLE IV
Owners, Operators and Occupants
§ 47-11. Duties. [Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 883]
In furtherance of the purposes of this code, it shall be the duty and
responsibility of the owner, operator or occupant of the premises to comply
with any or all of the requirements and standards of this code, to keep
the premises free of conditions which constitute violations hereof and to
promptly remove, prevent or abate such conditions.
§ 47-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-11
1:387

ARTICLE V
Maintenance Standards
§ 47-12. Prohibited matter, materials and conditions.
The exterior of all premises shall be kept free of the following matter,
materials or conditions:
A. All abandoned, discarded, useless, unusable, unused or worthless solid
waste matter or materials, combustible or noncombustible, including
but not limited to the following:
(1) Appliances.
(2) Ashes.
(3) Bedding.
(4) Boats, licensed or unlicensed, registered or unregistered, or parts
thereof.
(5) Boilers.
(6) Construction material.
(7) Containers.
(8) Crockery.
(9) Debris.
(10) Furniture.
(11) Garbage.
(12) Glass.
(13) Household goods.
(14) Junk.
(15) Leather.
(16) Lumber, scrap.
(17) Machinery, operable or inoperable, or parts thereof.
(18) Metal, scrap.
(19) Mineral matter.
(20) Paper, paper goods or products.
(21) Plastic.
(22) Rubber.
§ 47-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-12
1:389
(23) Tires.
(24) Trailers, licensed or unlicensed.
(25) Vehicles, motorized or not, licensed or unlicensed, registered or
unregistered, or parts thereof.
(26)Waste.
(27)Wood.
(28)Wrappings.
B. Abandoned or uncovered wells, shafts, towers, exterior cellar openings
or basement hatchways.
C. Structurally unsafe or unsound buildings, foundations, excavations,
structures or fences.
D. Rats, vermin, pest infestations or their harborages.
E. Foul-smelling material, liquid or solid.
F. Hidden or uncovered ground or surface hazards, such as holes, sudden
depressions, sharp or jagged projections or obstructions in areas
accessible to the general public.
G. Stagnant surface water or groundwater accumulations which create or
are likely to create mosquito or other insect breeding areas.
H. Any public or private condition that would constitute a nuisance
according to the statutes, laws and regulations of the State of New
Jersey, its governmental agencies or the ordinances of the Borough of
Ho-Ho-Kus.
I. Any physical condition existing in or on the exterior of any premises
which is potentially dangerous, detrimental or hazardous to the life,
health or safety of persons on, near or passing within the proximity of
the premises where said condition exists.
J. Dangerously loose and overhanging objects, including but not limited to
dead trees or tree limbs, accumulations of ice or any object, natural or
man-made, which could threaten the health and safety of persons if
caused to fall, or other similar dangerously loose and overhanging
objects which, by reason of their location above ground level, constitute
an actual hazard to persons or vehicles in the vicinity thereof.
K. Inadequate or unsafe foundation walls, piers and columns, and other
similar structurally unsound, damaged or defective load-bearing
components, which are incapable of bearing imposed loads safely at all
points.
L. Structurally unsound, loose, dangerous, crumbling, missing, broken,
rotted or unsafe exterior portions of buildings or structures, including
§ 47-12 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 47-12
1:390
§ 47-13. General standards.
Without limitation by the foregoing, it shall also be the duty and
responsibility of owners, occupants or operators to keep the exterior of all
premises structurally sound, in good repair and sufficiently maintained to
an extent so as to avoid and prevent conditions that violate the purposes of
this code as hereinabove set forth in § 47-2.
but not limited to porches, landings, balconies, stairways, handrails,
steps, walls, overhangs, roofs, gutters, downspouts, wires, cables,
fences, supporting members, timbers, abutments, fire escapes, signs,
bricks, stones, mortar or plaster.
M. Exterior surfaces or parts of buildings or structures containing sharp,
rough or projecting surfaces or objects which might cause injury to
persons coming in contact therewith in areas accessible to the general
public.
N. Broken glass or windows, rotted, missing or substantially destroyed
window frames and sashes, door frames, exterior doors or other major
exterior components of buildings or structures.
O. Weeds, grass or other plant growth which is noxious or detrimental to
public health and safety.
P. Laundry anywhere in the front exterior of the premises. [Added
1-28-1992 by Ord. No. 694]
Q. All exterior surfaces, including but not limited to doors, door and
window frames, cornices, porches and trim, shall be maintained in good
condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods,
shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other
protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint
shall be eliminated and surfaces painted. [Added 12-16-2003 by Ord.
No. 883]
§ 47-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-13
1:391

ARTICLE VI
Administrative Provisions
§ 47-14. Enforcement officer. [Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord. No.
883]
The Property Maintenance Officer of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus is hereby
designated as the officer charged with the enforcement of this code and is
hereby referred to as the "enforcement officer."
§ 47-15. Enforcement procedures. [Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord.
No. 883]
Whenever the enforcement officer determines that there is or has been a
violation of any provision of this code, he shall give notice of such violation
to the person or persons or entities responsible therefor under this code.
Such notice shall be in writing and shall include a concise statement of
the reasons for its issuance. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly
and sufficiently served if a copy thereof is sent, by registered or certified
mail, to the last known address of the person or entity upon which the same
is served, as shown by the most recent tax lists of the municipality; or a
copy thereof handed to said person or persons; or a copy thereof left at
the usual place of abode or office of said persons or entities. Notice shall
be given as aforesaid within or without the municipality. The notice shall
also state that unless the violation is abated, removed, cured, prevented or
desisted from within 10 days of the date of service of such notice, exclusive
of the date of service, a summons shall be issued for such violation. The
enforcement officer may, at the time he issued the notice, extend the period
for compliance, with the violation stated in the notice, for a period in
excess of the aforesaid 10 days if, in his judgment, the abatement, removal,
prevention, cessation or cure of the condition violated cannot reasonably
be effected within the ten-day period; and, in such cases, the enforcement
officer shall state such reasonably required extended period in the notice,
which shall then be applicable instead of the aforesaid 10 days. In the event
the violation is not abated, removed, cured, prevented or desisted from or
otherwise fully remedied within said ten-day period or within such extended
period as set forth in the notice, pursuant to the foregoing, a summons shall
then be issued against the person, persons, entity or entities so notified.
§ 47-16. Emergency conditions.
Whenever the enforcement officer finds that an emergency condition in
violation of the code exists, which condition requires immediate attention in
order to protect the public health or safety, he may issue an order by service
of notice as set forth in § 47-15 reciting the existence of such an emergency
condition and requiring that such action be taken by the violator as soon
as it is reasonably necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding any
other provision of this code, such order shall be effective immediately.
Any person to whom such an order is directed shall comply therewith
immediately, but, upon objection in writing to the enforcement officer, any
§ 47-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-16
1:393
such person shall be afforded a hearing before the governing body of the
Borough as soon as is reasonably possible. After such a hearing and decision
by the governing body as to the existence or nonexistence of the emergency
conditions, the governing body may continue such order in effect, or modify
it or withdraw it, subject to issuance of a summons for violation thereof, if
such order is continued.
§ 47-16 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 47-16
1:394
ARTICLE VII
Violations
§ 47-17. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-22-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-18]
A. Any person or entity who shall violate the terms and provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to any combination of
the following: a fine not exceeding $1,000, imprisonment not to exceed
90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days. Each
day upon which a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
B. In addition to the remedies provided for in this section, should an
owner, operator or occupant of any premises fail to comply with any
order and/or directive of the enforcement officer within 10 days after
notice of such violation or such extended notice period, the
enforcement officer may cause such condition to be remedied. In such
case, the enforcement officer may cause such remediation by retaining
the services of a contractor, in accordance with applicable laws, and the
cost of such remediation shall be paid by the Borough. The expenses
incurred by the Borough shall become a charge or lien on such lands
and shall be added to and become and form a part of the taxes to be
assessed and levied upon such lands and shall bear interest at the same
rate as taxes and shall be collected and enforced in the same manner.
§ 47-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-17
1:395

ARTICLE VIII
General Provisions
§ 47-18. Higher standards to prevail; repealer.
In any case where a provision of this code is found to be in conflict or
inconsistent with a provision of any other ordinance or code of this
municipality which establishes a lower standard for the promotion and
protection of the safety, health and welfare of the people, the provisions of
this code shall prevail, and such other ordinances or codes or parts thereof
are hereby declared to be repealed to the extent that they may be so found
to be in conflict with this code.
§ 47-19. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this
code shall be declared to be unenforceable or invalid for any reason
whatsoever, such decision or declaration shall not affect the remaining
portions of this code which shall continue in full force and effect, and, to
this end, the provisions of this code are hereby declared to be severable.
§ 47-20. Word usage.
All terms and words used in this code shall be deemed and construed
to include any other number, singular or plural, and any other gender,
masculine, feminine or neuter, as the context or sense of any paragraph or
clause herein may require.
§ 47-21. When effective.
This code shall take effect as provided by law.
§ 47-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-21
1:397

ARTICLE IX
Maintenance of Vacant and Abandoned Residential Properties
[Added 10-25-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-11]
§ 47-22. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CREDITOR — Consistent with Section 3 of P.L. 2008, c. 86,101 a statechartered
bank, savings bank, savings-and-loan association or any credit
union, any person required to be licensed under the provisions of the New
Jersey Residential Mortgage Lending Act, and any entity acting on behalf
of the creditor named in the debt obligation, including but not limited to
servicers.
VACANT AND ABANDONED — For residential property, consistent with
Section 1 of P.L. 2010, c. 70 (N.J.S.A. 2A:50-73), residential real estate for
which a notice of violation has been issued pursuant to § 47-15 of this
chapter and Subsection b of Section 1 of P.L. 2014, c. 35.102 Where a notice
of violation has not been issued pursuant to § 47-15 of this chapter and
Subsection b of Section 1 of P.L. 2014, c. 35, residential property shall
be deemed "vacant and abandoned" where a mortgaged property is not
occupied by a mortgagor or tenant as evidenced by a lease agreement
entered into prior to the service of a notice of intention to commence
foreclosure according to Section 4 of the Fair Foreclosure Act, P.L. 1995, c.
244,103 and at least two of the following conditions exist:
A. Overgrown or neglected vegetation;
The accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers or mail on the
property;
B.
C. Disconnected gas, electric, or water utility services to the property;
The accumulation of hazardous, noxious, or unhealthy substances or
materials on the property;
D.
E. The accumulation of junk, litter, trash or debris on the property;
F. The absence of window treatments such as blinds, curtains or shutters;
G. The absence of furnishings and personal items;
Statements of neighbors, delivery persons, or government employees
indicating that the residence is vacant and abandoned;
H.
Windows or entrances to the property that are boarded up or closed off
or multiple window panes that are damaged, broken and unrepaired;
I.
101. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:10B-38.
102. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.125.
103. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2A:50-56.
§ 47-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-22
1:399
§ 47-23. Creditor responsibility.
§ 47-24. Notice.
Doors to the property that are smashed through, broken off, unhinged,
or continuously unlocked;
J.
A risk to the health, safety or welfare of the public, or any adjoining
or adjacent property owners, exists due to acts of vandalism, loitering,
criminal conduct, or the physical destruction or deterioration of the
property;
K.
An uncorrected violation of a municipal building, housing, or similar
code during the preceding year, or an order by municipal authorities
declaring the property to be unfit for occupancy and to remain vacant
and unoccupied;
L.
The mortgagee or other authorized party has secured or winterized the
property due to the property being deemed vacant and unprotected or
in danger of freezing;
M.
A written statement issued by any mortgagor expressing the clear
intent of all mortgagors to abandon the property; and
N.
O. Any other reasonable indicia of abandonment.
A. A creditor filing a summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on a
residential property within the Borough shall be immediately
responsible for the care, maintenance, security and upkeep of the
exterior of the property, after the property becomes vacant and
abandoned as defined in this chapter.
B. Where a creditor is located out of state, the creditor shall be
responsible for appointing an in-state representative or agent to act on
the creditor's behalf for the purpose of satisfying the requirements of
Subsection A of this section. Notice of said representative or agent shall
be provided to the Borough Clerk in an manner that is consistent with
Subsection a of Section 17 of P.L. 2008, c. 127 (the Save New Jersey
Homes Act of 2008)104 and shall further include the full name and
contact information of the in-state representative or agent.
A. Any public officer designated by the Borough or authorized municipal
official responsible for the administration of any property maintenance
or public nuisance code shall be authorized to issue a notice to a
creditor that has filed a summons and complaint in an action to
foreclose on a residential property within the Borough, if the public
officer determines that the creditor has violated this chapter by failing
to provide for the care, maintenance, security and upkeep of the
exterior of the property. Where a creditor is an out-of-state creditor, the
notice shall be issued to the representative or agent that has been
104. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51a.
§ 47-22 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 47-24
1:400
§ 47-25. Violations and penalties.
§ 47-26. Severability.
In the event that any word, phrase, clause, section or provision of this
article is found by any Court of competent jurisdiction to be unenforceable,
illegal or unconstitutional, such word, phrase, clause or provision shall be
severable from the balance of this article and the remainder of this article
shall remain in full force and effect.
identified by the creditor pursuant to the Save New Jersey Homes Act
of 2008.
B. The notice referenced in Subsection A of this section shall require the
creditor to correct the violation(s) within 30 days of receipt of the
notice or within 10 days of receipt of the notice if the violation presents
an imminent threat to public health and safety.
C. The issuance of a notice pursuant to Subsection A of this section shall
constitute proof that a residential property is vacant and abandoned for
the purposes of this chapter.
A. A creditor subject to this chapter that is found by the Municipal Court of
the Borough, or by any other court of competent jurisdiction, to be in
violation of the requirement to correct a care, maintenance, security, or
upkeep violation cited in a notice issued pursuant to this chapter shall
be subject to a fine of $1,500 for each day of the violation. Any fines
imposed pursuant to this subsection shall commence 31 days following
the creditor's receipt of the notice, except where the violation is
deemed to present an imminent risk to the public health and safety, in
which case any fines shall commence 11 days following receipt of the
notice.
B. An out-of-state creditor subject to this chapter that is found by the
Municipal Court of the Borough, or by any other court of competent
jurisdiction, to be in violation of the requirement to appoint an in-state
representative or agent shall be subject to a fine of $2,500 for each day
of the violation. Any fines imposed on an out-of-state creditor for the
failure to appoint an in-state representative or agent shall commence
on the day after the ten-day period set forth in Paragraph 1 of
Subsection a of Section 17 of P.L. 2008, c. 127 [N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51a(1)]
for providing notice to the municipal clerk that a summons and
complaint in an action to foreclose on a mortgage has been served.
C. No less than 20% of any money collected by the Borough pursuant to
this section shall be utilized by the Borough for Municipal Code
enforcement purposes.
§ 47-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47-27
1:401
§ 47-27. Repealer.
Ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent herewith are
hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
§ 47-28. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon final passage and publication
as required by law.
§ 47-27 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 47-28
1:402
Chapter 47A
PUBLIC CONTRACTING PAY-TO-PLAY REFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Contracts for county services — See Ch. 16.
§ 47A-1. Prohibition on awarding public contracts to certain
contributors.
A. Any other provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, the
municipality or any of its purchasing agents or agencies or those of its
independent authorities, as the case may be, shall not enter into an
agreement or otherwise contract to procure professional, banking,
insurance coverage services or any other consulting services, including
those awarded pursuant to a "fair and open" process, from any
professional business entity if that entity has solicited or made any
contribution of money, or pledge of a contribution, including in-kind
contributions, to any Ho-Ho-Kus municipal candidate or holder of the
public office having ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract
or campaign committee supporting such candidate or officeholder or to
any Ho-Ho-Kus or Bergen County party committee or to any political
action committee (PAC) that regularly engages in the support of
municipal elections and/or municipal parties in excess of the thresholds
specified in Subsection D within one calendar year immediately
preceding the date of the contract or agreement.
B. No professional business entity which enters into negotiations for, or
agrees to, any contract or agreement with the municipality or any
department or agency thereof or of its independent authorities for the
renditions of professional, banking or insurance coverage services or
any other consulting services, including those awarded pursuant to a
"fair and open" process, shall solicit or make any contribution of money,
or pledge of a contribution, including in-kind contributions, to any Ho-
Ho-Kus municipal candidate or holder of the public office having
ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract or campaign
committee supporting such candidate or officeholder or to any Ho-Ho-
Kus or Bergen County party committee or to any political action
committee (PAC) that regularly engages in the support of municipal
elections and/or municipal parties between the time of first
communications between that business entity and the municipality
regarding a specific professional services agreement and the latter of
the termination of negotiations or the completion of the contract or
agreement.
C. For purposes of this chapter, a "professional business entity" seeking a
public contract means an individual, including the individual's spouse,
if any, and any child living at home; person; firm; corporation;
§ 47-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47A-1
1:403
§ 47A-2. Contributions made prior to effective date.
No contribution of money or any other thing of value, including in-kind
contributions, made by a professional business entity to any municipal
candidate for Mayor or Council or municipal or county party committee
or PAC referenced in this chapter shall be deemed a violation of this
section, nor shall an agreement for property, goods or services of any kind
whatsoever be disqualified thereby, if that contribution was made by the
professional business entity prior to the effective date of this section.
§ 47A-3. Contribution statement; duty to report violations.
professional corporation; partnership; organization; or association. The
definition of a "business entity" includes all principals who own 10%
or more of the equity in the corporation or business trust, partners,
and officers in the aggregate employed by the entity, as well as any
subsidiaries directly controlled by the business entity.
D. Any individual meeting the definition of "professional business entity"
under this section may annually contribute a maximum of $300 each for
any purpose to any candidate for Mayor or governing body or $300 to
the municipal party committee or $500 to the Bergen County party
committee or to a PAC referenced in this chapter without violating
Subsection A of this section. However, any group of individuals meeting
the definition of "professional business entity" under this section,
including such principals, partners, and officers of the entity in the
aggregate, may not annually contribute for any purpose in excess of
$2,500 to all Ho-Ho-Kus candidates and officeholders with ultimate
responsibility for the award of the contract, and all municipal or Bergen
County political parties and PACs referenced in this chapter combined,
without violating Subsection A of this section.
E. For purposes of this section, the office that is considered to have
ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract shall be:
(1) The Ho-Ho-Kus Council and the Mayor of Ho-Ho-Kus, if the contract
requires approval or appropriation from the Council.
(2) The Mayor of Ho-Ho-Kus, if the contract requires approval of the
Mayor, or if a public officer who is responsible for the award of a
contract is appointed by the Mayor.
A. Prior to awarding any contract or agreement to procure services,
including banking or insurance coverage services, with any
professional business entity, the municipality or any of its purchasing
agents or agencies, as the case may be, shall receive a sworn statement
from the professional business entity made under penalty of perjury
that this entity or officer has not made a contribution in violation of
§ 47A-1 of this chapter.
§ 47A-1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 47A-3
1:404
§ 47A-4. Reimbursement of contributions.
A professional business entity or municipal candidate or officeholder or
municipal or county party committee or PAC referenced in this chapter
may cure a violation of § 47A-1 of this chapter if, within 30 days after
contribution, the professional business entity notifies the Municipal Council
in writing and seeks and receives reimbursement of a contribution from
the municipal candidate or municipal or county political party or PAC
referenced in this chapter.
§ 47A-5. Breach of professional service agreement.
B. The professional business entity shall have a continuing duty to report
any violations of this chapter that may occur during the negotiation or
duration of a contract. The certification required under this section
shall be made prior to entry into the contract or agreement with the
municipality and shall be in addition to any other certifications that may
be required by any other provision of law.
A. It shall be a breach of the terms of a professional service agreement for
a business entity to:
(1) Make or solicit a contribution in violation of this chapter;
(2) Knowingly conceal or misrepresent a contribution given or
received;
(3) Make or solicit contributions through intermediaries for the
purpose of concealing or misrepresenting the source of the
contribution;
(4) Make or solicit any contribution on the condition or with the
agreement that it will be contributed to a campaign committee of
any candidate or holder of the public office of Ho-Ho-Kus;
(5) Engage or employ a lobbyist or consultant with the intent or
understanding that such lobbyist or consultant would make or
solicit any contribution, which, if made or solicited by the business
entity itself, would subject that entity to the restrictions of this
chapter;
(6) Fund contributions made by third parties, including consultants,
attorneys, family members, and employees;
(7) Engage in any exchange of contributions to circumvent the intent
of this chapter; or
(8) Directly or indirectly, through or by any other person or means, do
any act which would subject that entity to the restrictions of this
chapter.
§ 47A-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 47A-5
1:405
§ 47A-6. Repealer.
All other ordinances of the Borough, or parts thereof, which are in conflict
with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
§ 47A-7. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or word
contained in this chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason
whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this
chapter, which shall remain in full force and effect, and, to this end, the
provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable.
§ 47A-8. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon passage and publication as required by
law.
Chapter 48
PUBLIC SCAVENGERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 34.
Recycling — See Ch. 52.
Solid waste — See Ch. 64.
§ 48-1. License required; exception.
It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, firm or corporation to gather,
collect, remove or in any way interfere with ashes, garbage, refuse or
other refuse matter from any dwelling house, tenement, store, or other
building or place or to engage in the business or occupation of gathering,
collecting or removing ashes, garbage, refuse or other refuse matter within
the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, or use the streets of the Borough of Ho-Ho-
Kus for the purpose of transporting same, without first procuring or having
procured a license therefor from the Board of Health of said Borough;
provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall prevent any property
owner from gathering, collecting or removing ashes, garbage, refuse or
other refuse matter from his own property, or himself using the streets of
the Borough for the purpose of transporting such from his own property.
But no such ashes, refuse, garbage or other refuse matter is to be dumped
or deposited within the confines of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
B. Any professional business entity who violates Subsection A(1) through
(8) shall be disqualified from eligibility for future Ho-Ho-Kus contracts
for a period of four calendar years from the date of violation.
§ 47A-5 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 48-2
1:406
§ 48-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of interpreting the requirements and provisions of this
chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ASHES and REFUSE — Intended to include the residue of any material used
as fuel for heating or cooking purposes after combustion has taken place,
broken or discarded crockery, glassware, rags, household utensils, house
sweepings, bottles, tin cans, plastic containers, paper cartons, newspapers
and similar materials, but not building materials or fixtures, trees, grass
clippings, leaves, earth, stones or industrial waste.
GARBAGE — Intended to include the refuse of animal and vegetable matter
which has been used as food and all other household waste matter, exclusive
of ashes and refuse as herein defined.
§ 48-3. License fees.
Any person, persons, firm or corporation authorized by the Board of Health
to furnish scavenger service to any resident or building in the Borough of
Ho-Ho-Kus shall pay the nominal license fee of $300 to the Board of Health
which, upon granting of the license, shall immediately forward the license
fee to the Clerk of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus for the use of the Borough.
§ 48-4. License term.
The initial licenses granted under this chapter shall expire on December 31,
1972, and all licenses granted thereafter shall be for a period of two years,
commencing January 1 and expiring December 31 of the second year.
§ 48-5. Application for license.
A. Every applicant for a scavenger license shall submit an application in
writing to the Board of Health, together with the license fee of $300,
which shall be returned in the event said license is denied.
B. The applicant shall further submit with his application satisfactory
proof of the following:
(1) An itemized list of all machinery and equipment owned by the
applicant, setting forth the make and year of the various pieces of
equipment.
(2) The number of persons in the employ of the applicant and a
certification that a minimum of two men will be assigned to each
truck working in the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
(3) The applicant has a place for the disposal of the ashes, refuse,
garbage, rubbish and other collected materials, which disposal site
is assured for the period of the license.
(4) The said place for disposal of ashes, refuse, garbage, rubbish and
other collected materials is located outside the limits of the
§ 48-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-5
1:407
§ 48-6. Hearing.
The Board of Health shall act upon every application within 30 days after
the same has been filed with it, and, in the event said application is denied,
then, upon request of the applicant, the Board of Health shall conduct a
hearing within 30 days of said request, at which time the applicant may
present any additional proof in support of his application. The applicant
shall be notified of the decision of the Board of Health upon his application
within 15 days after said hearing has been conducted.
§ 48-7. Rules and regulations.
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, and the governing body of the municipality
in which said site for disposal is located has established either a
dump or a suitable incinerator by ordinance, and the applicant shall
submit a duly authenticated copy of such ordinance.
(5) He has been granted a permit or written permission to use the
disposal site by the Board of Health or other duly constituted
authority of the municipality wherein said disposal site is located.
(6) He has been actively engaged for at least six months in scavenger
service substantially similar to the service required in the Borough
of Ho-Ho-Kus.
C. The applicant shall furnish proof of his financial ability to carry on a
proper scavenger service, as required by this chapter, for the entire
term of the license requested.
D. The applicant shall further furnish to the said Board of Health a detailed
statement of the services to be rendered, together with a schedule of
fees to be charged by him for the period of the license, and, once
approved, said schedule of fees may not be altered or changed except
by a resolution of the Board of Health approving the requested change.
A. Each licensee shall collect and transport all ashes, rubbish, garbage,
refuse and other collected material by such means and in such a
manner that none of such material, solid or liquid, shall escape and
drop upon the ground, and all reasonably avoidable noise incident to
the collection and transportation of such material shall be prevented.
B. All vehicles furnished and used shall be subject to the approval at all
times of the Sanitarian and/or Borough Engineer and must be
maintained in good working order and in a clean and sanitary condition.
C. Each licensee shall furnish a sufficient number of trucks of ample power
and capacity to carry out the particular collection service undertaken
by him and shall always have at least one spare vehicle available to
make the collection in case of a breakdown.
D. Trucks must be special body-packer types designed specially for the
collection of garbage.
§ 48-5 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 48-7
1:408
E. Any collected material which drops from collection containers or from
trucks, either during loading or transporting, must be gathered and
cleaned up immediately.
F. The name and address of every employee of a licensee who shall be
working in the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus shall be registered with the Board
of Health.
G. Garbage collections shall be provided six days per week, regardless of
holidays, commencing not earlier than 6:00 a.m. and terminating not
later than 8:00 p.m., but there shall be no collections on Sundays
without the express permission of the Board of Health.
H. Every licensee shall be required to notify all persons desiring scavenger
service of the days upon which such collections shall be made and shall
deliver to each household, place of business or other building having
materials to be collected a printed card defining the collection days as
well as the rules and regulations governing said collections.
I. All ashes, refuse, garbage and refuse materials defined herein which a
licensee undertakes to collect shall be collected with all reasonable
speed and efficiency and shall be transported and disposed of by the
licensees, and all matter so collected shall be transported to the place
of disposal in the same vehicle or vehicles on which collected and on the
same day as collected, and no part of the collected contents of one
vehicle shall be transferred to another vehicle within the limits of the
Borough, unless a truck in operation becomes disabled and
nonoperable; then such transfer may be made as an emergency, except
that, in certain locations of the Borough designated by the Board of
Health, a pickup truck approved by the Board of Health may be used to
collect ashes, garbage, refuse or other refuse materials and transferred
to a regular packer truck for transportation to the disposal site.
J. Licensees shall not place receptacles containing collected material
along the curb awaiting arrival of the trucks. The collected material
must be carried directly from the premises where collected to the truck
and dumped into the truck, and the empty receptacles shall be
immediately returned to their proper places.
K. Each licensee shall maintain an office with local telephone connections
and keep said office open and in charge of a competent person in
attendance daily, except Sundays and holidays, from 8:00 a.m. until
5:00 p.m., and on Saturdays from 8:00 a.m. until 12:00 noon, to receive
and transmit to operators of the scavenger service any complaints from
persons concerned and notices and directions from the Sanitarian or
other duly designated employee of the Board of Health and to see that
such complaint, notices or directions receive prompt and proper
attention.
L. The license number of all trucks used by a licensee in the Borough of
Ho-Ho-Kus shall be registered with the Board of Health.
§ 48-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-7
1:409
§ 48-8. Supervision; enforcement.
Every licensee shall be subject to the supervision of the Board of Health
of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, and all provisions of this chapter, as well as
the rules and regulations promulgated hereby, and all orders or regulations
promulgated by the Board of Health shall be enforced by such person or
persons as the Board of Health, by resolution, may designate from time to
time.
§ 48-9. Extent of service.
Any licensee undertaking to furnish scavenger service to any residents of
the Borough, or to the owners or occupants of any commercial or industrial
establishments located within the Borough, upon commencing such
undertaking, shall be deemed conclusively to have entered into a contract
with such person or persons to supply scavenger service to the persons
owning residences in the Borough no less frequently than twice a week and
to the persons who are owners or occupants of any commercial or industrial
establishment as often each week as may be determined by the Board of
Health in order to maintain proper health standards. Such contract shall
remain in full force and effect during the entire term of the license, and
said scavenger service may not be discontinued by the licensee except for
nonpayment of the bill for the service, and then only if such nonpayment
continues after the licensee has given the person or persons involved 15
days' notice, in writing, of the nonpayment by certified mail, return receipt
requested.
§ 48-10. Performance bond.
Simultaneously with the granting of the license, every licensee must deliver
to the Board of Health an executed bond in the sum of $50,000 as security
for the faithful and uninterrupted performance of the contracts which the
licensee is to undertake with each resident and each owner or occupant of
the commercial or industrial establishments to supply them with scavenger
service during the entire term of his license, as more particularly set forth
herein, and to further insure said licensee will comply with all the provisions
of this chapter, as well as the rules and regulations contained herein, and
any other orders or regulations promulgated by the Board of Health. Said
bond must have as surety thereon such surety company or companies as are
acceptable to the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus and as are qualified to do business
in the State of New Jersey.
M. Every truck of a licensee, while collecting the ashes, garbage, refuse
and refuse material, shall be manned by a minimum of two employees.
N. The Board of Health may supplement these rules and regulations from
time to time, by resolution, whenever, in its opinion, it is necessary to do
so in order to safeguard the health of the inhabitants of the Borough of
Ho-Ho-Kus.
§ 48-7 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 48-11
1:410
§ 48-11. Insurance.
Every licensee, prior to undertaking to supply scavenger service in the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, must file with the Borough Clerk certificates of
insurance which contain a provision that, in the event of their cancellation,
the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus is to receive notice of such intended cancellation
20 days in advance, and, without such notice to the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus,
such cancellation shall be ineffective, and such certificates shall indicate
that the following coverage is in full force and effect:
§ 48-12. Revocation of license.
Any license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked at
any time by the Board of Health for just cause or if the licensee, after 10
days' notice in writing, continues to violate any of the provisions of this
chapter, any of the rules and regulations contained herein, or any of the
orders or regulations promulgated by the Board of Health.
§ 48-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter or any of the rules and regulations contained herein or any of
the orders or regulations promulgated by the Board of Health pursuant
hereto shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $500 or imprisonment in
the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, in the discretion of the
Judge before whom such conviction shall be had. Each and every violation
and nonconformance of this chapter, or each day that any provision of this
chapter shall have been violated, shall be construed a separate and distinct
violation thereof.
§ 48-14. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter shall not invalidate
any other section or provision thereof.
A. Public liability insurance on each truck used in the performance of
scavenger service in the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, with limits of bodily
injury liability of not less than $300,000 for each person and not more
than $500,000 for each accident.
B. Property damage liability on each truck used in the performance of
scavenger service in the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus in the amount of not
less than $50,000 for each accident.
C. Standard workmen's compensation insurance as required by the
workmen's compensation laws of the State of New Jersey.
D. Public liability insurance covering accidents that may be caused by
employees of the licensee in the amount of $300,000 for each person
and $500,000 for more than one person and property damage coverage
in the amount of not less than $50,000.
§ 48-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 48-15
1:411
§ 48-15. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect when published, as required by law.
§ 48-16. Repealer.
Ordinance No. 233, entitled "An Ordinance to Provide for the Licensing and
Regulation of Public Scavengers in the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus," together
with all amendments thereto, is hereby repealed; and any licenses granted
thereunder are hereby revoked, except that any licensee holding a license
under the repealed ordinance may reapply under this chapter without the
necessity of paying another license fee.
Chapter 49
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
§ 49-1. Definitions.
The following words shall have the meanings described wherever the same
appears in this chapter, unless the context clearly denotes the contrary:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, in the County of Bergen, State of
New Jersey.
DEPARTMENT — Department of Public Works of the Borough.
GOVERNING BODY — The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus,
in the County of Bergen and State of New Jersey.
SUBCOMMITTEE — The subcommittee duly appointed by the governing
body from among its members and charged with the control, regulation and
supervision of the Department.
SUPERINTENDENT — The Superintendent of the Department.
§ 49-2. Establishment.
There is hereby created and established in the Borough a Department of
Public Works, to be supervised and administered by the Superintendent
designated by the governing body.
§ 49-3. Superintendent appointed; compensation.
The Superintendent shall be appointed by the governing body, and he shall
receive such salary as the governing body may determine from time to time
and set forth in the Salary Ordinance.105
105. Editor's Note: See Ch. 53, Salaries.
§ 48-15 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 49-4
1:412
§ 49-4. Authority of subcommittee.
The Superintendent and the Department shall be under the control and
supervision of and responsible to the subcommittee and perform such duties
as the subcommittee may from time to time designate.
§ 49-5. Powers and duties of Superintendent.
The Superintendent of the Department shall have the following powers and
duties:
§ 49-6. Department employees.
The employees of the Department of Public Works shall consist of a
Superintendent, Assistant Superintendent and a Foreman, and as many
other employees as the governing body may deem necessary and by
resolution from time to time appoint.
§ 49-7. Assistant Superintendent.
The Assistant Superintendent of the Department shall assist the
Superintendent in the administration and function of said Department and
A. Supervise and direct all employees of the Department.
B. Be responsible for the servicing of all requests and complaints of
citizens involving Borough facilities, including but not limited to storm
flooding, sewer failures and road damages.
C. Supervise the construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of
all public streets, sidewalks, curbs and gutters within the limits of the
Borough and prevent interference with the public use thereof and
further maintain reasonable standards of maintenance and repair of the
same.
D. Supervise the construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of
the sanitary and storm sewer systems within the limits of the Borough.
E. Supervise the construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of
the water system within the limits of the Borough.
F. Develop a comprehensive program for the removal of snow and leaves
and direct removal of snow and leaves and cleaning of streets.
G. Maintain all Borough-owned properties and recreational facilities.
H. Arrange for the keeping of a correct record of the work and operations
of the Department and at the end of each month shall prepare and
present to the governing body at the next regular meeting a report of
the work and operations of the Department for the preceding month.
I. Perform such other duties as the governing body may from time to time
request.
§ 49-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 49-7
1:413
shall perform such duties as may from time to time be assigned to him by
the Superintendent in addition to ordinary work of the Department.
§ 49-8. Foreman.
The Foreman of the Department shall assist the Superintendent and the
Assistant Superintendent in the administration and function of said
Department and shall perform such duties as may from time to time be
assigned to him by the Superintendent or the Assistant Superintendent in
addition to ordinary work in the Department.
§ 49-9. Personnel rules and regulations.
All employees of the Department shall be subject to and must comply with
the provisions of the Borough ordinance establishing the personnel rules
and regulations for Borough employees.106
§ 49-10. Repealer.
All ordinances, or parts of ordinances, relating to the contents of this
chapter and inconsistent therewith are herewith repealed to the extent of
such inconsistency.
§ 49-11. Severability.
It is the intention of this chapter that every provision thereof shall be
considered separable, and the invalidity of any section, clause or provision
of this chapter shall not affect the validity of any other portion of this
chapter.
§ 49-12. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately after publication of notice of final
passage in the manner provided by law.
Chapter 50
REFRIGERATION EQUIPMENT, WATER-COOLED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water and water rates — See Ch. 81.
§ 50-1. Recirculating system required.
Any water-cooled refrigeration equipment or air-conditioning equipment
installed within the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, which said equipment is
106. Editor's Note: See Ch. 42, Personnel Rules and Regulations.
§ 49-7 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 50-1
1:414
operated and serviced by water provided by the Water Department of the
said Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus after the effective date of this chapter, shall be
provided with such equipment as shall make it possible to continue to use
the water in said system in a recirculating manner.
§ 50-2. New equipment.
No water-cooled refrigeration equipment or air-conditioning equipment
shall be installed after the effective date of this chapter using a watercirculating
system in connection therewith which does not have a
recirculating system as provided in the preceding section.
§ 50-3. Approval of plans and specifications.
No water-cooled refrigeration equipment or air-conditioning equipment
shall be installed after the effective date of this chapter until complete plans
and specifications therefor have been approved by the Mayor and Council,
and no such plans shall be approved unless provision is made as provided
for above to prevent the wasteful use of water.
§ 50-4. Use prohibited during water shortage.
Any person, firm or corporation using water-cooled refrigeration equipment
or air-conditioning equipment using water shall immediately cease using
the same during any period of water shortage upon receipt of notice from
the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus that such an emergency exists affecting the
public welfare and shall not resume the operation of said equipment until
after notice is given that such water shortage emergency no longer exists.
§ 50-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the terms of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to pay a fine not exceeding $200,
the amount of such fine to be in the discretion of the Magistrate before
whom the matter shall be heard, and each day that a violation continues
shall be considered a separate offense for which a separate penalty may be
imposed.
§ 50-6. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect when passed and published as required by law.
Chapter 51
RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO
§ 51-1. Policy.
It is hereby declared to be the public policy of this Borough to recognize
the public's general right to know pursuant to the Open Public Records Act
§ 50-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 51-1
1:415
(N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.). All records kept in the course of official duties by
any Borough officer or employee shall be deemed to be government records,
as that term is defined by N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1.1, and such records shall be
subject to inspection by the public unless exempt under the statute or other
regulation, common law practice, executive order of the Governor, Rules of
Court, federal law or judicial decision.
§ 51-2. Custodian of records; records request form.
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1.1, the Municipal Clerk is designated as
the custodian of records. The Clerk shall adopt a form for the use of any
person who requests access to a record, and such form shall contain all of
the information required by N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5f.
§ 51-3. Inspection and copying of public records.
A. Any person seeking to inspect, examine or copy a public record of this
municipality shall make application in writing to the Municipal Clerk,
during regular business hours, on the form provided. All requests for
public records shall be as specific as possible, including the type of
record and date created, if known.
B. The Municipal Clerk shall promptly comply with a request to inspect,
examine, copy or provide a copy of a government record. If the Clerk is
unable to comply with a request for access, he or she shall indicate on
the request form the specific basis for such inability to comply and shall
promptly return it to the requestor. The Clerk shall sign and date the
form and provide the requestor with a copy thereof.
C. In those instances where the nature of the request or the record itself
leads the Municipal Clerk to doubt whether or not the record is a
government record as defined by law or is a record exempt from
disclosure, the Clerk shall request an opinion from the Municipal
Attorney. A copy of the request form shall be forwarded to the Attorney,
who, after review and investigation, shall issue an opinion and note
such opinion on the request form and promptly return it to the
Municipal Clerk. If any part of a particular record is exempt from public
access pursuant to N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq., the Clerk shall delete,
redact or excise from a copy of the record that portion which is exempt
from access and shall promptly permit access to the remainder of the
record.
D. If the record requested is temporarily unavailable because it is in use or
in storage, the Clerk shall so advise the requestor and shall make
arrangements to make a copy of the record available.
E. If a request for access to a government record would substantially
disrupt municipal operations, the Clerk may deny access to the record
after attempting to reach a reasonable solution with the requestor that
accommodates the interests of the requestor and the municipality.
§ 51-1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 51-3
1:416
§ 51-4. Time limits for compliance.
Unless a shorter time period is otherwise provided by statute, regulation
or executive order, the Clerk shall grant access to a government record or
deny a request for access to a record as soon as possible, but not later than
seven business days after receiving the request, provided that the record
is currently available and not in storage or archived. In the event that the
Clerk fails to respond within seven business days after receiving a request,
the failure to respond shall be deemed a denial of the request, unless the
requestor has elected not to provide a name, address or telephone number,
or other means of contacting the requestor. If the requestor has elected
not to provide a name, address, or telephone number, or other means of
contacting the requestor, the Clerk shall not be required to respond until
the requestor reappears before the custodian seeking a response to the
original request. If the government record is in storage or archived, the
requestor shall be so advised within seven business days after the Clerk
receives the request. The requestor shall be advised by the Clerk when the
record can be made available. If the record is not made available by that
time, access shall be deemed denied.
§ 51-5. Posting of appeals procedure.
The Clerk shall post prominently in public view, in or adjacent to the Clerk's
office, a statement that sets forth, in clear, concise and specific terms, the
right to appeal a denial of or failure to provide access to a government
record and the procedure by which an appeal may be filed.
§ 51-6. Viewing of government records; removal prohibited.
§ 51-7. Fees.
Copies of records may be purchased for the fee prescribed by law or
regulation. If a fee is not prescribed by law or regulation, the fee shall be
F. As required by N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5e, immediate access shall be granted for
access to budgets, bills, vouchers, contracts (including collective
negotiations agreements and individual employment contracts), and
public salary and overtime information.
A. Upon the approval of a request to view, inspect, examine or copy a
record, the record and the requestor shall remain in the presence of the
Municipal Clerk or his or her authorized representative at all times.
Under no circumstances shall any government record be removed from
the office where it is normally kept unless accompanied by the
custodian or his or her authorized representative.
B. In the event that the nature of a request to view records requires that
the Clerk or other municipal employee observe or monitor such viewing
for a period of time exceeding 1/2 hour, the requestor shall be
responsible for reimbursing the municipality for time spent by the Clerk
or other employee.
§ 51-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 51-7
1:417
the actual cost of duplicating the record; provided, however, that where the
actual cost for duplication of a record exceeds the rates below, the actual
cost shall be imposed.
A. Standard-sized paper documents, up to 8 1/2 inches by 14 inches in
size:
Pages Fee Per Page
1 to 10 $0.75
11 to 20 $0.50
All over 20 $0.25
B. Large-sized paper documents and maps:
Document Fee
Zoning Map and Schedule $2
Street Map $1
Drug-Free School Zone Map $1 per square foot
Soils Survey Map $1 per square foot
Site plan $1 per square foot
Subdivision plat $1 per square foot
Tax Maps (11 x 17) $1
Engineering plans $1 per square foot
C. Preprinted documents:
Document Fee
Copy of the Code book $261 or current price, whichever
is greater
Each Code supplement $20 per copy
Zoning pamphlet $25 per copy
Land Use pamphlet $15 per copy
Master Plan $25 per copy
Subdivision pamphlet $15 per copy
Tax Map booklet (11 x 17) $20 per copy
D. Police reports and photographs:
(1) Police accident reports: same as Subsection A above, if requested
and picked up in person.
(2) Police accident reports, when copies are requested other than in
person: $5 for the first three pages and $1 per page for each
additional page, as established by N.J.S.A. 39:4-131.
§ 51-7 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 51-7
1:418
(3) Photographs will be photocopied at the rates established herein. If
requests are made for duplicate photographs, the actual cost of
making the photographs shall be charged. [Amended 11-23-2004
by Ord. No. 891]
(4) A fee of $10 is hereby established for fingerprinting of any
individual.
(5) For Municipal Court discovery, videotapes shall be charged at the
rate of $5 per videotape. [Added 11-23-2004 by Ord. No. 891]
(6) On any item that cannot be photocopied on the Borough copy
machine or not otherwise provided for herein, the actual cost
incurred in making the copy shall be charged. [Added 11-23-2004
by Ord. No. 891]
(7) Actual postage shall be charged for any discovery sent by mail, as
well as $0.25 for the envelope for any discovery sent by mail.
[Added 11-23-2004 by Ord. No. 891]
(8) Where Municipal Court discovery must be obtained from an entity
other than the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, e.g., another police
department, the actual cost paid to the other entity shall be paid by
the requestor. [Added 11-23-2004 by Ord. No. 891]
E. Electronic records:
(1) Copy of videotape:
(a) Tape supplied by requestor: $45.
(b) Tape supplied by municipality: $50.
(2) Copy of audiotape:
(a) Tape supplied by requestor: $25.
(b) Tape supplied by municipality: $32.50.
(3) Copy of electronic document or database. The following fees cover
the cost of copying existing files to a floppy disk or CD. Any
requests for software conversions shall be subject to the special
service charge described below. For security reasons, the use of a
floppy disk or CD provided by the requestor is prohibited.
(a) Floppy disks: $5, plus cost of disk ($0.50 each).
(b) CD: $5, plus cost of CD ($3 each).
F. Miscellaneous:
§ 51-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 51-7
1:419
Document Fee
Municipal lien search, under N.J.S.A.
54:5-11
$10
Tax search, N.J.S.A. 54:5-13 and
54:5-14
$10
Tax search continuation, per year,
N.J.S.A. 54:5-15
$2
Tax bills (1st copy) $2
Subsequent copy, N.J.S.A. 54:4-64 $5
List of property owners, under N.J.S.A.
40:55D-12c
$0.25 per name or $10,
whichever is more
Certified copy of death certificate
[Amended 3-27-2007 by Ord. No.
925]
$15
Certified copy of marriage and birth
certificates [Amended 3-27-2007 by
Ord. No. 925]
$20
G. A special service charge shall be imposed, in addition to the actual cost
of duplicating the record, where the nature, format, manner of collation
or volume of printed matter is such that it cannot be reproduced by
ordinary document-copying equipment in ordinary business size, or
where such record involves an extraordinary expenditure of time and
effort to accommodate the request. The requestor shall have the
opportunity to review and object to the special service charge prior to it
being incurred. Charges shall be as follows:
(1) The actual cost (materials and supplies but no staff labor) of
duplication or reproduction; plus
(2) A special service charge of $50 per hour or the actual direct cost of
labor (if less) shall be imposed for each hour of extraordinary time
predicted to be utilized to respond to the request. The rate shall be
assessed in ten-minute increments. A deposit of 50% of the
estimated amount shall be made at the time of the request if the
estimated cost of reproducing and/or special service charge
exceeds $25. The balance will be paid at the time of pickup of
documents.
H. Conversion of records from one medium to another: cost of duplication,
plus special service charges as follows:
(1) Conversion of paper record to electronic form: $50 per hour.
(2) Conversion of electronic files from one software product to
another: $50 per hour.
§ 51-7 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 51-7
1:420
§ 51-8. Fee waivers.
§ 51-9. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter shall require the custodian of documents or any
other municipal official to examine, analyze, tabulate or interpret
documents which are subject to production under the New Jersey Open
Public Records Act.107 Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as
requiring the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus to furnish copies of any privileged
documents or other documents which have been determined not disclosable
in accordance with law.
§ 51-10. Notice concerning copyright laws.
The Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus may be compelled by New Jersey law to produce
or duplicate governmental records, but no compliance with these legal
obligations shall be deemed to constitute a license, sublicense or waiver of
copyright laws. The Municipal Clerk shall give the following notice to any
requestor of governmental records:
Notice: Copyright Laws
You must comply with United States copyright laws. These laws may
restrict your right to use, duplicate or modify the records provided to you
by the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus. You should consult your own legal counsel
on this, since severe civil and criminal penalties for violation of copyright
laws are provided.
§ 51-11. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or word
contained in this chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason
whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this
chapter, which shall remain in full force and effect, and, to this end, the
provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable.
I. Applicable postage shall be added for any and all records requested by
mail.
J. A deposit shall be paid prior to filling any anonymous request where it is
estimated that the information requested will cost in excess of $5 to
reproduce. The amount of the deposit shall equal the total estimated
cost of filling the request.
A. The Mayor and Borough Council may, by resolution, waive the fees or
other charges otherwise chargeable if the requestor of governmental
records is a governmental or educational entity.
B. In addition, the first 10 pages of any request by the press shall be
without charge.
107. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.
§ 51-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 51-12
1:421
§ 51-12. Repealer.
All other ordinances of the Borough, or parts thereof, which are in conflict
with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
§ 51-13. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon passage and publication as required by
law.
Chapter 51A
RECREATION COMMISSIONERS, BOARD OF
§ 51A-1. Creation; membership; terms; vacancies; compensation.
§ 51A-2. Officers; meetings.
A. There is hereby created, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:12-1 et seq., a Board of
Recreation Commissioners of the Borough consisting of seven
members. The members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Council. There may be one member of the
Council on the Board of Recreation Commissioners who shall be
appointed annually by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Council for a term of one year. All of the members of the Board shall be
citizens and residents of the Borough.
B. The Mayor and Council, in selecting members to serve on the Board,
shall give due consideration to selecting members from the following
organizations: the Ho-Ho-Kus Board of Education, the Ho-Ho-Kus/
Saddle River Athletic Association and four members at large.
[Amended 4-28-1992 by Ord. No. 702; 2-15-2005 by Ord. No.
894]
C. The Commissioners first appointed shall be appointed for terms of one,
two, three, four and five years, respectively, in such a manner that the
term of at least one Commissioner, and not more than two
Commissioners, shall expire in each year. Thereafter, all appointments
shall be for terms of five years, and vacancies shall be filled for the
unexpired term only. Members shall serve until their respective
successors are appointed and shall qualify.
D. No Commissioner shall receive any compensation for his services as a
Commissioner.
A. Immediately following their appointment and assumption of their office,
an organizational meeting shall be held by the members of the Board.
At such time, there shall be elected a Chairman and Vice Chairman,
who must be Commissioners, a Secretary, who need not be a
Commissioner, and such officers as may be necessary.
§ 51-12 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 51A-2
1:422
§ 51A-3. Powers and duties.
B. It shall be the duty of the Chairman to preside at all meetings of the
Board and of the Secretary to keep minutes at all the meetings and of
all the proceedings of the Board. A majority of the Board shall
constitute a quorum of business, and three affirmative votes shall be
necessary to carry any proposition. A meeting of the Board shall be held
at least once every three months.
A. The Board of Recreation Commissioners shall at all times be subject to
the general authority of the Mayor and Council but shall have the
following powers, duties and authority:
(1) With the approval of the Borough Council, and if given after
appropriate action in accordance with the law, the Board may
acquire lands for public parks and recreation places by gift or
purchase and construct or cause to be constructed on these lands
so acquired such buildings or other structures as may be deemed
necessary to enable the Board to provide properly and adequately
for the purposes of the Board.
(2) The Board may solicit and receive any gifts, bequests of money or
other personal property to be applied for either the temporary or
permanent operation and maintenance of the recreation areas
within the jurisdiction of the Board.
(3) The Board may conduct any form of recreation or cultural activity
that will benefit the health, education and general welfare of the
residents of the Borough.
(4) The Board may control and supervise all parks and places of
recreation within the jurisdiction of the Borough and Board.
(5) The Board may adopt suitable rules, regulations and bylaws
governing both the use of such parks and recreation areas and the
conduct of all persons while on or using the same. Any person who
shall violate any of such rules, regulations or bylaws shall be
deemed in violation of this chapter.
(6) The Board may appoint a Recreation Director for a term not to
exceed three years and such number of custodians, supervisors and
assistants for the several playgrounds and recreation places under
its control as they shall think necessary and fix and determine their
salaries. This chapter and the rules, regulations and bylaws
adopted by the Board may be enforced by the Police Department of
the Borough.
(7) The Board shall have the power to establish certain fees to be
charged to those persons who desire to use the various recreation
facilities in the Borough under the control of the Board of
Recreation Commissioners. Such fees as may be established by the
Board shall be set annually, and such fees, once established, shall
§ 51A-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 51A-3
1:423
§ 51A-4. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
§ 51A-5. Budget; recommendations for improvements; office space.
§ 51A-6. Fees and expenses; use of funds.
immediately be posted in the Borough Hall and published in the
official newspaper and a copy of the same immediately sent to the
Mayor and Council by forwarding a copy thereof to the Borough
Clerk.
B. The Board of Recreation Commissioners shall, in addition to the powers
and duties defined herein, be chargeable with the performance of all
duties and shall be vested with all other powers as are more particularly
set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:12-1 to 40:12-8, inclusive, as amended and
supplemented.
A. All rules, regulations, bylaws and amendments thereto adopted by the
Board shall be promulgated by one publication in the official newspaper
published or circulated in the Borough, and a notice shall be posted in
at least one public place and at each location in the Borough to which
they apply.
B. The rules, regulations and bylaws shall become effective 10 days from
and after the date of the last publication.
A. Each year, the Board shall develop an operating budget for the ensuing
calendar year and present it to the Mayor and Council on or before
November 15.
B. The budget shall give the details of the moneys considered necessary to
carry out the recreational program adopted by the Board and show the
amount of moneys allocated for the various required services. The
Mayor and Council shall have the right to approve the budget in whole
or in part or to fix an amount which the Council deems adequate and
proper for the purpose of the Board of Recreation Commissioners and
shall appropriate the sum for such purpose. The Board shall have the
right to conduct its affairs, policies and programs and shall expend
moneys each year within the amount appropriated by the Council for
such purpose. At no time shall the Board expend more than the sum so
appropriated.
C. Each year, the Board may make recommendations to the Council or the
Board of Education concerning capital improvements to any park,
playground, field or recreation area within the jurisdiction of the Board,
but, in accordance with the law, the Council or Board of Education shall
retain control over the expenditures of any moneys appropriated for
such capital improvements.
D. A suitable office or offices shall be provided for the Board of Recreation
Commissioners.
§ 51A-3 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 51A-6
1:424
§ 51A-7. Violations and penalties.
A violation of this chapter and the rules, regulations and/or bylaws adopted
pursuant hereto shall be punished by a fine of not less than $25 and not to
exceed $200.
§ 51A-8. Repealer; when effective.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed, and this chapter shall take effect immediately upon final passage
and publication as required by law.
§ 51A-9. Severability.
If any part of this chapter shall be deemed invalid, such part shall be
deemed severable, and the invalidity thereof shall not affect the remaining
parts of this chapter.
Chapter 52
RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 34. Public scavengers — See Ch. 48.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the Board of Recreation Commissioners
to collect the fees that are charged by the Recreation Commission and
to promptly deliver such fees to the Borough Treasurer for deposit in a
segregated account relating to the Board of Recreation Commissioners.
B. Such fees by the Board shall be used only for the purpose of improving,
maintaining or policing the playgrounds and recreation places and for
other expenses of the Board.
C. Expenditures by the Recreation Commission of any of the fees or
revenues collected by the Recreation Commission may only be made
upon the adoption of a resolution by the Mayor and Council approving a
resolution previously adopted by the Recreation Commission
specifically setting forth the purpose of such expenditure and the
amount to be expended.
§ 51A-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 51A-9
1:425

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 12-15-1987 by Ord. No. 614]
§ 52-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALUMINUM CANS — Recyclable aluminum cans; does not include pie
plates or ferrous metals.
CONCRETE, BRICK and BLOCK — Concrete, brick and block which is
processed at a facility approved by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection and Energy (NJDEPE) to recycle this
material.[Added 12-17-1991 by Ord. No. 692]
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS — Source-separated,
nonputrescible recyclable material generated from the construction,
alteration, repair, maintenance and/or demolition of structures within
Bergen County. This material shall include concrete, bricks, block, ferrous
and nonferrous scrap, asphalt, asphalt shingles, recyclable woods scrap and
any and all material generated from the construction, alteration, repair,
maintenance and/or demolition of a structure or structures within Bergen
County that a municipality may deem recyclable.[Added 10-26-1993 by
Ord. No. 722]
CONTAINERIZED — The placement of yard waste in a trash can, bucket,
bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling or
blowing out into the street and coming into contact with
stormwater.[Added 2-28-2006 by Ord. No. 908]
CORRUGATED PAPER/CARDBOARD — Structural material shaped in
parallel furrows and ridges for rigidity, used to make packing and shipping
containers primarily for commercial/industrial operations.[Amended
12-17-1991 by Ord. No. 692]
FERROUS CONTAINERS — All metal containers made of steel and/or tin,
the most common being food cans. Bimetal cans with steel sides and
bottoms and aluminum tops are included in this material.[Added
12-17-1991 by Ord. No. 692]
GLASS — All products made from silica or sand, soda ash and limestone,
the product being transparent or translucent and being used for packaging
or bottling of various matter and all other materials commonly known
as "glass," excluding, however, blue and flat glass, commonly known as
"window glass."
GRASS CLIPPINGS — All grass clippings that are not mulched or composted
on the respective property. The location of the compost facility and the
NJDEPE facility registration number must be provided.[Added 12-17-1991
by Ord. No. 692]
§ 52-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-1
1:427
HOUSEHOLD-GENERATED BATTERIES — Any type of button coin,
cylindrical, rectangular or other shaped, enclosed device or sealed
container consisting of a combination of two or more voltaic or galvanic
cells, electrically connected to produce electric energy, composed of lead,
lithium, manganese, mercury, mercuric oxide, silver oxide, cadmium, zinc,
copper or other metals, or any combination thereof, and designed for
household use, including any alkaline, manganese, lithium, mercuric oxide,
silver oxide, zinc-air or zinc-carbon battery, nickel-cadmium rechargeable
battery or sealed lead rechargeable battery.[Added 2-28-1995 by Ord.
No. 742]
LEAVES — Those materials naturally formed from trees and shrubs that are
suitable for composting and mulching purposes.
MAGAZINES — Includes all magazines or periodicals printed on glossy
stock or paper or heavier paper than that recognized as newsprint.
METAL WHITE GOODS — All products made of metal, exclusive of
aluminum, including washers, dryers, refrigerators, stoves, hot-water
heaters, tire rims, springs, bicycles, bimetal (tin) cans or scrap metal.
MIXED PAPER — High-grade office paper, all newspaper inserts,
magazines, computer paper, paper used in offices, phone books, white
typing and ledger paper, white note pad paper, copier paper, computer
printout paper, manila tab cards, file folders and books.
MOTOR OIL — All oil from automotive engines that is collected by an
NJDEPE-registered hazardous waste transporter. The following are not
eligible: antifreeze, hydraulic fluid, machine oil and transmission
fluid.[Added 12-17-1991 by Ord. No. 692]
NEWSPAPER — Paper of the type commonly referred to as "newsprint"
and distributed at stated intervals, usually daily or weekly, having printed
thereon news and opinions and containing advertisements and other
matters of public interest. Magazines and periodicals, as well as any other
paper products, are not considered "newspaper."
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.[Added 2-28-2006 by Ord. No. 908]
PLASTIC CONTAINERS — This includes such containers as polyethylene
terephthalate (PET), soda bottles, high-density polyethylene (HDPE), milk,
water or detergent bottles and vinyl (V).[Added 12-17-1991 by Ord. No.
692]
ROOFING SHINGLES — All roofing shingles that are recycled at a facility
approved by NJDEPE to recycle this material.[Added 12-17-1991 by Ord.
No. 692]
SOLID WASTE — Includes all garbage and rubbish usually disposed of by
regular scavenger service for the residential and nonresidential occupants
of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
§ 52-1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 52-1
1:428
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive
or other way, which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway,
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.[Added
2-28-2006 by Ord. No. 908]
TIRES — All truck and passenger automobile tires that are retreaded,
remanufactured, recapped, used in a tire reef project or shredded for use
as tire-derived fuel at a facility approved by the NJDEPE to recycle this
material, unless otherwise exempted.[Added 12-17-1991 by Ord. No.
692]
YARD WASTE — Leaves and grass clippings.[Added 2-28-2006 by Ord.
No. 908]
§ 52-2. Separation required; applicability. [Amended 12-17-1991 by
Ord. No. 692]
On and after the date fixed and promulgated by regulations issued by
resolution of the Borough Council in accordance with the terms hereof,
it shall be mandatory for all residential, commercial/industrial and
institutional facilities to separate aluminum cans, glass, corrugated paper/
cardboard, mixed paper, magazines, newspapers, metal white goods, leaves,
grass clippings, motor oil, plastic containers and ferrous containers from all
other solid waste produced by any such facility and to separate and bundle
such materials for pickup, collection or delivery to depots for recycling.
§ 52-3. Regulations.
The owner or occupant of any building, residential, commercial/industrial
or institutional buildings within the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus who shall place
for disposal, removal or collection the following items shall do so in strict
conformity with the following regulations:
A. Aluminum cans shall be rinsed and placed in bags or boxes which have
been securely closed and placed for curbside collection, not in the
gutter, in accordance with a schedule as authorized herein.
B. Glass, as defined herein, shall be rinsed and separated into clear, brown
and green glass and contained in suitable owner- or occupant-supplied
containers and delivered to a depot at the Department of Public Works
Building in accordance with a schedule as authorized herein.
C. Corrugated paper/cardboard shall be separately bundled and delivered
to a depot at the Department of Public Works in accordance with a
schedule as authorized herein. This regulation applies only to
commercial/industrial operations.
D. Newspapers shall be bundled separately, secured by cord, the bundles
not to exceed 25 pounds in weight. Newspapers shall not be bundled in
plastic or paper bags. No magazines or mixed paper shall be included
§ 52-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-3
1:429
with newspapers. Newspapers shall be collected in accordance with a
schedule as authorized herein. [Amended 10-26-1993 by Ord. No.
722]
E. Mixed paper and magazines shall be bundled separately and placed for
curbside pickup in accordance with a schedule as authorized herein.
[Amended 10-26-1993 by Ord. No. 722]
F. Metal white goods, as defined herein, shall be placed for curbside
pickup on monthly trash cleanup day or dropped off at the recycling
depot at the Department of Public Works. [Amended 10-26-1993 by
Ord. No. 722]
G. Leaves and yard waste. [Amended 8-28-1990 by Ord. No. 660;
2-28-2006 by Ord. No. 908]
(1) Between September 1 and December 31 of each year, leaves,
unless stored or recycled for composting or mulching, shall be
placed outside the street lines for pickup in accordance with a
schedule as authorized herein. Leaves shall be source separated
from solid waste generated at any residential premises. Leaves
shall not be placed for collection or disposal as waste.
(2) No person shall transport leaves to an out-of-state facility as
defined in N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.12, except in those instances where the
out-of-state facility is designed and operated for the purpose of
accepting leaves for recycling and the facility is designated in the
District Recycling Plan required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13.
(3) Sweeping, raking, blowing or otherwise placing yard waste that is
not containerized at the curb or along the street is only allowed
during the seven days prior to a scheduled and announced
collection and shall not be placed closer than 10 feet from any
storm drain inlet. Placement of such yard waste at the curb or
along the street at any other time or in any manner is in violation of
this article. If such placement of yard waste occurs, the party
responsible for the placement of the yard waste must remove the
yard waste from the street, or said party shall be deemed in
violation of this article.
H. Ferrous containers must be rinsed and free of food solids or liquids
prior to being placed in the container at the depot. [Added
12-17-1991 by Ord. No. 692]
I. Grass clippings shall be placed into reusable trash containers (no
plastic bags) weighing a maximum of 50 pounds. The containers must
be placed at curbside and shall be collected in accordance with the
respective schedule. [Added 12-17-1991 by Ord. No. 692]
J. Motor oil from automobiles must be in plastic containers with secured
lids and placed at the designated location within the depot. No
§ 52-3 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 52-3
1:430
§ 52-4. Ownership of recyclables. [Amended 12-17-1991 by Ord. No.
692]
Except for recyclable material placed at curbside in connection with
volunteer or charitable recycling efforts, from the time of placement at the
curb for delivery to the depot by or on behalf of any residential, commercial/
industrial or institutional facility, all aluminum cans, glass, corrugated
paper, newspapers, mixed paper, metal white goods, leaves, ferrous
containers, grass clippings, motor oil and plastic containers in accordance
with the terms hereof shall become the property of the Borough of Ho-Ho-
Kus or its authorized agent. It shall be a violation of this article for any
unauthorized person to collect, pick up or deliver, or cause to be collected,
picked up or delivered, any such recyclable material. Any such collection,
pickup or delivery in violation of this article shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense punishable as hereinafter provided.
§ 52-5. Donation and sale of recyclables. [Amended 12-17-1991 by
Ord. No. 692]
Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, any person who is an
owner, lessee or occupant may donate or sell recyclables to any person,
partnership or corporation, whether operating for profit or not for profit,
but weight/tonnage slips must be submitted to the Borough Recycling
Coordinator; except for recyclable material placed at curbside in connection
with volunteer or charitable recycling efforts, such person, partnership
or corporation may not, however, under any circumstances, pick up said
recyclables from curbside in the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, whether or not
antifreeze, hydraulic fluid, machine oil or transmission fluid will be
accepted. [Added 12-17-1991 by Ord. No. 692]
K. Plastic containers shall be rinsed and crushed, with caps removed, and
separated into the following types: No. 1 polyethylene terephthalate
(PET), No. 2 high-density polyethylene (HDPE) and No. 3 vinyl (V), then
delivered to the recycling depot. [Added 12-17-1991 by Ord. No.
692]
L. Construction and demolition debris shall be separated and disposed of
by private contractor or commercial recycler. Upon acquiring the
necessary Uniform Construction Code permit(s) for construction or
demolition, it shall be the responsibility of the permit holder, owner,
occupant or lessee of said property to recycle said materials as defined
in § 52-1, Definitions. All subsequent records and/or weight slips
documenting the recycling of said materials shall be given to the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus Municipal Recycling Coordinator before a
certificate of occupancy can be issued. [Added 10-26-1993 by Ord.
No. 722]
M. Household-generated batteries shall be placed in designated containers
located in the newspaper recycling barn at the recycling center on
Hollywood Avenue. [Added 2-28-1995 by Ord. No. 742]
§ 52-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-5
1:431
said recyclables are placed at curbside on or immediately preceding regular
curbside collection.
§ 52-6. Enforcement.
The Superintendent of the Department of Public Works, the Sanitation
Officer, the Construction Code Official and the Police Department are
hereby authorized and directed to enforce this article. The Borough
Administrator is hereby authorized and directed to establish and
promulgate rules and regulations as to the manner, days and times for
collection or delivery of recyclable materials as defined herein and initially
in accordance with the terms hereof. Such regulations shall be promulgated
no later than January 1, 1988. Within 60 days from the date of the
promulgation and publication of said regulations, the Borough Council may,
by resolution, change, modify, repeal or amend any portion of said rules and
regulations.
§ 52-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-27-1988 by Ord. No.
630]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates or neglects to comply
with any provision of this article or any regulation promulgated pursuant
thereto shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not less
than $5 nor more than $500. No enforcement of §§ 52-2 and 52-3 of this
article shall be made until three months from the effective date of
regulations authorized to be promulgated hereunder. A maximum two
warning notices shall be issued before the issuance of a summons and
complaint for all violations hereunder.
§ 52-8. Severability.
If any provision of this article is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid, such
judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this article
but shall be confined in its effect to the provision directly involved in the
controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 52-9. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this article are hereby repealed to the extent of such
inconsistency.
§ 52-10. When effective.
This article shall take effect after final passage and publication as required
by law.
§ 52-5 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 52-10
1:432
ARTICLE II
Multifamily Housing Developments
[Adopted 11-23-1993 by Ord. No. 724]
§ 52-11. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A building containing three or
more dwelling units occupied or intended to be occupied by persons living
independently of each other, or a group of such buildings.
RECYCLING AREA — Space allocated for collection and storage of sourceseparated
recyclable materials.
§ 52-12. Recycling area required; dimensions.
There shall be included in any new multifamily housing development that
requires subdivision or site plan approval an indoor or outdoor recycling
area for the collection and storage of residentially generated recyclable
materials. The dimensions of the recycling area shall be sufficient to
accommodate recycling bins or containers which are of adequate size and
number and which are consistent with anticipated usage and with current
methods of collection in the area in which the project is located. The
dimensions of the recycling area and the bins or containers shall be
determined in consultation with the Municipal Recycling Coordinator and
shall be consistent with the District Recycling Plan adopted pursuant to
Section 3 of P.L. 1987, c. 102 (N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13), and any applicable
requirements of the Municipal Master Plan adopted pursuant to Section 26
of P.L. 1987, c. 102.108
§ 52-13. Location of recycling area.
The recycling area shall be conveniently located for the residential
disposition of source-separated recyclable materials, preferably near, but
clearly separated from, a refuse dumpster.
§ 52-14. Lighting; accessibility.
The recycling area shall be well lit and shall be safely and easily accessible
by recycling personnel and vehicles. Collection vehicles shall be able to
access the recycling area without interference from parked cars or other
obstacles. Reasonable measures shall be taken to protect the recycling
area, and the bins or containers placed therein, against theft of recyclable
materials, bins or containers.
108. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
§ 52-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-15
1:433
§ 52-15. Protection against environmental conditions.
The recycling area or the bins or containers placed therein shall be
designed so as to provide protection against adverse environmental
conditions which might render the collected materials unmarketable. Any
bins or containers which are used for the collection of recyclable paper
or cardboard and which are located in an outdoor recycling area shall
be equipped with a lid or otherwise covered so as to keep the paper or
cardboard dry.
§ 52-16. Signs.
Signs clearly identifying the recycling area and the materials accepted
therein shall be posted adjacent to all points of access to the recycling area.
Individual bins or containers shall be equipped with signs indicating the
materials to be placed therein.
§ 52-17. Landscaping.
Landscaping and/or fencing shall be provided around any outdoor recycling
area and shall be developed in an aesthetically pleasing manner.
§ 52-15 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 52-17
1:434
Chapter 53
SALARIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Borough personnel — See Ch. 10.
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 16A.
Defined contribution retirement
program — See Ch. 16B.
§ 53-1. Annual Salary Ordinance.
The salaries and compensation of all officers and employees of the Borough
of Ho-Ho-Kus shall be as set forth in the annual Salary Ordinance.
§ 53-2. Public copy to be filed.
A copy of the current Salary Ordinance shall be kept on file by the Borough
of Ho-Ho-Kus for examination and inspection by the public.
Chapter 54
SCHOOL ZONE MAP
GENERAL REFERENCES
Drug-Free Zone Map — See Ch. 19. Official Map — See Ch. 39.
§ 54-1. Designation of school crossings.
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of P.L. 1999, c. 185, the
following is a list of school crossings which have been so designated by the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus:
§ 54-2. Adoption of map.
The School Zone Map prepared on or about July 28, 2000, by David A. Hals,
P.E., L.S., P.P., the Borough Engineer, is hereby approved and adopted as an
official finding and record of the location and areas within the municipality
A. Hollywood Avenue and Cleverdon Road (east side of Hollywood Avenue
overpass).
B. Hollywood Avenue and Lloyd Road (west side of Hollywood Avenue
overpass).
C. Midway on Lloyd Road (first entrance driveway).
D. Hollywood Avenue and Sheridan Avenue (at traffic light).
§ 52-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-2
1:435
of property which is used for school purposes and which is owned or leased
to any elementary or secondary school on school land and of the areas on or
within 1,000 feet of such school property.
§ 54-3. Map and list to constitute official finding and record.
The School Zone Map approved and adopted herein shall continue to
constitute an official finding and record as to the location and boundaries
of areas on or within 1,000 feet of property owned by or leased to any
elementary or secondary school or school board which is used for school
purposes until such time, if any, that this chapter shall be amended to reflect
any additions or deletions with respect to the location and boundaries
of school property and drunk-driving-free school zones. The list of school
crossings designated above by the Borough Council shall continue to
constitute an official finding and record of the location of school crossings
within the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus until such time, if any, that this chapter
shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions with respect to school
crossings in the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
§ 54-4. Changes in locations or boundaries.
The school board, or the chief administrative officer in the case of any
private or parochial school, is hereby directed and shall have the continuing
obligation to promptly notify the office of the Borough Engineer and the
Borough Attorney of any changes or contemplated changes in the location
and boundaries of any property owned or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or school board and which is used for school purposes or
of any additions or deletions to school crossings.
§ 54-5. Filing of map; copies.
The Borough Clerk is hereby directed to receive and to keep on file the
original of the map approved and adopted herein and the list of school
crossings and to provide at a reasonable cost a true copy thereof to any
person, agency or court which may from time to time request such a copy,
along with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the map approved
and adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby further directed that a
true copy of such map and list and of this chapter shall be provided without
cost to the Bergen County Clerk and to the office of the Bergen County
Prosecutor.
§ 54-6. Map and list as evidence.
It is understood that the map and list approved and adopted pursuant
to this chapter was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence in
prosecutions arising under the criminal and traffic laws of this state and
that, pursuant to state law, such map and list shall constitute prima facie
evidence of the following:
A. The location of elementary and secondary schools within the Borough.
§ 54-2 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 54-6
1:436
Chapter 55
SEWAGE DISPOSAL: INDIVIDUAL SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Illicit connections — See Ch. 31A.
Plumbing Code — See Ch. 44.
Sewers — See Ch. 56.
Water and water rates — See Ch. 81.
§ 55-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE AS TO INSTALLATION — A certificate
issued by the Board of Health, or an authorized agent, certifying that an
individual sewage disposal system has been installed in such manner as to
meet the requirements of the Realty Improvement Sewerage and Facilities
Act, P.L. 1954, c. 199,109 Standards for the Construction of Sewerage
Facilities for Realty Improvements, and higher standards prescribed by this
chapter, and all terms and conditions of approval imposed by the Board of
Health with respect to such system upon the issuance of the certificate of
compliance as to location and design therefor.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE AS TO LOCATION AND DESIGN — A
certificate issued by the Board of Health certifying that a proposed
individual sewage disposal system, or an alteration of any such system, is
in compliance with the provisions of the Realty Improvement Sewerage and
Facilities Act, P.L. 1954, c. 199,110 Standards for the Construction of Sewage
Facilities for Realty Improvements, and any higher standards prescribed by
this chapter.
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — Any system for the disposal of
sewage other than a sanitary sewer system collecting sewage from various
premises for treatment and disposal at a sewage disposal plant approved by
the State Department of Health.
B. The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to such
schools or a school board.
C. That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes.
D. The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000 feet
of such school property.
E. The location of all school crossings in the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
109. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 58:11-23 et seq.
110. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 58:11-23 et seq.
§ 54-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-1
1:437
PERSON — Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association or
other organization.
§ 55-2. Adoption of standards; title; copies on file; additional
regulations. [Amended 10-26-1967 by Board of Health Ord. No. 10]
A code regulating the location, construction, use, maintenance and method
of emptying or cleaning individual sewage disposal systems and fixing
penalties for the violation thereof is hereby adopted pursuant to P.L. 1950,
c. 188 (N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 26:3-69.6). A copy of said code is annexed
hereto and made a part hereof without inclusion of the text thereof herein.
The said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Individual Sewage Disposal System Code of New
Jersey (1963)." Three copies of the said Individual Sewage Disposal System
Code of New Jersey (1963) have been placed on file in the office of the
Secretary, Clerk or other similar officer of this Board of Health upon the
introduction of this chapter and will remain on file in said office for the
use and examination of the public. All references in this chapter shall be
construed to mean this code of 1963, and said code shall be in effect, except
that the following regulations or higher standards are hereby prescribed:
A. Plans and specifications. Every application for a certificate of
compliance as to location and design of an individual sewage disposal
system shall include as a part thereof a complete set of plans and
specifications prepared or reviewed and approved by an engineer
licensed to practice professional engineering in the State of New Jersey.
The plans and specifications shall be drawn to scale and shall fully and
accurately show the system to be constructed and each component part
thereof as related to the plan and elevation of the building structure(s)
and the topography of the lot.
B. Requirements for built-in-place units.
(1) Detailed construction plans shall be provided for any component
part of a system to be built in place such as a septic tank,
distribution box or seepage pit. The construction plans shall specify
the dimensions, the materials to be used, the cement mixture, and
the size, type and location of any reinforcement.
(2) Concrete septic tanks and distribution boxes shall equal or exceed
the design and construction standards of current ACI 318 (Building
Code Requirements for Reinforced Concrete, adopted by the
American Concrete Institute).
(3) Units constructed of concrete block, cinder block, brick or stone
shall meet the requirements of the highest standards of masonry
construction. Septic tanks shall be constructed on a concrete base
at least six inches thick to serve as a foundation and bottom of the
unit. Mortar shall be one part portland cement to three parts sand.
Two coats (each 1/4 of an inch thick) of portland cement, sand
§ 55-1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 55-2
1:438
plaster or other equivalent sealing mixture shall be applied to the
interior walls of a septic tank.
C. Information to be furnished respecting precast and prefabricated septic
tanks and distribution boxes and seepage pits.
(1) If any precast concrete unit is to be used, the plans for the system
may, in addition to other specifications, provide a designation of
any such unit or units to be used.
(2) Concrete units shall equal or exceed the design and construction
standards of current ACI 318 (Building Code Requirements for
Reinforced Concrete, adopted by the American Concrete Institute).
(3) No precast or prefabricated unit shall be installed in any individual
sewage disposal system constructed in the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus
unless the design and construction of such unit shall have been
determined by the Board of Health to comply with the
requirements of the Standards for the Construction of Sewerage
Facilities for Realty Improvements and the provisions of this
chapter. Such determination shall be made only upon the
submission to and review by the Board of Health of the structural
design of the unit. Structural design data shall show all detail
specifications, including dimensions, thickness of walls, strength of
materials, size, type and locations of any reinforcement, inlet,
outlet, access openings and other details sufficient to establish that
the unit complies with all the requirements of state laws and
standards and any applicable requirements of this chapter.
Submission to the Board of Health for purposes of the required
determination as to any unit may be made in connection with an
application for certification as to location or design or may be made
at any time by any manufacturer or distributor of precast or
prefabricated septic tanks, distribution boxes or seepage pits. In
the event that the Board of Health determines that a unit does not
meet the applicable requirements, the Board shall furnish to the
applicant, manufacturer or distributor a written report stating the
specific reason for such determination.
D. Capacities of septic tanks serving single-family dwelling units.
(1) Septic tanks serving single-family dwelling units shall have the
following minimum capacities:
Number of
Bedrooms
Capacity of Septic
Tank
(gallons)
Two Seepage Pits for
Each Tank
(gallons each)
2 or less 1,000 1,000
3 or less 1,200 1,200
4 or less 1,200 1,400
§ 55-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-2
1:439
Number of
Bedrooms
Capacity of Septic
Tank
(gallons)
Two Seepage Pits for
Each Tank
(gallons each)
5 or less 1,450 1,600
6 or less 1,450 1,800
Promulgated by the State Commission of Health on December 7,
1954, and the Individual Sewerage Disposal Code of New Jersey,
1953, adopted by the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus May 25, 1961.
(2) Septic tanks and pits can be round or square of the above capacity.
The foregoing minimum capacity requirements shall be controlling
in the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus and not those specified in Section
5.1(a) of the Standards for the Construction of Sewerage Facilities
for Realty Improvements.
(3) The top of the tank and seepage pit are to have a poured concrete
slab, reinforced with iron, the minimum thickness to be six inches
with an eighteen-inch opening, with covers constructed so as to
anchor the top of all walls.
(4) All drainage fields and area around the outer walls of
compartments, the seepage tank and seepage pits are to be filled
with one-and-one-half-inch and three-fourths-inch crushed stone to
a width of 12 inches, and from the bottom of the pit up to the inlet
pipe to be of this same width, and a layer of salt hay spread over the
crushed stone.
(5) If mud and water are present, cracked stone is to be laid in the
bottom of the excavation before concrete footing is poured. Pumps
must be in continuous use until completion.
(6) The above will be subject to and determined by a percolation test,
the porosity of the soil, the slope of the plot and geographical
surroundings according to the Realty Improvement Sewerage and
Facilities Act, P.L. 1954, c. 199,111 promulgated by the State
Commission of Health December 7, 1954, and Individual Sewerage
Disposal Code of New Jersey, 1953, adopted by the Borough of Ho-
Ho-Kus May 25, 1961. Care must be taken to prevent the
surrounding surface water from entering the disposal field.
(7) In low wet land, surface water and groundwater that interfere with
the proper functioning of a sewerage disposal system shall be
drained and trenched to a proper depth with one-and-one-half-inch
or three-fourths-inch crushed stone and drain pipe for discharge
into a lower level or into a storm drain.
111. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 58:11-23 et seq.
§ 55-2 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 55-2
1:440
§ 55-3. Location, construction and alteration.
(8) If groundwater elevation is high in the area where the proposed
building is to be constructed, the property must be filled in and
graded in a higher level.
(9) If a drainage field or a disposal bed is contemplated in place of a
seepage pit, application must be made to the Board of Health for
permission of location, adaptability and performance of same.
(10) Care must be taken to prevent any operation of mechanized
devices and bulldozers over or upon the completed sewerage
disposal system. This responsibility remains with the builder and
the property owner.
E. Building sewer.
(1) Building sewers shall be constructed of cast iron and shall be at
least 20 feet in length, measured from the outer wall of the building
to the inlet opening of the septic tank. All joints in the building
sewer shall be sealed with lead.
(2) Care must be taken on the depth of a basement in conjunction with
the level of the septic tank for the outgoing sewer pipe. Pipes from
the building to the septic tank are to be of not less than four-inch
extra-heavy cast-iron soil pipe.
(3) The foregoing provisions shall control over any inconsistent
provisions of the Standards for the Construction of Sewerage
Facilities for Realty Improvements, promulgated by the State
Commissioner of Health on December 7, 1954. The Board of Health
may issue such a certificate if the officer of the Health Department
shall submit a statement, in writing, signed by him to the Board of
Health that the said disposal system has been located and
constructed in accordance with the terms of the permit issued and
the requirements of the aforesaid code.
(4) In the event the officer of the Health Department deems it
necessary, he may require such certification to be made by an
engineer licensed to practice professional engineering in the State
of New Jersey, and in such event the costs thereof shall be borne by
the property owner or the person applying for such permit.
A. No person shall locate, construct or alter any individual sewerage
disposal system until the Board of Health shall have issued a certificate
of compliance as to location and design with respect to such system and
a permit to construct or alter such system.
B. Every application for a certificate of compliance as to location and
design shall contain a statement made by an engineer licensed to
practice professional engineering in the State of New Jersey that the
design and location of the proposed system are in compliance with the
§ 55-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-3
1:441
§ 55-4. Installation.
No individual sewage disposal system shall be placed in service or operation
until the Board of Health or its duly authorized agent shall have issued a
certificate of compliance as to installation with respect to such system. The
Board of Health may issue such a certificate if the officer of the Health
Department shall submit a statement, in writing, signed by him to the Board
of Health that the said disposal system has been located and constructed in
accordance with the terms of the permit issued and the requirements of the
aforesaid code.
§ 55-5. Application for certification.
All applications for certifications are supplied by the Secretary of the Board
of Health for that purpose. A separate application shall be filed and a
separate certificate issued for each installation.
§ 55-6. Fees.
The following fees and charges are hereby established:
§ 55-7. Inspections and tests.
provisions of the Realty Improvement Sewerage and Facilities Act,
promulgated by the State Commissioner of Health, the 1954 Standards
for the Construction of Sewerage Facilities for Realty Improvements
and any higher standards prescribed by this chapter.
A. For the filing of an application and plans for a certificate of compliance
as to location and design, to locate and construct an individual sewage
disposal system, the sum of $20.
B. For the filing of an application and plans for a certificate of compliance
as to location and design to alter an existing sewage disposal system,
the sum of $5.
C. For each reinspection of an individual sewage disposal system or part
thereof caused by the failure of the permittee to locate and construct or
alter the same in accordance with the application and the plan
submitted and the terms of the permit issued or the terms of the
aforesaid code, an inspection fee of $5 shall be charged.
D. If the officer of the Health Department is called to check on a
percolation test being made at the location where an individual
sewerage system is being installed, a fee of $10 will be charged.
A. No part of an individual sewerage disposal system exposed to view
upon completion of installation shall in any manner be filled in around
or covered from view until it has been inspected by the Board of Health
or its duly authorized representative.
§ 55-3 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 55-7
1:442
§ 55-8. Stoppage of work.
The Board of Health may order all further work in and about any individual
sewage disposal system which is being erected or installed in violation of
the Realty Improvement Sewerage and Facilities Act, promulgated by the
State Commissioner of Health December 7, 1954, or any provision of this
chapter to be stopped forthwith, except such work as shall be necessary
to remedy such violation, and thereafter to continue such work without
any violation of any of the provisions of the regulations, and after issuance
of any such order and the service of a copy thereof upon any person
connected with or working in and about the erection or installation of any
such disposal system or any part thereof, no further work shall be done
thereon except as aforesaid.
§ 55-9. Right of appeal.
Any person aggrieved by a denial of any certification or permit required
by this chapter or by any order of the Board of Health shall be entitled to
a hearing thereon before the Board of Health within 15 days after written
request therefor is made by the person claiming to be adversely affected.
Upon such a hearing, or within 15 days thereafter, the Board shall affirm,
alter or rescind the previous action with written findings and conclusions.
§ 55-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of the Realty Improvement
Sewerage and Facilities Act, 1954, any provisions of this chapter or any
order of the Board of Health issued pursuant thereto shall be subject to a
penalty of not less than $2 nor more than $200 for each violation. Each day
a particular violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 55-11. Repealer.
All ordinances, codes or parts of same inconsistent with any of the
provisions of this chapter or code established hereunder are hereby
repealed to the extent of such inconsistency and otherwise shall remain in
full force and effect.
§ 55-12. Severability.
If any section, subdivision, clause or provision of this chapter shall be
adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such adjudication
shall apply only to the section, subdivision, clause or provision so adjudged,
and the remainder of the chapter shall remain valid and effective.
B. The Board of Health may test in any appropriate manner any materials,
construction, products or units comprising any part of any individual
sewage disposal system to determine compliance with applicable
requirements with state laws and standards and the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 55-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-13
1:443
§ 55-13. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect as provided by law.
Chapter 56
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hazardous waste materials — See Ch. 28.
Illicit connections — See Ch. 31A.
Plumbing Code — See Ch. 44.
Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
55.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 66.
Stormwater control — See Ch. 66A.
Water and water rates — See Ch. 81.
§ 55-13 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 55-13
1:444
Part 1
[Adopted By The Mayor AGnedn eCroaul nPcriolv Oisfi oTnhse Borough Of Ho-Ho-Kus
9-26-1967 By Ord. No. 435]
ARTICLE I
Terminology
§ 56-1. Word usage; definitions.
For the purpose of this Part 1, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein, unless the context
specifically indicates otherwise. When not inconsistent with the context,
words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural
number include the singular number, words in the singular number include
the plural number, and the masculine shall include the feminine. The word
"shall," as used herein, is mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive.
AUTHORITY — The Northwest Bergen County Sewer Authority, which is the
district sewer system into which the municipal sewer system shall connect.
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Board of Health of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
BOD (denoting "biochemical oxygen demand") — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C., expressed in milligrams per liter.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of
food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
HOUSE CONNECTION — That part of the sewer lateral beginning five feet
outside the inner face of the building wall which receives the discharge from
the house drain and conveys it to the house sewer lateral.
HOUSE CONNECTION MAP — The plans showing points of connection for
the house connection laterals.
HOUSE DRAIN — The lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system within
a building which receives the discharge from soil and waste pipes and
conveys it to the house connection, and shall include those drains leading
from dwellings, business establishments and industrial buildings.
HOUSE SEWER LATERAL — That part of the sewer lateral that extends
from the main sewer to the curb to provide a connection point for the house
connection, all as shown on the house connection maps.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — The liquid waste from industrial processes as
distinct from sanitary sewage.
MAIN SEWER or PUBLIC SEWER — The sewers laid longitudinally along
the center lines or other part of the street or other right-of-way in which all
owners of abutting properties have equal rights and which is controlled by
the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
§ 56-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-1
1:445
MUNICIPAL SEWER SYSTEM — The Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus sewer system
and all appurtenances thereto.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or
other body of surface water or groundwater.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, corporation, society
or group.
pH — The logarithm to the base 10 of the reciprocal of the weight of
hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.
PLUMBING — The practice of installing, maintaining, extending, repairing
and altering plumbing systems. It is also the installed plumbing system
piping, materials, plumbing fixtures and appurtenances of such systems
in connection with the following: sanitary drainage or storm drainage
facilities, together with their venting systems, a public or private watersupply
system and fire-protection systems within or adjacent to any
building, structure or conveyance.
PLUMBING INSPECTOR — A person licensed and authorized to inspect
plumbing pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 26:1A-38 to 26:1A-44 and
N.J.S.A. 26:3-20 and in the employment of the Board of Health of the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
PLUMBING SYSTEM — The sanitary and storm drainage facilities, together
with their venting systems and plumbing fixtures, a public or private water
supply and the fire-protection systems within or adjacent to any building,
structure or conveyance to a point of connection to a public or private
sewage system, public or private water supply or other acceptable terminal.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree
that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch (1.27
centimeters) in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER — The same as "main sewer."
SANITARY SEWAGE — Sewage (including properly shredded garbage)
discharging from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including
apartment houses and hotels), office buildings, factories or institutions, and
free from stormwater and surface water.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which
stormwater, surface water and groundwater are not admitted.
SEWAGE — Any liquid waste containing animal, chemical or vegetable
matter in suspension or solution.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — Any arrangement or devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
SEWAGE WORKS — All facilities for collecting, pumping and disposing of
sewage.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
§ 56-1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 56-1
1:446
SEWER ENGINEER — The person or firm of duly licensed engineers
retained or appointed by the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus in connection with the
construction, installation and maintenance of the municipal sewer system
and, if no one has been appointed or such services have been completed,
the term shall mean the Borough Engineer.
SLUG — Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in
concentration of any given constituent or quantity of flow, exceeds, for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average
twenty-four-hour concentration of flows during normal operation.
STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN — A sewer which carries stormwater or
surface water and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial
waste.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in, water, sewage or other liquids and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
UNPOLLUTED WATER OR WASTE — Any water or waste containing no
free or emulsified grease or oil; acid or alkali; phenols or other substances
imparting taste and odor in receiving waters; toxic and poisonous
substances in suspension, colloidal state or solution; and noxious or odorous
gases. It shall contain not more than 10,000 parts per million (1,000,000)
by weight of dissolved solids, of which no more than 2,500 parts per million
(1,000,000) shall be as chloride, with permissible volume subject to review
by the Authority, and not more than 10 parts per million (1,000,000) each of
suspended solids and BOD. The color shall not exceed 50 parts per million
(1,000,000).
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
§ 56-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-1
1:447

ARTICLE II
Installation of Toilet Facilities; Connection to Public Sewer
§ 56-2. Separate and independent house sewer lateral required;
exception.
A separate and independent house sewer lateral shall be provided for:
§ 56-3. Installation and connection required.
The owner of all property upon which there is erected a house, building
or other structure used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or
other purpose, situated within the Borough and abutting on any street, alley
or right-of-way or located in the rear of other properties so abutting and
having access to such street, alley or right-of-way, in which street, alley or
right-of-way there is now located, or may in the future be located, a public
or sanitary sewage system of the Borough, is hereby required, at his own
expense, to:
§ 56-4. Time limit for connection of toilet facilities.
Such toilet facilities shall be installed and connection shall be made with the
public sewer within 180 days after the date of official notice requiring such
action.
A. Each building under one roof and occupied as one business or
residence; or
B. A combination of buildings owned by one party in one common
enclosure, occupied by one family or business; or
C. The one side of a double house having a solid vertical partition wall
making it capable of divided ownership. A building owned by one party
containing more than one store, apartment or office may be supplied by
one or more house sewer laterals at the discretion of the Sewer
Engineer, except that where one building stands at the rear of another
on an interior lot and no separate house connection is available or can
be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court or
driveway, the house service connection from the front building may be
extended to the rear building and the whole constructed as one building
sewer.
A. Install suitable toilet facilities therein.
B. Connect such facilities and all sanitary sewage facilities in such house,
building or structure directly with the proper public sewer in
accordance with the provisions of this Part 1 and of the requirements of
the Board of Health of the Borough.
§ 56-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-5
1:449
§ 56-5. Discontinuation of private sewage disposal systems.
As public sewers become available to property presently being served by
a private sewage disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to
the public sewer pursuant to the terms of this article, and any septic
tanks, cesspools and/or similar private sewage disposal systems shall be
abandoned and securely covered or filled with suitable material if required
by the Board of Health to protect the health and welfare of the community.
§ 56-6. Costs and expenses; liability of Borough.
All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the
house connection shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify
the Borough from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of the house connection.
§ 56-5 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 56-6
1:450
ARTICLE III
Failure to Comply With Connection Requirements
§ 56-7. Installation or connection by Borough.
If, after the expiration of said 180 days from the date of official notification,
the owner of any property affected by the provisions of this Part 1 has
failed to install such toilet facilities and to make such sewer connection as
required by Article II hereof after receiving official notice requiring such
action, as hereinbefore provided, the Borough may cause such installation
or connection to be made under the direction and supervision of the Board
of Health, or such other official or department of the Borough as may
hereafter be designated by the Mayor and Council of the Borough, or award
one or more contracts for the making of such improvements by a contractor
selected by the Borough on an annual basis as a result of open competitive
bidding.
§ 56-8. Notice of violation.
Before proceeding to make any such installation or connection, the Board of
Health, or such other official or department of the Borough as may hereafter
be designated by the Borough, shall cause notice of such contemplated
installation or connection to be given to the owner of any properties affected
thereby. The notice shall contain a description of the property affected,
sufficiently definite in term to identify it, as well as a description of the
required installation or connection and notice that, unless the installation or
connection shall be completed within 30 days after the service thereof, the
Borough will proceed to make such installation or connection or cause the
same to be done, pursuant to the authority of § 56-7 hereof. The notice shall
be served in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:63-56, 40:63-57 and 40:63-58.112
§ 56-9. Record of Borough expenses; filing with Tax Collector.
When any such toilet installation or sewer connection shall be made by the
Borough, a true and accurate account of the cost and expense shall be kept
and apportioned to the property or the properties thereby connected with
the sewers, and a true statement of such costs under oath shall be forthwith
filed by the Board of Health, or such other official or department of the
Borough as may hereafter be designated by the Borough, with the Borough
Clerk. The Borough shall examine the same, and if properly made, shall
confirm it and file such statement with the Tax Collector of the Borough,
who shall record the installation of the sewer connection in the same book
in which he records sidewalks or other assessments.
§ 56-10. Assessment of costs; lien.
Every such installation or sewer connection charge shall bear interest and
penalties from the same time and at the same rate as assessments for local
112. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:63-56 to 40:63-58 were repealed by P.L. 1991, c. 53, § 1.
§ 56-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-10
1:451
improvements in the Borough and from the time of confirmation shall be
a first and paramount lien against the respective property or properties
so connected with the sewer to the same extent as assessments for local
improvements and shall be collected and enforced in the same manner.
§ 56-11. Validity of charges.
No such charge for toilet installations or sewer connections shall be invalid
by reason of any error or omission in stating the name of the owner
or owners of properties affected by such toilet installations or sewer
connections, nor for any other informality, where such property or real
estate has actually been improved by such toilet installation or sewer
connection.
§ 56-10 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 56-11
1:452
ARTICLE IV
House Connections
§ 56-12. Filing of house connection maps.
After approval of a section or sections of the main sewer and house sewer
laterals, the Sewer Engineer or Borough Engineer shall file a complete set
of house connection maps with the Board of Health of the Borough of Ho-
Ho-Kus and with the Borough Clerk.
§ 56-13. Approval of house drain and house connection.
Before any portion of the house drain outside of the house is connected
to the house connection, the owner shall prove to the satisfaction of the
Plumbing Inspector that it is clean and conforms in every respect to the
ordinances of the Board of Health, and before any portion of the house
connection is connected to the house sewer lateral, the Plumbing Inspector
shall be satisfied that the house connection is in good order and conforms
in every respect to the requirements for construction thereof.
§ 56-14. Elevation requirements.
Whenever possible, the house connection shall be brought to the building at
an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any house
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the municipal and/or Authority
sewage works, sanitary sewage carried by such house drain shall be lifted
by an approved means and discharged to the house connection.
§ 56-15. Digging and backfilling of trenches.
A. When installing the house connection, the trenching shall be dug in a
careful manner and properly sheathed where required. The excavated
materials shall be piled in a compact heap, so placed as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the public. Proper barricades and lights
must be maintained around the trench to guard against accidents.
Extreme care shall be taken to prevent any dirt, stones or other
undesirable material from entering the public sewer through the house
sewer lateral during these operations.
B. In backfilling, the material for the two feet immediately over the pipe
shall be selected so it contains no stones. All backfill material for the
trench shall be placed by tamping in eight-inch layers so as to avoid any
settlement. When the trench has been filled to the proper height, the
surface material shall be replaced and heavily tamped and rolled.
C. Where the trench is excavated in rock, the rock must be carefully
excavated to a depth of six inches below the grade line of the sewer, and
the trench brought to the proper elevation with gravel or other material
satisfactory to the Plumbing Inspector. The remainder of the trench
must be backfilled with suitable material.
§ 56-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-15
1:453
§ 56-16. Connection with house sewer lateral.
Where connection is made between the house connection outside of the
building and the house sewer lateral, a long radius bend shall be
appropriately installed at this connection, along with a cleanout as required
by the Plumbing Code.113 This connection shall be subject to the approval of
the Plumbing Inspector, who shall be given ample notice prior to such work.
§ 56-17. Testing pipes and materials.
The Plumbing Inspector may apply any appropriate test to the pipes, and
the plumber and contractor, at his own expense, shall furnish all necessary
tools, labor, materials and assistants for such tests and shall remove or
repair any defective materials when so ordered by the Inspector.
§ 56-18. Applicability of Board of Health ordinances.
Each contractor or other person performing work on private property for
the purpose of connection from the house sewer lateral to the house drain
shall be governed by the terms of the ordinances of the Board of Health.
D. Nothing in this section shall be construed as abrogating any of the
existing requirements of the Borough relating to the excavation and
backfilling of trenches, but the requirements herein contained shall be
in addition thereto.
E. Where subsoil conditions are bad, such special precaution must be
taken to secure a watertight job as may be directed by the Plumbing
Inspector.
113. Editor's Note: See Ch. 44, Plumbing Code.
§ 56-15 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 56-18
1:454
ARTICLE V
Connection to Public Sewers
§ 56-19. Authority to make sewer connections, alterations and
repairs.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection or disturb
any public sewer or house sewer lateral and the appurtenances thereof.
The sewer contractor retained by the Borough, the Department of Public
Works or such other official or department of the Borough as may hereafter
be designated by the Mayor and Council of the Borough shall make all
connections, alterations and repairs upon the public sewers and shall alter,
maintain and repair the house sewer laterals and appurtenances thereof.
§ 56-20. Maintenance of sewers and connections.
Maintenance of the public sewer and house sewer laterals and all
connections to the public sewer and all work performed on the sewer
system between the main and the end of the house sewer lateral shall be
performed by the Department of Public Works, or such other agency as the
Borough Council may designate.
§ 56-21. Installation of house sewer lateral.
Where there is no house sewer lateral available, the property owner shall,
prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, apply to the Borough
Clerk to have a house sewer lateral installed from the sewer main to the
curb in each such case, or, in any instance where the connection to the
house sewer lateral requires the performance of labor or the furnishing of
materials on the part of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, a minimum charge of
$100 will be made. Where, because of the nature and extent of the work
to be done or the pavement or terrain to be penetrated or the width of the
road or any such circumstances, the sum of $100 is not sufficient to cover
the costs and expenses of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, the Borough Engineer
or such other official or department of the Borough as may hereafter be
designated by the Mayor and Council of Ho-Ho-Kus shall fix the fee at a
higher figure to fully cover the costs and expenses of such connection or
house sewer lateral.
§ 56-22. Bond requirements; safety standards; permit
requirements.
Each contractor or other person performing work on Ho-Ho-Kus public
property for the purpose of installing house sewer laterals shall post a
bond or cash acceptable to the Mayor and Council or such other official
or department of the Borough as may hereafter be designated by the
Mayor and Council of the Borough. All work shall be adequately guarded
with barricades, lights and other measures for protection of the public
from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, curbs and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
§ 56-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-22
1:455
satisfactory to the Borough. In addition, a permit must be obtained under
the provisions of the ordinances governing excavations in the streets or
public rights-of-way.
§ 56-22 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 56-22
1:456
ARTICLE VI
Use of Public Sewers
§ 56-23. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to:
A. Place, deposit or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon
public or private property within the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, or in any
area under the jurisdiction of said Borough, any human or animal
excrement, garbage, industrial waste, foul liquids or other
objectionable waste.
B. Discharge to any natural outlet, gutter, stream, ditch, culvert, catch
basin, or watercourse in the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, or in any area
under the jurisdiction of said Borough, any sanitary sewage, industrial
waste or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has
been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this Part 1.
C. Uncover any portion of the public sewers, house sewer laterals or
drains, or the connection branches thereof, or to open any manhole,
except with the written permission of the Mayor and Council of the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus or some person designated by the Mayor and
Council to issue permits.
D. Open any public street or place for the purpose of making a sewer
connection or to make or cause to be made any connection with a house
sewer lateral or a public sewer, except under a special written permit
signed by the Mayor and Council, or such other official or department of
the Borough as may hereafter be designated by the Mayor and Council,
allowing such specific connection and under the supervision of the
Mayor and Council or such other official or department.
E. Make or cause or to allow to be made any excavation within four feet of
any public sewer or to blast any rock within 10 feet thereof, save with
the express written permission of the Inspector employed by the Mayor
and Council and under his supervision and control.
F. Use or cause or to allow the use of any metal, mechanical or electrical
cutters, eels, snakes or any other sewer-cleaning apparatus within the
Borough without first having registered his or its name and place of
business at the office of the Board of Health of the Borough upon forms
to be furnished by said Board. The fee for such registration shall be
$15, payable in advance. The registration shall be renewed annually on
or before December 31 of each year. In addition to the payment of the
fees herein provided, each registrant shall enter into a bond to the
Board of Health of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus with surety satisfactory to
the Board, on the forms to be prescribed by the Board of Health, in the
sum of $1,000 for faithful performance of any sewer-cleaning work
done by him or it. The bond shall indemnify and save harmless said
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus for any expense or costs paid by said Borough of
§ 56-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-23
1:457
§ 56-24. Prohibited discharges.
Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any of the following described waters or wastes into any public
sanitary sewers:
Ho-Ho-Kus in the correction or replacement due to his or its negligence
or mistake or that of any person working under his or its direction in
the performance of the work done.
G. Break or to cut or remove any pipe or any main or public sewer or to
make or cause to be made any connection with such sewer except
through the specific branch or branches allotted for the purpose, the
allotment of such connection and its location to be designated by the
Mayor and Council of the Borough, or such other official or department
as may hereafter be designated by the Mayor and Council of the
Borough.
H. Discharge or to cause or permit the discharge into any main or public
sanitary sewer, directly or indirectly, of any clear drainage, swimming
pools, air-conditioning units, groundwater, surface water or rainwater
from sidewalks, yards, areas, courts, roofs or any sump, cistern or tank
overflow, uncontaminated cooling water and unpolluted water or waste.
The items covered under this section shall be discharged into storm
sewers or natural outlets approved by the Mayor and Council.
I. Discharge or to cause or permit the discharge into any main or public
sewer, directly or indirectly, of any drainage or overflow from cesspools,
manure pits, privies or other receptacles storing or designed to store
organic wastes.
J. Violate any of the "Rules, Regulations and Standards of the Northwest
Bergen County Sewer Authority," which were annexed as Appendix A to
the service contract between the Northwest Bergen County Sewer
Authority and the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, dated March 12, 1965, and as
amended and supplemented, a copy of which is hereby adopted and
made a part hereof without the inclusion of the text thereof. A copy of
said "Rules, Regulations and Standards of the Northwest Bergen
County Sewer Authority" has been placed on file in the office of the
Borough Clerk of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus upon the introduction of
this Part 1 and will remain on file there until final action is taken on this
Part 1 for the use and examination of the public. Upon adoption of this
Part 1, said copy shall remain on file in said office so long as said Part 1
is in effect, and, in addition, a copy shall be placed on file and remain on
file in the office of the Board of Health, so long as said Part 1 is in effect,
for use and examination of the public.
A. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive
liquid, solid or gas.
§ 56-23 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 56-24
1:458
B. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or
create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment
plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two mg/l as CN
in the wastes as discharged to the Authority sewage waters.
C. Any waters or wastes, acid or alkaline in reaction, having a pH lower
than 5.5 or higher than 9.5, or having any other corrosive properties
capable of or causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and
personnel of the sewage works. Free acids and alkalis of such wastes
must be neutralized to a pH of between five point 5.5 and 9.5 at all
times.
D. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works, such as, but not limited to,
ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers,
tar, plastics, wood, underground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure,
hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers,
etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
E. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F. (65° C.).
F. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which
may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32° F. and
150° F. (0° C. and 65° C.).
NOTE: The concentration permitted per day from any establishment
may be subsequently limited depending upon either soluble content of
the sewage delivered to the Authority sewage treatment works.
G. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and
operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of 3/4
horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review
and approval of the Borough and the Authority.
H. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes or
concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not.
I. Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and
similar objectionable or toxic substances, or wastes exerting an
excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material
received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works
exceeds the limits established by the Authority for such materials.
J. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odorproducing
substances, which, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, are capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or of
preventing entry into sewers for their maintenance and repair, or in
§ 56-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-24
1:459
§ 56-25. Interceptors required; location and construction.
such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the
Authority as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to
meet the requirements of discharge to the receiving waters.
K. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half life or concentration as
may exceed limits established by the Authority in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations.
L. Materials which exert or cause:
(1) Unusual concentrations of inert, suspended solids (such as, but not
limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and
sodium sulfate).
(2) Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions).
(3) Unusual BOD, biochemical oxygen demand, or chlorine
requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load
on the sewage treatment works.
(4) Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
"slugs" as defined herein. Such water or wastes, if otherwise
acceptable for admission, shall be retained in a holding tank or
tanks of approved capacity and be released at a rate to provide the
necessary distribution and dilution to avoid undue burden and
shock load on the sewage treatment works.
M. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed or
are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage
treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of discharge to
the receiving waters.
A. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion
of the Plumbing Inspector, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or other
flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients, except that such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
Plumbing Inspector and shall be located so as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection.
B. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious
materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in
temperature. They shall be of a substantial construction, watertight and
equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place,
shall be gastight and watertight.
§ 56-24 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 56-26
1:460
§ 56-26. Maintenance of interceptors.
Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by
the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times.
§ 56-27. Approval of certain discharges; preliminary treatment
facilities.
The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having fiveday
biochemical oxygen demand greater than 300 parts per million
(1,000,000) by weight; or containing more than 350 parts per million
(1,000,000) by weight of suspended solids; or containing any quantity of
substances having the characteristics described in § 56-24 hereof; or having
an average daily flow greater than 2% of the average daily sewage flow
of the Borough; or having unusual volume of flow or concentration of
waste constituting "slug," as defined herein, shall be subject to the review
and approval of the Plumbing Inspector. Where necessary, in the opinion
of the Plumbing Inspector, the owner shall provide, at his expense, such
preliminary treatment as may be necessary to reduce the biochemical
oxygen demand to 300 parts per million (1,000,000) and the suspended
solids to 350 parts per million (1,000,000) by weight; or reduce
objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits
provided for in § 56-24 hereof; or control the quantities and rates of
discharge of such waters or wastes. Plans and specifications and any other
pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities
shall be submitted for the approval of the Plumbing Inspector and of the
Department of Health and of the State of New Jersey, and no construction
of such facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are obtained in
writing.
§ 56-28. Maintenance of preliminary treatment facilities.
Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or
wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation by the owner at his expense.
§ 56-29. Control manhole.
When required by the Plumbing Inspector, the owner of any property served
by a house connection carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable
control manhole in the house connection to facilitate observation, sampling
and measurement of the waste. Such manhole, when required, shall be
accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with
plans approved by the Plumbing Inspector. The manhole shall be installed
by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe
and accessible at all times.
§ 56-30. Measurements, tests and analysis of waters and wastes.
A. All measurements, test and analysis of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which references are made in §§ 56-24 and 56-27 hereof shall
§ 56-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-30
1:461
be determined in accordance with the "Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Waste Water," published by the American
Public Health Association, Inc., being particularly the 12th edition,
1965, thereof, a copy of which is hereby adopted, is annexed hereto and
made a part hereof and incorporated herein as fully as if set forth at
length.
B. A copy of said "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Waste Water" has been placed on file in the office of the Borough Clerk
of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus upon the introduction of this Part 1 and
will remain on file there until final action is taken on this Part 1 for the
use and examination of the public. Upon adoption of this Part 1, said
copy shall remain on file in said office so long as said Part 1 is in effect,
and, in addition, a copy shall be placed on file and shall remain on file in
the office of the Board of Health of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, so long
as said Part 1 is in effect, for the use and examination of the public.
C. All such measurements, tests and analysis of the characteristics of
waters and wastes shall be determined at the control manhole provided
for in § 56-29 hereof or upon suitable samples taken at said control
manhole. In the event that no special manhole is available, then the
control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer from the point at which the house sewer
lateral is connected.
§ 56-30 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 56-30
1:462
ARTICLE VII
Protection From Damages
§ 56-31. General prohibitions.
No person shall break, damage, destroy, deface or tamper with any
structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the municipal
sewer system. Any person violating this provision shall be immediately
arrested and, upon conviction, shall be subject to the penalties hereinafter
set forth under Article X hereof.
§ 56-32. Liability for costs and damages.
Any person who, by reason of the violation of the provisions of this Part 1
or other improper use of the municipal sewer system or any of its branches,
appurtenances or connections, shall cause damage to said municipal sewer
system or to the facilities of the Northwest Bergen County Sewer Authority
to which the municipal sewer system is connected, by reason of which the
Borough may sustain damage or may be or become liable to the Northwest
Bergen County Sewer Authority for damages which it may sustain, shall
be liable to the Borough for all costs and expenses that may be incurred
by the Borough for the correction of any such damage. The Borough shall
have the right to recover such costs and expense from any such person by
appropriate action at law in a court of competent jurisdiction. The right of
the Borough to be reimbursed for any costs and expenses incurred by it
by reason of such damages shall be an additional remedy, and such person
shall also be subject to the penalties contained in this Part 1 for violation of
its provisions.
§ 56-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-32
1:463

ARTICLE VIII
Jurisdiction
§ 56-33. Authority of Board of Health and Mayor and Council.
In the administration of this Part 1, the house connections from the curb
or street line or from the house sewer lateral shall be supervised and
administered by the Board of Health of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, and all
matters relating to sewers lying within the street from the curb, or from the
main sewer to curb, or end of the house sewer lateral, shall be within the
jurisdiction of the Mayor and Council of the Borough or such other official
or department of the Borough as may be hereafter designated by the Mayor
and Council of Ho-Ho-Kus.
§ 56-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-33
1:465

ARTICLE IX
Powers and Authority
§ 56-34. Right of entry.
The Plumbing Inspector and Sewer Engineer and other duly authorized
employees of the Borough, bearing proper credentials and identifications,
shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purposes of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance
with the provisions of this Part 1.
§ 56-35. Interpretation and application; variances; issuance and
revocation of permits.
Decisions of the Plumbing Inspector or the Mayor and Council of the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, or such other official or department of the Borough
as may be hereafter designated by the Mayor and Council, in the
interpretation and application of the provisions of this Part 1 shall be final
and binding upon the property owner affected. The Board of Health or the
Mayor and Council of the Borough may waive strict compliance with the
provisions of this Part 1 where such compliance would cause great hardship
other than increased financial expense to the property owner involved. No
action which shall be authorized by a permit from the Mayor and Council
of the Borough or the Board of Health shall be deemed a violation of this
Part 1, providing the action authorized is not injurious in any manner to the
health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
The issuance of any such permit by the Mayor and Council or the Board of
Health shall be within their discretion and revocable at their pleasure, and,
upon such revocation, the provisions of this Part 1 shall apply as though said
permit had never been granted.
§ 56-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-35
1:467

ARTICLE X
Penalties
§ 56-36. Notice of violation.
Any person found to be violating any provision of this Part 1, except § 56-31,
which requires immediate arrest, shall be served by the Borough with
written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable
time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within
the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all such
violation.
§ 56-37. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided
for in § 56-36 hereof or who shall violate § 56-31 hereof may, upon
conviction thereof, be fined in an amount not exceeding $200 for each
such violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall
be deemed a separate offense. In default of the payment of such fine,
the person convicted may be imprisoned in the county jail for a term
not exceeding 60 days. The Magistrate before whom any violator of this
Part 1 shall be convicted shall have the power to impose the fine or term
of imprisonment in default of payment of said fine, not exceeding the
maximum fixed by this Part 1.
§ 56-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-37
1:469

ARTICLE XI
Severability
§ 56-38. Severability.
If any article, section, paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision of this
Part 1 shall be adjudged to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
such adjudication shall only apply to the article, section, paragraph,
subdivision, clause or provision so adjudged, and the remainder of this Part
1 shall remain valid and effective, provided effect can be given thereto
without such invalid part or parts.
§ 56-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-38
1:471

ARTICLE XII
Repealer
§ 56-39. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of this
Part 1 are hereby repealed as to such inconsistencies.
§ 56-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-39
1:473

ARTICLE XIII
When Effective
§ 56-40. When effective.
This Part 1 shall take effect immediately upon publication thereof after final
passage and approval pursuant to law.
§ 56-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-40
1:475

Part 2
[Adopted By TShuep Bpoleamrde nOtfa Hl Reaulltehs OAfn dT hRee Bguolraotuiognhs Of Ho-Ho-Kus
10-26-1967 By Board Of Health Ord. No. 11]
ARTICLE I
Terminology
§ 56-41. Word usage; definitions.
For the purpose of this Part 2, the terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the same meanings as given in Chapter 56, Part 1,
Article I, of the Code of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
§ 56-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-41
1:477

ARTICLE II
Standards for Pipes
§ 56-42. Standards established.
In the installation of the house connections to the house sewer laterals, the
following standards are hereby established as to the pipe to be used.
§ 56-43. Connections to buildings and dwellings.
Connections made to all buildings and dwellings shall use 60 pounds per
length (five feet) of extra-heavy-weight cast-iron pipe of the best quality, no
less than four inches in diameter, or Class 3300 asbestos cement pipe.
§ 56-44. Oversized connections.
In the event that the existing house drain to which the house connection is
to be connected is larger than four inches in diameter, then in such event,
the pipe to be used in making such house connection must be of such larger
size for its entire length.
§ 56-45. Installations under driveways, filled ground and other
special areas.
Extra-heavy-weight cast-iron pipe or its equivalent in asbestos cement pipe
shall be used in the installation of any house connection under driveways,
under filled areas, or in any other area as may be directed by the Plumbing
Inspector, whose decision thereon shall be final.
§ 56-46. Laying of pipe.
All pipes used in the installation of house connections shall be laid on a
smooth bottom, with a special groove cut in the bottom of the trench for
each hub (in order to give the pipe a solid bearing throughout its entire
length). The soil shall be well rammed on each side of the pipe. Such pipe
shall be laid with the joints properly caulked with lead or with rubber rings
for asbestos cement pipe. The spigot end and hub ends shall be concentric.
§ 56-47. Identifying marks on pipe to be exposed.
All pipe used in the installation of house connections shall be so installed
that the legend imprinted thereon indicating the weight of such pipe may be
seen from above and shall be exposed for its entire length for examination
and approval of the Plumbing Inspector.
§ 56-48. Slope of house connection.
The slope of the house connection shall be subject to the approval of the
Plumbing Inspector, but in no event shall it be less than 1/4 inch per foot for
four-inch pipe and shall not be less than 1/8 inch per foot for six-inch pipe.
§ 56-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-49
1:479
§ 56-49. Grade; changes in direction; cleanouts.
The house connection shall be constructed at uniform grade and in straight
alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only
with properly curved pipe and twenty-two-and-one-half-degree fittings, and
cleanouts shall be constructed as directed by the Plumbing Inspector at
each and every bend.
§ 56-50. Use of existing sewers and laterals.
Existing building sewers and existing laterals may be used with new house
connections only when they are found on examination and test by the
Plumbing Inspector to meet all requirements of this Part 2.
§ 56-49 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 56-50
1:480
ARTICLE III
Dry House Connections
§ 56-51. Authority of Plumbing Inspector.
The Plumbing Inspector of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus is hereby authorized
to grant applications to install dry house connections and to make the
necessary inspections thereof under the following circumstances and
subject to the following regulations.
§ 56-52. Application for permit.
Application shall be made to the Plumbing Inspector for a dry house
connection permit, as hereinafter provided under Article IV.
§ 56-53. Prerequisites.
No such dry house connection permit shall be granted by the Plumbing
Inspector unless and until the house sewer lateral has been installed by the
sewer contractor for service to such building, unless specifically authorized
by resolution of the Board of Health of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus. In new
housing developments where dry sewer mains and house sewer laterals
have been installed by the developer as a requirement of other public
boards or bodies of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, dry house connection
permits may be granted to the developer for the installation of such dry
house connections, in accordance with and subject to the regulations herein
stated.
§ 56-54. Installation.
The dry house connection to be installed shall be connected to the house
sewer lateral and run to a point near the house drain to be designated by
the Plumbing Inspector where it shall be capped by an expandable plug at
that end.
§ 56-55. Pipe specifications.
The pipe used for the installation of a dry house connection shall be of a
type and shall be laid in accordance with the provisions of this Part 2, the
Plumbing Code,114 and all other ordinances, both of the Borough Council
and of the Board of Health of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
§ 56-56. Backfilling; inspection and approval.
No portion of the dry house connection shall be backfilled until the same
has been inspected and approved by the Plumbing Inspector in accordance
with the Plumbing Code115 of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
114. Editor's Note: See Ch. 44, Plumbing Code.
115. Editor's Note: See Ch. 44, Plumbing Code.
§ 56-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-57
1:481
§ 56-57. Final connection with public sewer.
Upon official notice requiring connecting with the public sanitary sewer, in
accordance with Chapter 56, Part 1, Article I, of the Code of the Borough
of Ho-Ho-Kus, final connection of the dry house connection with the public
sanitary sewer shall be made, and the following steps shall be taken:
A. Application shall be made to the Plumbing Inspector for a final house
connection permit in accordance with Article IV hereof.
B. Prior to the final connection of the dry house connection with the house
drain, the expandable plug heretofore installed shall be removed, and
the entire length of the dry house connection shall be completely
flushed and cleaned in the presence of the Plumbing Inspector if, in his
opinion, this is necessary.
C. Reasonable notice of the date and time when such flushing will be
performed shall be given to the Plumbing Inspector, and no flushing
shall be done except in the presence of the Plumbing Inspector.
D. After completion of final connection of the dry house connection with
the house drain, said connection shall be inspected and approved by the
Plumbing Inspector before it is backfilled in accordance with the
Plumbing Code of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.116
116. Editor's Note: See Ch. 44, Plumbing Code.
§ 56-57 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 56-57
1:482
ARTICLE IV
Permit Requirements
§ 56-58. Permit required.
No house connection, dry or final, shall be made, nor any work performed
in connection therewith, unless and until a permit therefor has been issued
by the Plumbing Inspector of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
§ 56-59. Applicant qualifications.
No such permit will be issued to any person other than a master plumber
who has been issued and is in possession of a valid master plumber's
license from the Board of Health of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, nor shall
any plumbing work to be performed in accordance with such permit be
performed by any person other than the holder of such valid master
plumber's license, or his employees, except that a permit may be issued
to a person to install a house connection to a single-family dwelling used
exclusively for his own living purposes, including the usual accessory
buildings and quarters in connection with such building, provided that:
§ 56-60. Application forms; sketch plan required.
Applications for house connection permits shall be on forms which will
be provided by the Board of Health of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus and
shall be accompanied by a sketch showing the proposed work to be done
in sufficient detail so that a determination may be made that such work
complies with the provisions of this Part 2, the Plumbing Code118 and all
other ordinances of the Borough Council and of the Board of Health of the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
A. Such person shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Board of Health
of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, or its duly authorized agent, that he is
personally qualified to perform the plumbing work for such house
connection and has the necessary tools and testing equipment for the
performance thereof; and
B. Such person is the bona fide owner and occupant of such dwelling; and
C. Such plumbing work is to be personally performed by such person; and
D. Such work will be performed in accordance with the provisions of this
Part 2, the Plumbing Code117 and all other ordinances, both of the
Borough Council and of the Board of Health of the Borough of Ho-Ho-
Kus.
117. Editor's Note: See Ch. 44, Plumbing Code.
118. Editor's Note: See Ch. 44, Plumbing Code.
§ 56-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-61
1:483
§ 56-61. Additional regulations.
All house connections, dry or final, for which such permit has been issued
shall comply in all respects with the provisions of this Part 2, the Plumbing
Code119 and all other ordinances of the Borough Council and of the Board of
Health of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
119. Editor's Note: See Ch. 44, Plumbing Code.
§ 56-61 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 56-61
1:484
ARTICLE V
Fees
§ 56-62. Payment of certain fees required.
There shall be no fees for permits and inspections for the installation of any
house connections. However, the applicant shall pay any other fees required
in connection with the performance of any other plumbing work under the
Plumbing Code120 or other ordinances of the Board of Health of the Borough
of Ho-Ho-Kus.
120. Editor's Note: See Ch. 44, Plumbing Code.
§ 56-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-62
1:485

ARTICLE VI
Certificate of Approval
§ 56-63. Inspection, testing and approval of house connections.
All house connections, dry and final, shall be inspected, tested and approved
by the Plumbing Inspector of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus in accordance with
the provisions of the Plumbing Code121 and all other ordinances of the
Borough Council and of the Board of Health of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
§ 56-64. Certificate of approval required; distribution.
No plumbing work for which a permit has been issued in accordance with
this Part 2 shall be placed in service until a certificate of approval has
been issued by the Board of Health or its duly authorized agent, on forms
provided by the Board of Health for that purpose. Such certificates of
approval shall be issued in quadruplicate and shall be distributed as follows:
§ 56-65. Issuance.
The copy of the certificates of approval for the owner and the plumber will
be issued to the person in whose name the permit was issued, who in turn
shall forward such certificate of approval to the person for whom the work
was performed.
§ 56-66. Limitations.
The issuance of a certificate of approval will constitute a certification that
the house connection has been installed in accordance with the provisions
of this Part 2 and all other ordinances of the Borough Council and of the
Board of Health of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, but the issuance of such
certificate of approval is not and shall not be construed as a guarantee by
the Board of Health or the Borough Council of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus
that the house connection so installed will function satisfactorily, nor shall
it in any way restrict the powers or responsibility of the Board of Health in
the enforcement of any law or ordinance relating to the public health.
A. One copy to the Borough Clerk.
B. One copy to the owner of the premises.
C. One copy to the plumber performing the work.
D. One copy to be filed in the office of the Board of Health of the Borough
of Ho-Ho-Kus.
121. Editor's Note: See Ch. 44, Plumbing Code.
§ 56-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-66
1:487

ARTICLE VII
Penalties
§ 56-67. Notice of violation.
Any person to whom a permit has been issued hereunder who violates any
provision of this Part 2 shall be served by the Board of Health, or its duly
authorized agent, with a written notice stating the nature of the violation
and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof.
The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice,
permanently cease such violation.
§ 56-68. Violations and penalties; multiple violations.
Any person who shall make any house connection or do any work in
connection therewith without first having secured a permit therefor, as
required herein, or who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in § 56-67 hereof shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined in an
amount not exceeding $100 nor less than $2 for each such violation, in the
discretion of the court. In default of payment of such fine, the person so
convicted may, in the discretion of the court, be imprisoned in the county
jail for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day in which any such violation
shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. In such event that the
same person shall be convicted two or more times, within the space of six
months, of a violation of this Part 2, and due proof of such fact is made, the
court may, in addition to the imposition of the penalty hereinabove referred
to, cause the defendant to be imprisoned in the county jail for any number
of days, not exceeding one for each dollar of the penalty.
§ 56-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-68
1:489

ARTICLE VIII
Suspension or Revocation of Licenses
§ 56-69. Grounds.
In addition to the penalties herein provided in Article VII hereof, the Board
of Health of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus shall have the right to suspend
or revoke the license of a master plumber if, after proper hearing as
hereinafter provided, it is shown to the satisfaction of the Board of Health
that the holder of such license:
§ 56-70. Enforcement procedure.
The procedure to be followed by the Board of Health in the enforcement of
this article shall be as follows:
A. Has been convicted of a violation of this Part 2, the Plumbing Code122 or
other ordinances of the Board of Health;
B. Is shown to be incompetent as a master plumber;
C. Obtained such license through fraud or misrepresentation; or
D. That the holder of such license who has secured a permit to perform
plumbing work under the provisions of this Part 2, the Plumbing Code
or other ordinances of the Board of Health of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus
has permitted such work to be performed by persons other than the
holder of such master plumber's license or his employees.
A. Notice shall be served upon the holder of such master plumber's license
setting forth the charges against him and requiring him to appear
before the Board of Health for a hearing on such charges.
B. At said hearing, the Board of Health shall conduct a full, complete and
impartial inquiry into the charges, and a full opportunity shall be given
to the licensee to present any evidence in defense or mitigation thereof.
C. After such hearing the Board of Health may, in its discretion:
(1) Revoke such license for the balance of the term for which it has
been issued; or
(2) Suspend such license for such lesser period as, in the discretion of
the Board of Health, is just and proper under the circumstances; or
(3) Issue a reprimand; or
(4) Dismiss the charges.
122. Editor's Note: See Ch. 44, Plumbing Code.
§ 56-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-71
1:491
§ 56-71. Renewal of revoked licenses.
Upon the application for renewal of a master plumber's license which has
been revoked as herein provided, such licensee shall be required to file a
new application and submit to a new examination by the Board of Health as
provided in the Plumbing Code.123
123. Editor's Note: See Ch. 44, Plumbing Code.
§ 56-71 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 56-71
1:492
ARTICLE IX
Severability
§ 56-72. Severability.
If any article, section, paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision of this
Part 2 shall be adjudged to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
such adjudication shall only apply to the article, section, paragraph,
subdivision, clause or provisions so adjudged, and the remainder of this
Part 2 shall remain valid and effective, provided effect can be given thereto
without such invalid part or parts.
§ 56-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-72
1:493

ARTICLE X
Effect on Other provisions
§ 56-73. Repealer; savings clause; interpretation.
All former ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the
provisions of this Part 2 are hereby repealed, except the ordinances
governing individual sewage disposal systems,124 the Plumbing Code of the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus,125 and the Health Code of the Borough of Ho-Ho-
Kus.126 The interpretation and application of the provisions of this Part 2
shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the protection of the
public health, safety and general welfare. Whenever the requirements of
the ordinances governing individual sewage disposal systems, the Plumbing
Code of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus and the Health Code of the Borough of
Ho-Ho-Kus are at a variance with the requirements of this Part 2, the most
restrictive or that which imposes the higher standard shall govern.
124. Editor's Note: See Ch. 55, Sewage Disposal: Individual Systems.
125. Editor's Note: See Ch. 44, Plumbing Code.
126. Editor's Note: See Ch. 29, Health Code.
§ 56-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-73
1:495

ARTICLE XI
When Effective
§ 56-74. When effective.
This Part 2, after final passage and publication as required by law, shall take
effect in 30 days after the date of first publication.
§ 56-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-74
1:497
Chapter 56A
SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Borough personnel — See Ch. 10.
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 16A.
Personnel rules and regulations — See Ch. 42.
§ 56A-1. Adoption of policy; distribution.
The Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus hereby adopts a formal policy on sexual
harassment, which shall be distributed to every employee of the Borough of
Ho-Ho-Kus and which shall be strictly enforced.
§ 56A-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SEXUAL HARASSMENT — Unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual
favors and other verbal or physical conduct based on gender when:
§ 56A-3. Policy.
All employees, female or male, shall be permitted to work in an environment
free from all forms of unlawful discrimination and conduct which can be
considered harassing, coercive or disruptive, including sexual harassment.
Sexual harassment is a form of employee misconduct which undermines
Submission to such conduct is made, either explicitly or implicitly, a
term or condition of an individual's employment;
A.
Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as
the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual; or
B.
Such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with
an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or
offensive working environment, including but not limited to:
GENDER HARASSMENT — Generalized gender-based remarks
and behavior.
(1)
SEDUCTIVE BEHAVIOR — Inappropriate, unwanted, offensive
physical or verbal sexual advances.
(2)
SEXUAL COERCION — Coercion of sexual activity by threat of
punishment.
(3)
SEXUAL ASSAULT — Gross sexual imposition such as touching,
fondling, grabbing or assault.
(4)
C.
§ 56-74 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 56A-3
1:498
the integrity of the employment relationship. Sexual harassment debilitates
morale and interferes with work productivity and, therefore, will not be
tolerated.
§ 56A-4. Complaint procedure.
§ 56A-5. Contents of filing.
A. Supervisory. In order to ensure the integrity of the work environment,
supervisory personnel are required to ensure adherence to and
compliance with this policy and, upon being informed of possible sexual
harassment, are required to take appropriate immediate action in
response, including informing employees of their right to file a
discrimination complaint with the Personnel Officer.
B. Employee. Employees are encouraged, whether directly or through a
third party, to notify the alleged harasser that the behavior in question
is offensive and unwelcome. However, failure to do so does not preclude
filing a complaint. Employees are encouraged to promptly report all
alleged incidents of sexual harassment to the Personnel Officer.
A. The complaint filed must include the following information:
(1) The name and department of the complainant;
(2) The name and department of the charged party;
(3) The nature and circumstances, in detail, of the alleged sexual
harassment, including but not limited to the injuries or
consequences suffered by the complainant, the names of any
witnesses to such actions and the duration of the actions
questioned; and
(4) Whether such harassment has been previously reported to a
supervisor or other person and, if so, when and to whom.
B. Nothing in this section shall prevent the complainant from providing
other information or documents they believe are essential to the fair
adjudication of their case.
C. The initial complaint must be made in writing.
D. The Personnel Officer is hereby designated as the sexual harassment
officer. The Chief Financial Officer of the Borough is hereby designated
as the alternate officer, unless the Chief Financial Officer is one and the
same as the Personnel Officer, in which event the Assistant Treasurer
will become the alternate. Persons who, by reason of the circumstances,
are uncomfortable directing a complaint to the Personnel Officer may
report the same to the alternate officer.
§ 56A-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56A-6
1:499
§ 56A-6. Investigation of filed complaints.
A complaint of sexual harassment shall be investigated by the Personnel
Officer or the alternate in a timely manner and shall include, but not be
limited to:
§ 56A-7. Confidentiality.
To the extent possible, the sexual harassment investigative proceedings will
be conducted in a manner to protect the confidentiality of the complainant,
the alleged harasser and all witnesses. All parties involved in the
proceedings will be advised to maintain strict confidentiality, from the initial
meeting to the final decision, to safeguard the privacy and reputation of all
involved.
§ 56A-8. Retaliation prohibited.
It shall be a violation of this policy for any employee to take reprisals against
any person because she/he has filed a complaint, testified or assisted in any
proceeding under this policy. Threats, other forms of intimidation and/or
retaliation against the complainant or any other party based on involvement
in the complaint process may be cause for disciplinary action.
§ 56A-9. Protection of all parties.
All complaints will be addressed by the Personnel Officer or alternate. The
alleged harasser will be notified once a formal complaint is filed with the
Personnel Officer or alternate. A finding of no probable cause as a result of
an investigation does not necessarily establish that an accusation is false.
However, this policy shall not be used to intentionally bring frivolous or
malicious charges against an employee.
§ 56A-10. Disciplinary action.
Disciplinary action for employees found in violation of this policy may be
progressive in nature, but is not required to be, and may include:
A. Interviewing the complainant in detail.
B. Interviewing all potential witnesses, including those persons who may
have knowledge of similar incidents.
C. Interviewing the charged party in detail.
D. Reviewing municipal files for similar incidents involving the
complainant and the charged party.
E. Assessing the presence or absence of corroborative evidence for either
party.
A. Written reprimand.
B. Suspension (with or without pay).
§ 56A-6 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 56A-10
1:500
§ 56A-11. Exhaustion of remedies.
To the extent permitted by law, the Borough will not be liable for damages
obtained as a result of a decision of a nonlocal agency or court of superior
administrative remedies described herein.
§ 56A-12. Training.
Employees of the Borough shall be provided with training, by a person
trained to lead or implement such training, which shall include a detailed
discussion of the following:
§ 56A-13. False accusations.
Chapter 57
SHADE TREE COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 47. Trees in highways — See Ch. 76.
C. Demotion.
D. Termination.
E. Referral to the criminal justice system.
F. Mandatory counseling.
A. A detailed explanation of what constitutes sexual harassment.
B. The procedures for filing a sexual harassment charge.
C. The procedures to be followed in the investigation of a sexual
harassment charge.
D. Management's obligation regarding incidents of sexual harassment.
E. Recordkeeping requirements.
A. Since a charge of sexual harassment is a grave and serious one, false
accusations of sexual harassment are, and will be treated as, a
disciplinary offense and will result in a level of punishment appropriate
for a person actually engaging in such behavior.
B. A person who knowingly and/or recklessly fails to give truthful
testimony to the Personnel Officer or alternate shall also be guilty of
having made false accusations.
§ 56A-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-1
1:501
§ 57-1. Definitions. [Added 7-22-2003 by Ord. No. 875127]
As used in this chapter, the terms hereinafter set forth shall be defined and
deemed to have the following meanings:
COMMISSION — The Shade Tree Commission of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus,
including any of its duly appointed members and any of its duly authorized
agents or employees.
DRIP LINE — A boundary on the soil surface delineated by the branch
spread of the tree or group of trees.[Added 7-26-2011 by Ord. No. 992]
PERMITS — Written permission of the Commission. Whenever, pursuant to
any provision of this chapter, the Commission shall have occasion to pass
upon an application for a permit, it shall, in determining whether or not to
issue such permit, take into consideration the nature, species, size, age and
condition of any tree involved; the location thereof in the street or park; the
planting, care, protection, maintenance, or removal procedures involved;
the public safety and welfare; and the improvement and advancement of the
shade tree plan or program of the Commission.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership or corporation, or any
combination thereof. Where, in the proper context, it is so required, this
term may be construed to designate the plural as well as the singular.
STREET — Any road, avenue, street or highway dedicated to the public use
for street purposes. A street shall be deemed to include all portions lying
between the dedicated or established right-of-way lines and/or planting
easement thereof, said lines being identical with the front property lines of
lands abutting the street.
TREE — Any tree, shrub or plant, or any root, branch, flower or other
part thereof that is located in or upon any street, park or public
property.[Amended 7-26-2011 by Ord. No. 992]
TREE PROTECTION ZONE — The area designated by the Ho-Ho-Kus Shade
Tree Commission to be free of equipment, supplies or building materials
and to be delineated by an orange construction fence.[Added 7-26-2011
by Ord. No. 992]
§ 57-1.1. Creation; composition; compensation. [Amended
7-26-2011 by Ord. No. 992; 2-26-2013 by Ord. No. 1018]
The regulation, planting, care, and control of shade and ornamental
shrubbery upon and in the streets, highways, public places, parks and
parkways of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, except state highways, unless the
State Department of Transportation (NJDOT) shall assent thereto. Bergen
County does not have a Shade Tree Commission; however, the Bergen
County Department of Public Works does remove dead and/or hazardous
trees and will prune hazardous trees if requested. Since no County Shade
Tree Commission is operative and gives assent thereto, such functions shall
be exercised by and under the authority of Ho-Ho-Kus Borough Shade Tree
127. Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former § 57-1 as § 57-1.1.
§ 57-1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 57-1.1
1:502
Commission, which is hereby created. The Commission shall consist of five
members appointed by the Mayor, who shall be residents of the municipality
and shall serve without compensation.
§ 57-2. Appointment; terms.
§ 57-3. Organization.
The Commission shall organize within 30 days after the appointment of
its total membership for the remainder of the then calendar year, and
thereafter annually, by the election of one of its members as Chairman and
the appointment of a Secretary.
§ 57-4. Vacancies.
Any vacancy occurring by reason of the death, resignation or removal of
any Commissioner shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Mayor of the
municipality.
§ 57-5. Powers.
The Shade Tree Commission organized under this chapter shall have power
to:
A. The first Commissioners shall be appointed within 60 days after the
effective date of this chapter, and their terms of office shall commence
upon the day of their appointment and be for the respective periods of
three, four and five years.
B. The terms of each appointment shall be designated in his appointment.
All subsequent appointments, except to fill vacancies, shall be for the
full term of five years, to take effect on January 1 next succeeding such
appointment.
A. Exercise full and exclusive control over the regulation, planting and
care of shade and ornamental trees and shrubbery now located, or
which may hereafter be planted, in any public highway, park or
parkway, except such as are excluded pursuant to § 57-1.1 of this
chapter, including the planting, trimming, spraying, care and protection
thereof.
B. Regulate and control the use of the ground surrounding the same, so far
as may be necessary for their proper growth, care and protection.
C. Move or require the removal of any tree or part thereof dangerous to
public safety.
D. Care for and control such park and parkways, encourage arboriculture,
make, alter, amend and repeal, in the manner prescribed for the
passage, alteration, amendment and repeal of ordinances by the
governing body of the municipality, any and all ordinances necessary or
proper for carrying out the provisions thereof.128
§ 57-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-6
1:503
§ 57-6. Responsibility for costs of planting and improvements.
§ 57-7. Planting and removal of trees; notice and hearing;
emergencies.
In every case where the property of an abutting owner will be chargeable
with the cost of the planting of any shade tree or trees, the Commission
shall give notice of the meeting at which it is proposed to consider said
planting by publishing the notice at least once, not less than 20 days
before the meeting, in a newspaper circulating in the municipality or by
personal service of a copy of the notice upon the abutting owner at least
10 days before the meeting. The notice shall specify the street, streets, or
portions thereof, on which such planting is proposed and require all persons
who may object thereto to present their objections in writing at the office
of the Commission at or before the meeting. Before final action shall be
taken, all objections so filed shall be considered. The Commission shall give
reasonable notice of its intention to remove or cause the removal of a tree
or part of a tree dangerous to public safety, unless public safety requires
immediate removal, in which case no notice shall be necessary.
§ 57-8. Construal of provisions.
A. Except as hereinafter provided, the initial cost of all trees planted by
the Commission, the cost of planting the same, the cost of the posts and
boards or guards used for the protection thereof, and the cost of the
removal of any tree or part thereof dangerous to the public safety shall,
if the Commission shall so determine, in accordance with uniform rules
and regulations promulgated for this purpose, be a charge upon the
real estate in front of which such tree or trees shall be planted or
removed as an improvement thereof. Such cost, if it is so determined
that it is to be paid by the owner, shall, unless paid directly to the
Commission, be certified by it to the Collector of Taxes of the
municipality; shall thereupon become and be a lien upon said real
estate; shall be included in the next tax bill rendered to the owner or
owners thereof; and be collected in the same manner as other taxes
against that property.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(1) A planting to replace a tree or trees theretofore planted by the
Commission.
(2) A planting in connection with Arbor Day exercises or other
educational demonstration.
A. No statute giving any person or state, county or municipal board, body
or official power or authority to lay any sidewalk along or to open,
construct, curb or pave any street or to do any similar act shall be
128. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection E, regarding administering treatment, was repealed
8-23-2011 by Ord. No. 992.
§ 57-6 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 57-8
1:504
§ 57-8.1. Prohibited acts. [Added 7-22-2003 by Ord. No. 875]
No person shall, without a permit, do any of the following acts:
§ 57-8.2. Planting. [Added 7-22-2003 by Ord. No. 875]
No person shall plant any tree in any park or street without a permit.
§ 57-8.3. Obstructions. [Added 7-22-2003 by Ord. No. 875]
construed to permit or authorize any interference with or injury to a
highway shade tree without the consent of the Shade Tree Commission
within whose jurisdiction such tree shall be located. In all cases, such
Commission shall reasonably cooperate with such person, board, body
or official for the general public good.
B. Nothing in this chapter contained shall be held to take away or diminish
any of the powers or authority of any County Park Commission over the
trees or shrubbery in any county park or parkway within its jurisdiction
or to give any other commission or board any power or authority with
respect to such trees or shrubbery.
A. Cut, prune, break, injure, remove, disturb or interfere in any way with
any tree, including the root system. [Amended 7-26-2011 by Ord.
No. 992]
B. Spray with any chemical any tree or near a tree to cause injury or death
to said tree;
C. Fasten any rope, wire, sign or other device to a tree or to any guard
about such tree;
D. Remove or injure any guard or device placed to protect any tree;
E. Close or obstruct any open space provided about the base of a tree to
permit the access of air, water and fertilizer to the roots of such trees.
F. Excavate under the drip line. [Added 7-26-2011 by Ord. No. 992]
A. No person shall, without a permit, place or maintain in any street or
park any stone, cement or other sidewalk or any stone, cement or other
substance which shall impede the free access of air and water to the
roots of any tree.
B. Where any tree is to be surrounded by pavement of stone, cement,
asphalt or any other substance tending to impede the free access of air
and water to the roots of the tree, no portion of such pavement shall be
nearer to any portion of the base of the trunk than four feet.
C. As to Borough sidewalks, this shall apply only to new development(s);
not to replacement of existing sidewalks.
§ 57-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-8.4
1:505
§ 57-8.4. Injurious substances; maintenance of utility lines. [Added
7-22-2003 by Ord. No. 875]
§ 57-8.5. Construction and excavation work. [Added 7-22-2003 by
Ord. No. 875; amended 7-26-2011 by Ord. No. 992]
§ 57-8.6. Wires; utility trimming. [Added 7-22-2003 by Ord. No.
875; amended 7-26-2011 by Ord. No. 992]
A. No person shall place salt, brine, oil or any other substance injurious to
plant growth in any street or park in such a manner as to injure any
tree.
B. No person shall build any fire or station any tar kettle, road roller, fueloil-
dispensing truck, or other engine in any street or any other place in
such a manner that the heat, vapors, fuel, or fumes therefrom may
injure any tree.
C. Every person or entity, having or maintaining any underground or
overhead utility lines in any street, public property or park shall
maintain such lines in such a manner as will safeguard the trees against
any damage therefrom and shall make periodic adjustments whenever
necessary to prevent damage to trees. [Amended 7-26-2011 by Ord.
No. 992]
A. In any site improvement, erection, alteration or repair of any structure
or building, the owner, contractor or other person in charge thereof
shall place required protection around all street trees and nearby trees
as directed by the Shade Tree Commission. No storage of equipment,
supplies or building materials will be permitted in the tree protection
zone.
B. No person shall use or operate any power equipment or any other
implement or tool in such a manner so as to damage or destroy any tree.
A. No person shall string any wires in or through a public park or property
without a permit.
B. Every person having or maintaining any electric, telephone, telegraph,
cable TV or other wires running in or through a street, public property,
or park shall securely fasten and maintain such wires in such manner as
will safeguard all trees against any damage there from and shall make
periodic adjustment whenever necessary to prevent damage to all
trees.
C. No person shall, without a permit, attach or fasten any wires, insulator
or other device for holding any wire to any tree.
D. Whenever the Commission shall deem it necessary to prune or remove
any tree, any persons having a wire running in or through any street or
park shall temporarily remove such wire within 24 hours after the
service upon the owner or his agent of a written notice to do so.
§ 57-8.4 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 57-8.6
1:506
§ 57-8.7. Interference prohibited. [Added 7-22-2003 by Ord. No.
875]
No person shall prevent, delay or in any manner interfere with the
Commission or its authorized agents in the performance of their lawful
duties.
§ 57-9. Annual appropriation.
§ 57-10. Violations and penalties; ordinances of Commission;
restitution; exemptions.
E. Any public utility or its agents may upon receiving written permission
(permit) from the Commission at least 72 hours prior to the start of
work, prune or remove trees for line clearance of utility wires in
nonemergency situations pursuant to a line clearance program.
F. Any public utility or its agents may undertake emergency tree work to
restore electrical service or spot work to prevent interruption of
electrical, telephone, telegraph, cable TV or other wire services. In such
event the utility will notify the Commission of said work within three
business days of its beginning.
A. During the month of December in each year, the Shade Tree
Commission shall certify to the governing body of the municipality the
estimated sum necessary for the proper conduct of its work during the
ensuing fiscal year, which shall include the sums estimated to be
expended for such of the following items as it is anticipated expenditure
will be made for, namely:
(1) Expenses of Commission members in discharging official duties,
including expenses incident to attendance at professional
meetings.
(2) Purchase of trees and shrubbery.
(3) Purchase of necessary equipment and materials and the cost of
services for the prudent promotion of the work.
B. The governing body of the municipality shall annually appropriate such
sum as it may deem necessary for said purposes.
A. Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter or who fails to
comply with the terms and provisions of any permit issued pursuant
hereto shall, upon conviction in the Municipal Court, pay a fine not less
than $200 nor more than $1,500 for each violation. Each day that a
violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. This chapter
shall be enforced by either the Property Maintenance Officer, Zoning
Officer, the members of the Ho-Ho-Kus Shade Tree Commission or any
of its duly authorized agents or employees by like proceedings and
process consistent with the practice for the enforcement of ordinances
of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus. The officers authorized by law to serve
§ 57-8.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-10
1:507
§ 57-11. Disposition of fines and penalties. [Amended 7-26-2011 by
Ord. No. 992]
and execute process in the aforementioned court shall be the officers
to serve and execute any process issued out of any court under this
chapter. [Amended 7-22-2003 by Ord. No. 875; 7-26-2011 by Ord.
No. 992]
B. A copy of any ordinance of the Commission, certified to under the hand
of its Secretary or Chairman, shall be received in any court of this state
as full and legal proof of the existence of the ordinance, and that all
requirements of law in relation to the ordaining, publishing and making
of the same, so as to make it legal and binding, have been complied
with, unless the contrary be shown.
C. Restitution. In addition to the penalties authorized by § 57-10 of this
chapter, the Commission may require a person who removes, damages
or otherwise destroys a tree in violation of a municipal ordinance to pay
restitution or a replacement assessment to the municipality. The
replacement assessment shall be the value of the tree as determined by
the appraisal of a trained forester or licensed tree expert retained by
the Commission for that purpose. In lieu of an appraisal, the
Commission will use a formula and schedule based upon the Council of
Tree and Landscape Appraisers Guide for Plant Appraisal, 9th Edition
(or latest edition) guidelines. The Commission shall evaluate the value
of the tree based upon its species, variety, location and its condition at
the time of removal or destruction. [Added 7-22-2003 by Ord. No.
875; amended 7-26-2011 by Ord. No. 992]
D. In the absence of the Property Maintenance or Zoning Officer, stop
orders on behalf of the Commission may be issued by the Borough
Administrator, Superintendent of Public Works or duly authorized
police officer. [Added 7-22-2003 by Ord. No. 875; amended
7-26-2011 by Ord. No. 992]
A. All monies collected, either as fines or penalties, for any violation of a
rule or regulation of a Shade Tree Commission or as a charge against
real estate, under any provision of this chapter, shall be forthwith paid
over to the Custodian of the Municipal Funds.
B. Restitution shall be paid to the Ho-Ho-Kus Shade Tree Commission as
set forth in § 57-10 for the value of a tree removed, destroyed or
damaged and for the value of labor and materials required. The Ho-Ho-
Kus Shade Tree Commission shall administer the Shade Tree
Commission Trust Fund for the care, protection and enhancement of
Borough trees, parks and public properties.
§ 57-10 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 57-12
1:508
§ 57-12. Liability.
Nothing in the chapter contained shall be construed to make the
Commission or any member thereof responsible for the death or injury of
any person or for any injury to any property or highway tree or shrub.
§ 57-13. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
The Shade Tree Commission is hereby authorized and empowered to
promulgate such ordinances and written rules and regulations as may be
necessary, pursuant to statute, for the proper interpretation of this basic
chapter, administration and enforcement, provided that such ordinances
and regulations do not conflict with this chapter and conform to the general
standards prescribed by this chapter.
§ 57-14. Fee schedule. [Added 7-22-2003 by Ord. No. 875; amended
7-26-2011 by Ord. No. 992]
§ 57-15. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word
contained in this chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason
whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this
chapter, which shall remain in full force and effect, and, to this end, the
provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable.
§ 57-16. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon passage and publication as required by
law.
Chapter 57A
A. The Shade Tree Commission shall adopt, from time to time, a fee
schedule policy for permits and services and shall review it periodically
and shall amend same by a majority vote of the Commission.
B. Permit fee schedule.
(1) Tree Planting. One up to five trees: $25 each. Over five trees: $10
each additional tree.
(2) Tree Pruning. One up to five trees: $50 each. Over five trees: $25
each additional tree.
(3) Tree Removal. One up to five trees: $100 each. Over five trees: $50
each additional tree.
(4) Excavation Inspection Fee: $75 per hour.
(5) General Tree Inspection Fee: $75 per hour.
§ 57-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-16
1:509
SHORT-TERM RENTAL PROPERTY
§ 57A-1. Findings.
The Mayor and Council hereby find and adopt, as if set forth more fully
herein, the fact assertions of the "Whereas" clauses of this ordinance as
their findings of fact.129
§ 57A-2. Prohibited uses.
§ 57A-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADVERTISE or ADVERTISING — Any form of solicitation, promotion, and
communication for marketing, used to solicit, encourage, persuade, or
manipulate viewers, readers, or listeners into contracting for goods and/
or services in violation of this chapter, as same may be viewed through
various media, including but not limited to newspapers, magazines, flyers,
handbills, pamphlets, commercials, radio, direct mail, Internet websites,
or text or other electronic messages for the purpose of establishing
occupancies or uses of rental property, for consideration, which are
prohibited by this chapter.
CONSIDERATION — Soliciting, charging, demanding, receiving or
accepting any legally recognized form of consideration, including a promise
or benefit, a quid pro quo, rent, fees, other form of payment, or thing of
value.
DWELLING UNIT — Any structure, or portion thereof, whether furnished or
unfurnished, which is occupied in whole or in part, or intended, arranged
or designed to be occupied, for sleeping, dwelling, cooking, gathering and/
or entertaining, as a residential occupancy, by one or more persons. This
definition includes an apartment, condominium, building, cooperative,
converted space, or portions thereof, that is offered to use, made available
for use, or is used for accommodations, lodging, cooking, sleeping,
A. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Borough
Code, it shall be unlawful for an owner, lessor, sublessor, any other
person(s) or entity(ies) with possessory or use right(s) in a dwelling
unit, their principals, partner or shareholders, or their agents,
employees, representatives and other person(s) or entity(ies), acting in
concert or a combination thereof, to receive or obtain actual or
anticipated consideration for soliciting, advertising, offering, and/or
permitting, allowing, or failing to discontinue the use or occupancy of
any dwelling unit, as defined herein, for a period of 30 days or less.
B. Nothing in this chapter will prevent formation of an otherwise lawful
occupancy of a dwelling unit for a rental period of more than 30 days.
129. Editor's Note: The complete ordinance is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 57-16 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 57A-3
1:510
gathering and/or entertaining of occupants and/or guest(s), for
consideration, for a period of 30 days or less.
HOUSEKEEPING UNIT — Constitutes a family-type situation, involving
one or more persons, living together that exhibits the kind of stability,
permanency and functional lifestyle equivalent to that of a traditional family
unit, as further described in the applicable reported and unreported
decisions of the New Jersey Superior Court.
OCCUPANT — Any individual using, inhabiting, living, gathering,
entertaining, being entertained as a guest, or sleeping in a dwelling unit, or
portion thereof, or having other permission or possessory right(s) within a
dwelling unit.
OWNER — Any person(s) or entity(ies), association, limited liability
company, corporation, or partnership, or any combination, who legally uses,
possesses, owns, leases, subleases or licenses (including an operator,
principal, shareholder, director, agent, or employee, individually or
collectively) that has charge, care, control, or participates in the expenses
and/or profit of a dwelling unit pursuant to a written or unwritten
agreement, rental, lease, license, use, occupancy agreement or any other
agreement.
PERSON — An individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership,
limited liability company, association, entity, and any person(s) and/or
entity(ies) acting in concert or any combination therewith.
RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCY — The use of a dwelling unit by an occupant(s).
§ 57A-4. Permitted uses.
The residential occupancy of an otherwise lawful and lawfully occupied
dwelling unit for a period of 30 days or less by any person who is a member
of the housekeeping unit of the owner, without consideration, such as house
guests, is permitted.
§ 57A-5. Advertising prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to advertise, solicit or promote by any means actions in
violation of this chapter.
§ 57A-6. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Zoning Official,
Fire Official, Health Department, other Subcode or Code Official, as
their jurisdiction may arise, including legal counsel for the Borough or
other persons designated by the Borough Council, to issue municipal
civil infractions directing alleged violators of this chapter and/or to
appear in court or file civil complaints.
B. A violation of this chapter hereby declared to be a public nuisance, a
nuisance per se, and is hereby further found and declared to be
offensive to the public health, safety and welfare.
§ 57A-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57A-6
1:511
§ 57A-7. Repealer.
All other ordinances or parts of ordinances of the Borough which are
inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed, but only to the extent of
such inconsistencies.
§ 57A-8. Severability.
If any portion of this chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate
the remainder of this chapter but shall be confined in its effect to the
provision directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall
have been rendered.
§ 57A-9. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon passage and publication as provided by
law.
Chapter 58
SIDEWALKS, CURBS AND STREETS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Excavations and dredging — See Ch. 21.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 47.
Snow, ice, grass and weeds — See Ch. 61.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 79.
C. Any person found to have violated any provision of this chapter, without
regard to intent or knowledge, shall be liable for the maximum civil
penalty, upon adjudicated violation or admission, of a fine not exceeding
$1,250. Each day of such violation shall be a new and separate violation
of this chapter.
D. The penalty imposed herein shall be in addition to any and all other
remedies that may accrue under any other law, including, but not
limited to, eviction proceedings and/or injunction, reasonable
attorney's fees or other fees and costs, in the Borough's Municipal
Court or the Superior Court of New Jersey in the vicinage of Bergen
County, or in such other court or tribunal of competent jurisdiction, by
either summary disposition or by zoning or construction code municipal
proceeding.
§ 57A-6 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 57A-9
1:512
ARTICLE I
Specifications
[Adopted 4-24-1962 by Ord. No. 380]
§ 58-1. Curbs.
All curbs in the Borough shall be constructed strictly in accordance with the
specifications hereinafter set forth.
A. Dimensions. Unless otherwise specified, concrete curbs shall be
constructed in accordance with the "Typical Curb Section for Municipal
Roads" herein shown as Figure 1.130 The approximate dimensions are:
depth, 18 inches; top width, six inches; width at 1/2 depth, nine inches;
and bottom width, nine inches. The batter on the front face shall be
three inches in nine inches and the rear face shall be vertical. The top
face of the curb shall be velled or sloped at the rate of 1/4 inch per foot,
and the radius of the outside edge shall be one inch.
B. Forms.
(1) The forms used may be of metal, or of thoroughly seasoned and
dressed lumber, not less than two inches in thickness. Forms must
be placed in proper alignment and thoroughly staked and braced.
Before any concrete is deposited, the forms shall be clean and free
from dirt and thoroughly oiled. Forms which have become bent or
warped, and which in the opinion of the Borough Engineer are
unsuitable for use, will be rejected and shall be removed from the
site of the work.
(2) Forms for radius curb may be of metal or, if constructed of wood,
shall be not more than 1/2 inch in thickness, dressed and
thoroughly battered together. They shall be so set to give the same
batter of the street face as straight curb.
C. Body of curbs. Concrete for curbs shall be Class B air-entrained
portland cement concrete, in accordance with the 1961 New Jersey
State Highway Department Standard Specifications, except that the
stone shall be 3/4 inch. As the concrete is placed into the forms, it shall
be thoroughly tamped and compacted or vibrated to insure that it
completely fills the forms and that all stone is completely imbedded in
the mortar. After the concrete has sufficient set and strength, the
outside edge of the curb shall be properly rounded with a curb-edging
tool having a radius of one inch. The face of the forms shall be removed
and the outside faces of the curb rubbed and finished with a steel float.
Plastering will not be permitted, and the use of gravel in any form is
absolutely prohibited. [Amended 10-24-1967 by Ord. No. 439]
D. Joints. The curb shall be constructed in sections 10 feet long. Each
section is to be separated by a three-sixteenths-inch metal form plate or
130. Editor's Note: Figure 1 is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 58-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-1
1:513
§ 58-2. Sidewalks. [Amended 10-24-1967 by Ord. No. 439]
All sidewalks in the Borough shall be constructed strictly in accordance with
the specifications hereinafter set forth.
other accepted material having the approval of the Borough Engineer.
The plates shall extend through the whole thickness and depth of the
curb. The plates shall act as spacing plates to the forms, and the joints
so formed will serve to take up expansion and contraction.
E. Driveway openings. Where required, driveway openings shall be
provided by lowering or depressing the top of the curb five inches
below normal elevation across the entire width of the driveway. Care is
to be taken to provide a neat and attractive transition from the normal
curb height to the depressed curb height.
A. Excavation. The subgrade shall be prepared and properly tamped to a
depth of eight inches below finished grade of the sidewalk.
B. Dimensions. Unless otherwise specified, concrete sidewalk shall be
constructed in accordance with the sidewalk as shown on "Typical Half
Section of Road" herein shown as Figure 2.131
C. Forms. Sidewalk forms may be of metal or wood and, if of wood, shall be
not less than two inches by four inches and free from warps or bends.
All forms must be thoroughly braced and staked to the established lines
and grades.
D. Foundation. Upon the subgrade shall be placed a layer of clean sand
having a compacted thickness of four inches.
E. Body of sidewalk. Concrete for sidewalks shall be Class C air-entrained
portland cement concrete in accordance with the 1961 New Jersey
State Highway Department Standard Specifications, except that the
stone shall be 3/4 inch. Concrete shall be placed in the forms and on the
prepared foundation to a thickness of four inches, minimum. After
being placed, the concrete shall be tamped, screened and finished to
true grade and even surface. Care is to be taken to insure that the
concrete completely fills the forms and that all stone is completely
imbedded in the mortar. After the concrete has sufficiently set, the
finish shall be applied with a wooden float so that a slightly roughened
surface is obtained. The surface shall then be brushed with a wet softhaired
brush to obtain a neat surface. Expansion joints 3/16 inch wide
shall be provided every five feet, and the joints filled with sand. All
exposed edges of the sidewalk and joints shall be rounded with a
sidewalk-edging tool having a radius of 1/2 inch. [Amended
10-24-1967 by Ord. No. 439]
F. Sidewalks at driveways and concrete aprons. Across driveways and
wherever directed by the Borough Engineer, the thickness of the
131. Editor's Note: Figure 2 is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 58-1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 58-2
1:514
§ 58-3. Streets.
All streets in the Borough shall be constructed strictly in accordance with
the specifications hereinafter set forth:
concrete for the sidewalk shall be six inches, and the sidewalk
constructed in the manner outlined above. Between the sidewalk and
the curb, a concrete apron shall be constructed. This apron shall have a
uniform slope from the grade of the sidewalk to the top of the depressed
curb. This apron shall be constructed in the manner as outlined above
for a concrete sidewalk, except the concrete shall be five inches thick
and no sand shall be placed under the apron.
A. Dimensions. Roads and pavement shall be constructed in accordance
with "Typical Half Section of Road" herein shown as Figure 2.132
B. Formation of subgrade.
(1) The surface upon which the pavement is to be placed shall be
known as a subgrade and must conform to the lines and grades and
cross sections given.
(2) After all drains have been laid, and all frames and heads of
manholes, catch basins and other structures have been reset at
proper grade, and subgrade has been shaped correctly, it shall be
brought to a firm unyielding surface by rolling the entire area with
a three-wheel, ten-ton power roller. Any portions of the subgrade
which are not accessible to the roller shall be thoroughly
compacted with hand tampers weighing not less than 50 pounds,
the face of which shall not exceed 100 square inches. All places in
the subgrade which do not attain the required stability or compact
properly when rolled shall be excavated and replaced with suitable
material.
(3) No base or surface material shall be dumped or deposited on a
subgrade that has not the required stability, is not at the proper
grade, or does not have the specified cross section. The subgrade
shall not be disturbed by any unnecessary carting or hauling upon
it, but if the surface is disturbed, the same shall be reshaped and
rerolled before the spreading of any foundation material.
Projections or high places shall be reduced and all depressions
filled, and filling and rolling shall continue until the subgrade has a
uniform, even surface at the required grade and crown and has the
required density and solidity at all points. Should the existing
subbase material be judged unstable, or in any way not acceptable,
by the Borough Engineer, this material shall be excavated to a
depth that the Engineer shall deem necessary and replaced with an
acceptable subbase material, and the subgrade formed as outlined
above.
132. Editor's Note: Figure 2 is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 58-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-3
1:515
C. Macadam foundation.
(1) After the subgrade has been properly prepared as herein specified,
two-and-one-half-inch stone shall be deposited thereon in a uniform
layer having a depth when compacted of four inches unless
otherwise shown on plans. When ordered by the Engineer, the
thickness of the loose stone shall be measured by wooden blocks of
the required depth. No stone shall be placed upon a wet subgrade.
(2) As soon as the stone has been properly spread, it shall be rolled
with a three-wheel power roller, weighing not less than 10 tons,
until thoroughly consolidated and compacted to a smooth, even
surface. During the initial rolling, the roller shall travel parallel to
the axis of the pavement, beginning at each edge and working
toward the center. The subsequent rolling shall be both diagonal
and parallel to the axis of the pavement, so that every part of the
stone surface receives compression from the rear wheels of the
roller.
(3) After the stone has been properly rolled, screenings shall be spread
in layers not over 1/2 inch in thickness and worked into the voids
thereof with intermittent rolling between each application until all
voids have been filled and the stone ceases to creep or sink under
the roller and is at the proper grade. Before and until the surface
pavement is applied on this foundation, it must be firmly bound
together, be at the proper grade, have the required crown, and be
free from ruts, loose stone, places showing instability and stone
covered with sufficient binder as to hide the top faces and edges.
(4) If at any time during the construction of the foundation the
subgrade shows evidence of instability, is forced below grade or up
into the voids of the stone, the contractor shall dig out all such
loose or unstable material, reshape and repack the subgrade in the
manner ordered by the Engineer, and shall replace the stone
removed with the necessary additional stone, which, when bound
and rolled as herein specified, shall give the required stability.
D. Modified penetration macadam intermediate course.
(1) After the foundation course has been prepared as herein specified,
a uniform layer of one-and-one-half-inch stone shall be spread over
its surface to a depth of two inches compacted.
(2) As soon as the stone has been properly spread, it shall be rolled
with a three-wheel power roller, weighing not less than 10 tons,
until thoroughly consolidated and compacted to a smooth, even
surface. Additional three-quarter-inch stone shall be added when,
in the opinion of the Engineer, the interstices would require too
much bitumen to properly fill, and the rolling continued until the
surface is thoroughly compacted. During the initial rolling, the
roller shall travel parallel to the axis of the pavement, beginning at
each edge and working toward the center. The subsequent rolling
§ 58-3 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 58-3
1:516
§ 58-4. Strict compliance required.
Any person who shall construct, remove, repair, replace, reset or alter
the curb, sidewalk or street or cause the construction, removal, repair,
replacement or altering of the curb, sidewalk or street shall do so strictly
in accordance with the above specifications and under the supervision and
inspection of the Borough Engineer and shall pay such reasonable fee for
said inspection as may be required.
§ 58-5. Violations and penalties.
A person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction,
be subject to a fine not to exceed the sum of $100 and, upon default in the
payment of said fine, may be imprisoned in the county jail for a term not to
shall be both diagonal and parallel to the axis of the pavement, so
that every part of the stone surface receives compression from the
rear wheels of the roller.
E. Application of bitumen.
(1) Bituminous binder Grade OA-4 or NA-4 shall then be applied at the
rate of 1.65 to 1.75 gallons per square yard or surface, applied from
an approved pressure distributor, which must be equipped with
stationary Fahrenheit thermometers for accurately indicating
temperatures of bitumen. No bitumen shall be applied when the
atmospheric temperature is below 50° F. or has been below 40° F.
within the preceding eight hours.
(2) When bituminous binder is applied, it must have a temperature
between 300° F. and 350° F.
(3) While the bitumen is still warm, a uniform layer of five-eighths-inch
stone shall be spread in sufficient quantity to fill the voids. The
stone shall be taken from piles adjacent to the road deposited there
before the bitumen is spread. The road surface shall be rolled until
the stone is thoroughly imbedded in the bitumen and anchored in
place. If bitumen appears on the surface in such quantity as to stick
to the wheels of the roller, additional stone must be applied at such
points. The rolling shall be continued until the surface is firmly
bound together, hard and smooth, and shows no perceptible
movement under the roller.
F. Bituminous concrete surface course: hot mix. After the modified
penetration macadam intermediate course has been constructed, there
shall be placed upon it a bituminous concrete surface course 1 1/2
inches thick when compacted. The top course shall consist of hot mix
bituminous concrete, New Jersey State Highway Specifications, Type
FA-BC-1 or Type S.M.1. The top course shall be constructed in
accordance with the 1961 New Jersey State Highway Department
standard specifications.
§ 58-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-5
1:517
exceed 30 days. Every day that such violation continues shall be deemed to
be a separate offense.
§ 58-6. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed.
§ 58-7. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately after passage and publication as
required by law.
§ 58-5 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 58-7
1:518
ARTICLE II
Street Openings and Excavations; Pavement Cuts133
[Adopted 10-24-1967 by Ord. No. 440]
§ 58-8. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context
clearly indicates otherwise:
APPLICANT — Any person who makes application for a permit.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, County of Bergen, State of New
Jersey.
EMERGENCY — Any unforeseen circumstances or occurrence, the
existence of which constitutes a clear and immediate danger to persons or
properties.
ENGINEER — The person duly appointed Borough Engineer, or his
authorized deputy, representative or inspector.
PERMITTEE — Any person who has been issued a permit and is obligated
to fulfill all the terms of this article.
PERSON — Includes any natural person, partnership, firm, association,
utility, corporation or authority created pursuant to statute. Whenever used
in any section prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term "person," as
applied to associations, shall mean the partners or members thereof and, as
applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive
or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway; or
which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law; or which
is approved by official action as provided by the Municipal Land Use Act134;
or which is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the
County Recording Officer prior to the appointment of a Planning Board and
the grant to such Board of the power to review plats; and includes the
land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may
comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas and
other areas within the street lines. For the purpose of this article, "street"
shall be classified as follows:[Amended 9-23-2003 by Ord. No. 877]
ARTERIAL — Those streets which are used primarily for fast or heavy
traffic.
A.
COLLECTOR — Those streets which carry traffic from minor streets to
the major system of arterial streets, including the principal entrance
streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within
such development.
B.
133. Editor's Note: Former Art. II, Obstructions and Encroachments, adopted 5-18-1927 by Ord.
No. 99, was repealed 10-24-1967 by Ord. No. 441.
134. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 58-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-8
1:519
§ 58-9. Permit requirements.
MINOR — Those streets which are used primarily for access to the
abutting properties.
C.
MARGINAL ACCESS — Those streets which are parallel to and adjacent
to arterial streets and highways and which provide access to abutting
properties and protection from through traffic.
D.
ALLEYS — Minor streets which are used primarily for vehicular service
access to the back or side of the properties otherwise abutting on a
street.
E.
A. Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to make any tunnel,
opening or excavation of any kind in or under the surface of any public
sidewalk or street without first securing a permit from the Borough for
each separate undertaking; provided, however, any person maintaining
pipes, lines or other underground facilities in or under the surface of
any street may proceed with an opening without a permit when
emergency circumstances demand the work to be done immediately,
provided the permit could not reasonably and practically have been
obtained beforehand. The person shall thereafter apply for a permit on
the first regular business day on which the office of the Borough Clerk
is open for business; the said permit shall be retroactive to the date
when the work was begun.
B. Street openings limited. No person to whom a permit has been granted
shall perform any of the work authorized by such permit in an amount
or quantity greater than that specified in the permit, except that, upon
the approval of the Engineer, additional work may be done under the
provisions of the permit in any amount not greater than 10% of the
amount specified in the permit. Any deposit and bond posted in
connection with the original permit shall be deemed to cover any such
additional work as may be approved pursuant to this section within the
limit mentioned herein.
C. Commencement of work. Work for which a permit has been issued shall
commence within 30 days after the issuance of the permit therefor. If
not so commenced, the permit shall be automatically terminated.
Permits thus terminated may be renewed upon the payment of an
additional permit fee as originally required.
D. Permits nontransferable. Permits are not transferable from one person
to another, and the work shall not be made in any place other than the
location specifically designated in the permit.
E. Expiration of permits. Every permit shall specify the period of time
within which the work must be completed and shall expire at the end of
such period. If the permittee shall be unable to complete the work
within the specified time, he shall, prior to expiration of the permit,
present, in writing, to the Engineer a request for an extension of time,
§ 58-8 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 58-9
1:520
§ 58-10. Application for permit.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of any applicant to:
setting forth therein the reasons for the requested extension. If such
an extension is necessary and not contrary to the public interest, the
permittee may be granted additional time by the Engineer for the
completion of the work.
F. State and county highways. The provisions of this article shall not be
applicable in those instances where the highway is maintained by the
State of New Jersey or by the County of Bergen, except in such cases
where the Borough may have special arrangements with the state or
county.
G. Revocation of permits.
(1) Any permit may be revoked by the Borough Council or its
designated agents or employees after notice to the permittee for:
(a) Violation of any condition of the permit or of any of the
provisions of this article.
(b) Violation of any provision of any other applicable ordinance or
law relating to the work.
(c) Existence of any condition of the doing of any act constituting
or creating a nuisance or endangering the lives or properties of
others.
(2) Written notice of any such violation or condition shall be served
upon the permittee or his agent engaged in the work. The notice
shall contain a brief statement of the grounds relied upon for
revoking the permit. Notice may be given either by personal
delivery thereof to the person to be notified or certified or
registered United States mail addressed to the person to be
notified.
(3) A permittee may be granted a period of 48 hours from the date of
the notice to correct the violation and to proceed with the diligent
prosecution of the work authorized by the permit before said
permit is revoked.
(4) When any permit has been revoked and the work authorized by the
permit has not been completed, the Borough, its agents or
employees shall do such work as may be necessary to complete
such work as was authorized by the permit and to restore the street
or part thereof to as good a condition as before the opening was
made. All expenses incurred by the Borough shall be recovered
from the deposit or bond the permittee has been made or filed with
the Borough.
§ 58-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-10
1:521
A. Make a written application for such permits with the Borough Clerk on
such form as the Borough shall prescribe.
B. Furnish to the Borough Clerk a plan in triplicate showing the work to be
performed under said application. If approved by the Engineer, one
copy of such plan shall be returned to the applicant at the time the
permit is granted.
C. No work shall commence until the Engineer has approved the
application and plan and the Borough Clerk has issued a permit after
applicant has submitted all fees, deposits, certificates and bonds
required by this article.
D. Agree to save the Borough, its officers, employees and agents harmless
from any and all costs, damages and liabilities which may accrue or be
claimed to accrue by reason of any work performed under said permit.
The acceptance of any permit under this article shall constitute such
agreement by the applicant, whether the same is expressed or not.
E. Pay a permit fee of $100; provided, however, that public utilities or
authorities may elect to be billed monthly for such fees as they may
accrue. [Amended 3-20-2012 by Ord. No. 1007]
F. Pay a deposit of $35 to be applied against the fee of the Engineer in
inspecting the work authorized by the permit, and moneys not used
shall be returned to the applicant.
G. Furnish a performance bond as required by § 58-12 of this article for
the proper repair of the street opening.
H. Pay a fee of $2.50 a square yard to cover the estimated cost of
maintenance for one year following completion of the work.
I. Furnish a certificate of insurance as required by § 58-13 of this article,
or in case of a public utility or authority, furnish a certificate of self
insurance.
J. Keep the original copy of the permit and an approved copy of the plan.
The permit must be in the possession of the party or parties actually
doing the work and must be exhibited to the Engineer, duly authorized
inspectors or, in the instances of county or state highways, to the
respective inspectors of these organizations.
K. Notwithstanding the requirements listed above, a public utility or
authority may, in lieu of the requirements for the maintenance charge
and performance bond, furnish the Borough with a performance bond
for the current year, in the amount of $5,000, guaranteeing compliance
with all provisions of this article.
L. Notwithstanding the requirements listed above, no owner of property in
the Borough or his agent shall be required to submit any fees, deposits
or performance bonds (Subsections E, F, G and H above) for his initial
connection to the Borough sewer system.
§ 58-10 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 58-11
1:522
§ 58-11. Street opening regulations.
A. Any person or permittee who shall make any excavation or trench in
any street of the Borough by virtue of any permit granted under the
provisions of this article shall backfill such excavation or trench and
replace the pavement, sidewalks and curbs in accordance with the
provisions of this article governing the construction of sidewalks, curbs
and streets in the Borough. Before any backfilling may commence, it
shall be the responsibility of the person charged with the duty of
performing the same to insure that any plumbing has been inspected
and approved by the proper official of the Borough. At least 48 hours
prior to backfilling the excavation or trench and replacing the
pavement, sidewalk and curbs, notice shall be given to the Borough
Engineer and/or the Superintendent of the Department of Roads. The
Borough Engineer and/or the Superintendent of the Department of
Roads or their authorized representative are hereby granted the
authority to approve the backfilling and replacement of pavement,
curbs and sidewalks, as aforesaid.
B. All existing pavements, road surfaces, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, pipes,
manholes, drains, conduits or other installations or fixtures and
property liable to be injured, damaged or destroyed shall be properly
protected by the person or applicant doing any work for which a street
opening permit has been issued during the time when such work is
being performed, and responsibility for any such damage shall be
assumed by the person or permittee to whom such permit has been
issued.
C. Any person or permittee making any opening or excavation by virtue of
a permit issued under this article shall carry out the work as
expeditiously as possible and in such manner as to cause the least
possible inconvenience and to permit the use of the sidewalk by
pedestrians, the roadway by vehicles, and the flow of water along the
gutters. All openings, diggings, excavations, piles of material,
equipment, machinery, barricades or obstructions, including earth and
stones removed from excavations, shall be properly guarded at all times
to prevent accidents, and a sufficient number of lighted lanterns or
flares shall be maintained between sunset and sunrise by the person or
applicant to whom such permit has been issued to designate such
openings or obstructions during the hours of darkness. Where any
excavation or trench is to extend across the full width of any street,
avenue, road or highway, only 1/2 of the same shall be made at one time
and shall be properly backfilled before the other 1/2 is excavated so as
not to interfere with traffic.
D. No person or applicant shall divert or discharge water into, upon or
across any street, avenue, road, highway or sidewalk so that a nuisance
is created or a hazardous condition caused to exist by the accumulation
of water or silt or by the formation of ice on the pavement or road
surface or cause the same to be damaged thereby.
§ 58-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-12
1:523
§ 58-12. Bond requirements.
§ 58-13. Liability insurance requirement.
Each applicant, prior to receipt of a permit, shall provide the Borough
with an acceptable certificate of insurance, indicating that he is insured
against claims for damages for personal injury, as well as against claims
for property damage, which may arise from or out of the performance
of the work, whether such performance be by himself, his subcontractor
or anyone directly or indirectly employed by him. Such insurance shall
cover collapse, explosive hazards and underground work by equipment
on the street and shall include protection against liability arising from
completed operations. The amount of the insurance shall be prescribed by
the Engineer in accordance with the nature of the task involved, provided
that the liability insurance for bodily injury in effect shall not be in an
amount less than $100,000 for each person and $300,000 for each accident,
and, for property damages, an amount not less than $50,000, with an
aggregate of $100,000 for all accidents. Public utilities and authorities may
be relieved of the obligation of submitting such certificates if they are selfinsured.
§ 58-14. Notice of improvements by Borough; street surfaces less
than five years old.
A. Performance bond requirements. Each applicant, prior to the receipt of
a permit, shall provide the Borough with an acceptable corporate surety
bond to guarantee faithful performance of the work authorized by a
permit granted pursuant to this article. The amount of the bond shall be
100% of the estimated cost of the work to be done by the permittee. The
term of the bond shall begin upon the date of posting thereof and shall
terminate upon receipt by the permittee of a certificate of final
inspection from the Engineer. If the permittee anticipates requesting
more than one permit per year as required by this article, he may
furnish one continuing corporate surety bond to guarantee faithful
performance, in such amount as the Engineer deems necessary. The
amount of such bond shall be in relation to the cost of restoring
pavement cuts to be made by the permittee throughout the year.
B. Default in performance. Whenever the Engineer shall find that a default
has occurred in the performance of any term or condition of the permit,
written notice thereof shall be given to the principal and to the surety
on the bond. Such notice shall state the work to be done, the estimated
cost thereof, and the period of time deemed by the Engineer to be
reasonably necessary for the completion of such work.
C. Completion of work. After receipt of such notice, the surety must,
within the time therein specified, either cause the required work to be
performed or, failing therein, indemnify the Borough for the cost of
doing the work as set forth in the notice.
§ 58-12 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 58-14
1:524
§ 58-15. Map requirements; notice to abutting property owners;
violations and penalties; severability; repealer.
A. Notices of improvements. When the Borough shall improve or pave any
street, the Borough Clerk shall first give notice to all persons owning
property abutting on the street about to be paved or improved and to all
public utilities and authorities operating in the Borough, and all such
persons, utilities and authorities shall make all connections, as well as
any repairs thereto which would necessitate excavation of the street,
within 30 days from the giving of such notice. The time shall be
extended if permission is requested in writing and approved by the
Borough Council.
B. Restrictions upon opening streets. No permit shall be issued by the
Borough Clerk to any person given notice under Subsection A hereof
which would allow an excavation or opening in a paved and improved
street surface less than five years old, unless the applicant can clearly
demonstrate that public health or safety requires that the proposed
work be permitted or unless an emergency condition exists.
C. Penalty for opening streets. If, by a special action of the Borough
Council, a permit is issued to open any paved and improved street
surface less than five years old, a penalty charge shall be made for the
opening, except that the penalty shall be waived in the event the work is
of an emergency nature. The penalty charge shall be on a sliding scale
and shall be equal to 2% of the cost of restoring the opening for each
unelapsed month or fraction thereof of the five-year restricted period.
A. Map requirements.
(1) Every person owning, using, controlling or having an interest in
pipes, conduits, ducts or other structures under the surface of any
street used for the purpose of supplying or conveying sewerage,
gas, electricity, communications impulses, water or steam to or
from the Borough, or to or from its inhabitants, or for any other
purpose, shall file with the Borough Clerk, within two years after
the adoption of this article, accurate information showing the
location, size and description of all such installations.
(2) Within 30 days after the first day of January of each and every year,
such person shall file with the Borough Clerk additional
information showing installations, including all those made or
abandoned during the previous years; provided, however, if no
additions have been made to its installation during the previous
year, a utility or authority may file with the Borough Clerk a written
statement to that effect, within the period of time specified above.
A utility or authority may, at its own option, elect to provide
additional information throughout the year as it is available rather
than proceed as above noted.
§ 58-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-15
1:525
§ 58-16. When effective.
This article shall take effect as provided by law.
B. Notices to property owners and tenants. If the work to be undertaken
by the permittee is such that it will affect the use of properties abutting
or adjoining the project or any subsurface installation in the vicinity of
the proposed opening, then the permittee shall serve each owner and/
or tenant of such properties or subsurface installations, personally or
by certified mail, return receipt requested, with a notice, at least 10
days prior to the date the work is to commence, stating:
(1) The date work will start;
(2) Date it will be completed; and
(3) Location and size of opening.
C. Penalty for violation. Any person who violates any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not
exceeding $200 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days,
or both. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist after notice in
writing shall have been served by the Engineer shall constitute a
separate offense.
D. Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or
portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional
by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a
separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
E. Repeal of existing ordinances. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in
conflict with the provisions of this article are hereby repealed.
§ 58-15 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 58-16
1:526
ARTICLE III
Sidewalk Repair, Maintenance and Replacement135
[Adopted 11-23-1993 by Ord. No. 723]
§ 58-17. Responsibility for costs.
Whenever the Construction Code Official of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus
certifies to the municipal governing body that any sidewalks and curbs
are in need of construction, repair, alteration, relaying or maintaining, the
expense of said construction, repairing, altering, relaying or maintaining
shall be borne by the landowners abutting the improvement.
§ 58-18. Notice to owner of required improvements.
The Borough Council, upon receipt of the certification set forth in § 58-17
hereof, shall determine the necessity of said improvement, and, if it deems
that said improvement is necessary, it shall, by resolution, cause a notice, in
writing, to be served upon said abutting owners or occupants of said lands
requiring the necessary specified work to said curb and/or sidewalk to be
done by said owner or occupant within a period of not less than 30 days nor
more than 90 days from the date of service of such notice.
§ 58-19. Manner of serving notice.
Whenever any said abutting lands are unoccupied and the owner cannot be
found within the municipality, the same may be mailed, postage prepaid,
to his or her post office address, if the same can be ascertained. In the
event that such owner is a nonresident of the municipality or his or her
post office address cannot be ascertained, then the notice may be inserted
for four weeks, once a week, in some newspaper published in the state and
circulating in said municipality.
§ 58-20. Failure to comply; work performed by Borough; lien.
In the event that the owner or occupant of such abutting lands shall not
comply with the requirements of said notice, it shall be lawful for the
Borough Administrator of the municipality, upon filing due proof of the
service or publication of the aforesaid notice in the appropriate department
of the municipality, to cause the work required to be done and paid for out
of municipal funds available for that purpose. The cost of such work shall
be certified by the Borough Engineer to the department or person having
charge of the collection of assessments in such municipality. Upon filing
said certificate of costs, the amount of the cost of such work shall be and
become a lien upon said abutting lands in front of which such work was
done, to the same extent that assessments for local improvements are liens
in the municipality, and shall be collected in the manner provided by law
for the collection of such other assessments and shall bear interest at the
135. Editor's Note: Former Art. III, Use, adopted 6-26-1905 by Ord. No. 7, was repealed
10-24-1967 by Ord. No. 441.
§ 58-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-20
1:527
same rate. In addition thereto, the municipality may commence, in any court
having competent jurisdiction thereof, an action against the owner of said
lands to recover said amount.
§ 58-21. Sidewalk specifications.
Sidewalk construction, repair, alteration, relaying or maintaining shall be in
conformance with the requirements of § 58-2 of the Code of the Borough
and subject to supervision and approval of the Borough Engineer.
§ 58-20 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 58-21
1:528
Chapter 60
(RESERVED)
Chapter 61
SNOW, ICE, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 47. Sidewalks, curbs and streets — See Ch. 58.
§ 58-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-21
1:529

ARTICLE I
General Requirements
[Adopted 4-21-1948 by Ord. No. 244]
§ 61-1. Removal from streets and sidewalks required.
The owner or owners, tenant or tenants of land abutting or bordering
upon the sidewalks of the public streets in the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus shall
remove all ice and snow from the portion of such sidewalks whereon such
lands abut or border within 24 hours after daylight after the same shall
be formed or fall thereon, and all grass, weeds and other impediments
therefrom within three days after notice to remove the same.
§ 61-1.1. Deposit of snow and ice. [Added 2-22-2011 by Ord. No.
981]
No person, owner or tenant of any premises abutting on any street shall
throw, place or deposit any snow or ice into or upon any street in the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, except such as falls upon or is formed upon that
portion of the property so abutting said street lying within the sidewalk
lines thereof. No person shall throw, place or deposit snow or ice into or
upon the property of another person without the property owner's express
permission. It is the intent and purpose of this section to prohibit all
persons from throwing, casting, placing or depositing snow and ice which
accumulated within the private property belonging to said persons upon the
sidewalks or streets of the Borough or upon other real property without the
owner's permission.
§ 61-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No.
981]
The owner or owners, tenant or tenants of lands abutting or bordering
upon such sidewalks who shall neglect to remove all ice and snow from the
portion of such sidewalk whereon such lands abut or border, and all grass
and weeds and other impediments as required by §61-1 of this article, or
such other person or persons properly charged for the commission of such
work, where such violation has been committed or shall exist, who refuse to
abate said violation within the times hereinbefore prescribed after having
been notified in person or in writing by the Police Department or other
official of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus properly charged with the enforcement
thereof, shall be subject to a fine of $50. Any person, including the owner or
owners, tenant or tenants, throwing, placing or depositing snow and ice into
or upon any street in the Borough shall be subject to a fine of up to $500, in
the discretion of the Judge. Each and every day that such violation continues
after such notice shall be considered a separate and specific violation of
this article and not as a continuing offense, and the penalty hereinbefore
provided shall be enforced in the proper court to punish said offender for
such violation.
§ 61-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 61-3
1:531
§ 61-3. Repealer. [Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 981]
All other provisions of this article which are not affected by Ordinance
No. 981 are hereby ratified and confirmed and shall remain in full force
and effect. However, all ordinances or parts of ordinances which are
inconsistent with the provisions of Ordinance No. 981 are hereby repealed
to the extent of such inconsistency.
§ 61-3.1. Severability. [Added 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 981]
If any portion of this article is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate
the remainder of this article, but shall be confined in its effect to the
provision directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall
have been rendered.
§ 61-4. When effective. [Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 981]
This chapter shall take effect upon passage and publication as required by
law.
§ 61-3 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 61-4
1:532
ARTICLE II
Clearing Snow From Fire Hydrants; Locator Poles
[Adopted 4-26-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-16]
§ 61-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Division of Fire Safety in the Department
of Community Affairs, State of New Jersey.
DIVISION — The Division of Fire Safety in the Department of Community
Affairs.
HYDRANT LOCATOR POLE — A pole installed on, or adjacent to, as
appropriate, a fire hydrant to enable the hydrant to be located when
covered in snow.
SNOW COVERAGE — The initial, complete coverage of the fire hydrant as a
result of natural precipitation or street clearing activities.
§ 61-6. Installation of hydrant locator poles.
The appropriate department of the Borough is hereby authorized to install
or cause to be installed a hydrant locator pole on every working fire hydrant
within municipal boundaries. The hydrant locator pole shall be maintained
in compliance with rules and regulations adopted by the Director.
§ 61-7. Clearance of fire hydrants.
§ 61-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates this article, or any part thereof, shall, upon
conviction, pay a fine up to but not exceeding $200 for each and every
offense in the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge.
§ 61-9. Severability.
If any portion of this article is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate
the remainder of this article but shall be confined in its effect to the
A. The owner of any real property abutting any fire hydrant shall clear
such fire hydrant of snow within 24 hours of snow coverage. A threefoot
clearance around the fire hydrant shall be required.
B. If a party responsible for fire hydrant clearance under Subsection A of
this section fails to perform the required clearance within the specified
time, the Borough, or any department thereof, may perform the
clearance and bill the responsible party no more than $75 for the
service. This charge shall be in addition to any penalty imposed for
violation of this section.
§ 61-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 61-9
1:533
provision directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall
have been rendered.
§ 61-10. Repealer.
All other ordinances or parts of ordinances of the Borough which are
inconsistent with this article are hereby repealed, but only to the extent of
such inconsistencies.
§ 61-11. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon passage and publication as required by
law.
§ 61-9 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 61-11
1:534
Chapter 62
SOCIAL MEDIA AND PUBLIC OUTREACH POLICY
§ 62-1. Purpose.
§ 62-2. Scope.
A. This policy sets forth guidelines for the establishment and use by the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus ("the Borough") of its social media sites and
public outreach tools (Facebook, YouTube, Twitter, website, electronic
sign, e-mail blast, public access TV, PowerPoint and any future
approved media - hereinafter collectively "social media") as a means of
conveying Borough-related information to its residents, employees and
visitors. The Borough has an overriding interest and expectation in
deciding what is "spoken" on behalf of the Borough on its social media
sites and what information get disseminated through its public
outreach tools.
B. The purpose of this Social Media and Public Outreach Policy is to
establish enforceable rules for the use of social media by Borough
officers and employees when engaged in Borough business. Social
media and public outreach tools at this time refers to Facebook,
YouTube, Twitter, website, electronic sign, e-mail blast, public access
TV, PowerPoint and any other communication, whether or not such
communication is open to response or comment. Rules are necessary to
assure that communications made on behalf of the Borough are
properly authorized and in correct form; that communications to the
municipality by means of social media which can be viewed by the
public are appropriate and pertinent; that all communications to the
municipality is related to the posted municipal information; and that the
sender is clearly and fully informed that a message received by means
of social media is not a substitute for required reporting procedures.
C. For purposes of this policy, "social media" is understood to be content
created by individuals, using accessible, expandable, and upgradable
publishing technologies, through and on the internet. Examples include
Facebook, YouTube and Twitter. "Public outreach tools" is understood
to be content created by individuals and published on the website,
electronic sign e-mail blast, public access TV and PowerPoint. For
purposes of this policy, "comments" include information, articles,
pictures, and any other written or communicated words or phrases.
A. This policy shall apply to all Municipal agencies and departments as
well as any affiliated government or Ho-Ho-Kus-sponsored clubs or
organizations, and organizations hosting an event for a nonprofit
organization in Ho-Ho-Kus or official and/or commission or council
permitted by the Borough to post on Borough social media sites and
public outreach tools.
§ 61-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-3
1:535
§ 62-3. General policy.
A. The objective of the use of social media and public outreach tools by the
Borough or its departments is to expand and facilitate the
dissemination of information from the Borough to its residents,
taxpayers and the general public.
(1) No Borough social media site shall be established without prior
approval of the Borough Council. The following social media sites
and public outreach tools are approved under the direction of the
Borough Administrator or his/her designee: Facebook, YouTube,
Twitter, website, electronic sign, e-mail blast, TV public access and
PowerPoint. The Borough social media site and public outreach
tools shall be administered by the Borough Administrator or his/her
designee. The Administrator or his/her designee shall designate a
representative from any Borough department or organization to
administer their own social media sites in accordance with this
policy.
(2) The Borough social media sites and public outreach tools shall
clearly set forth that they are maintained by the Borough and that
they follow this Social Media and Public Outreach Policy.
(3) Wherever possible, the Borough social media sites should link back
to the official Borough website for forms, documents, online
services and other information necessary to conduct business with
the Borough.
(4) The Borough social media sites are not to be used for making any
official communications to the Borough, for example, reporting
crimes or misconduct, reporting dangerous conditions, requesting
an inspection, giving notice required by any statute, ordinance or
regulations, such as but not limited to notices of claim. Prominent
notice of this subsection shall be displayed on every Borough social
media site, along with the appropriate contact information for
submitting official communications.
(5) This social media policy shall be placed on the Borough Website
and all Borough social media sites and public outreach tools.
(6) The Borough Administrator or his/her designee shall monitor
Borough social media sites and public outreach tools to ensure
adherence to both this Social Media and Public Outreach Policy and
the interest and goals of the Borough. The Borough has the right
and will restrict or remove any content that is deemed in violation
of this policy or any applicable law. Any content removed based on
these guidelines will be retained by the Borough Administrator
and/or his/her designee pursuant to the applicable Borough
retention policy, including the time, date and identity of the poster,
when available.
§ 62-3 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 62-3
1:536
§ 62-4. Comment policy.
(7) These guidelines must be displayed to users or made available by
hyperlink.
(8) The Borough will approach the use of social media tools as
consistently as possible, Borough-wide.
(9) The Borough website at www.ho-ho-kusboro.com will remain the
Borough's primary and predominate internet presence.
(10) The Borough's social media sites and this policy are subject to all
applicable federal and New Jersey laws and regulations, as well as
applicable record retention requirements.
(11) Employees and volunteers representing the Borough's government
via its social media sites shall conduct themselves at all times as a
representative of the Borough and in accordance with the
Employee Rules and Regulations manual.
(12) This Social Media and Public Outreach Policy may be revised at any
time by approval of the Borough Council.
(13) This policy governs all social media and public outreach tools used
by or on behalf of the Borough and/or its departments.
(14) The Borough shall have a single municipal presence on social
media approved for use, a Borough Police Twitter account and a
Volunteer Fire Department Facebook page.
(15) All Borough presence and activity on social media is an integral
part of the Borough's information networks and must comply with
all rules and policies governing the Borough's computers and
electronic media.
(16) All Borough use of social media is responsible for complying with
applicable federal, state, and county laws, regulations, and
policies. This includes adherence to established laws and policies
regarding copyright, records retention, Freedom of Information
Act (FOIA), Open Public Record Act (OPRA), First Amendment,
privacy laws, sunshine laws, and information security policies (if
applicable) established by the Municipality.
(17) All Municipal policies are applicable to interactions on social media
sites when acting in an official capacity and representing the
Municipality.
A. As a public entity the Borough must abide by certain standards to serve
all its constituents in a civil and unbiased manner.
B. The intended purpose behind establishing the Borough social media
sites and public outreach tools is to disseminate information from the
Borough about the Borough to its residents, employees and visitors.
§ 62-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-4
1:537
C. A comment posted by a member of the public on any Borough social
media site is the opinion of the commentator or poster only, and
publication of a comment does not imply endorsement of, or agreement
by, the Borough, nor do such comments necessarily reflect the opinions
or policies of the Borough.
D. Any attempt to hack or otherwise compromise the Borough's internet or
social media sites will be reported to law enforcement and the
perpetrator will be denied access to the sites.
E. The Borough reserves the right to deny access to its social media sites
for any individual who violates the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus' Social Media
and Public Outreach Policy at any time and without prior notice.
F. All comments posted to any Borough sites are bound by any applicable
terms and conditions of Facebook's Statement of Rights and
Responsibilities, located at http://www.facebook.com/terms.php. and
the Borough reserves the right to report any violation of Facebook's
Statement of Rights and Responsibilities to Facebook with the intent of
Facebook taking appropriate and reasonable responsible action. All
Borough policies are applicable to interactions on social media sites
when acting in an official capacity and representing the Borough.
G. All comments posted to any Borough sites are bound by any applicable
terms and conditions of Twitter's Terms of Service, located at
http://twitter.com/tos. and the Borough reserves the right to report any
violation of Twitter's Terms of Service to Twitter with the intent of
Twitter taking appropriate and reasonable responsible action. All
Borough policies are applicable to interactions on social media sites
when acting in an official capacity and representing the Borough.
H. All comments posted to any Borough sites are bound by any applicable
terms and conditions of YouTube's Terms of Service, located at
http://www.youtube.com/t/terms. and the Borough reserves the right to
report any violations of YouTube's Terms of Service to YouTube with the
intent of YouTube taking appropriate and reasonable responsible
action. All Borough policies are applicable to interactions on social
media sites when acting in an official capacity and representing the
Borough.
I. All comments posted to any future social media medium or site shall be
bound by such site's applicable terms and conditions regarding such
posting or commenting.
J. No Borough employee, Borough elected official, vendor performing
work or providing services to the Borough, or volunteer may post or
comment on a Borough social media site.
K. Persons posting prohibited content are subject to being barred from
posting comments on Borough social media.
§ 62-4 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 62-5
1:538
§ 62-5. Prohibited content.
Comments containing any of the following inappropriate forms of content
shall not be permitted on the Borough's social media sites or public
outreach tools and are subject to removal and/or restriction by the Borough
Administrator or Chief of Police or their designees.
A. Profane, obscene, violent, or pornographic content and/or language, or
sexually suggestive or explicit content links to such materials. Any
image or link containing minors or suspected minors in sexual and/or
provocative situations will be reported to law enforcement;
B. Content that promotes, fosters or perpetuates discrimination on the
basis of race, creed, color, age, religion, gender, or national origin,
marital status, status with regard to public assistance, physical or
mental disability or sexual orientation;
C. Reference to any political party or activity of a political party;
D. Reference to any religious belief;
E. Reference to any private interests group or activity of a private
interests group
F. Defamatory attacks;
G. Threats to any person or organization;
H. Solicitation of commence, including but not limited to advertising of any
business or product for sale;
I. Conduct in violation of any federal, state or local law;
J. Encouragement of illegal activity or illegal activity;
K. Information that may tend to compromise the safety or security of the
public or public systems;
L. Content that violates a legal ownership interest, such as copyright, of
any party the Borough does not permit or allow copyright infringing
activities and/or infringement of intellectual property rights on is
website or social media sites and will remove any and all content and
submissions if properly notified that such content and/or submission
infringes on another's intellectual property rights;
M. Private contact information such as names, addresses and phone
numbers no matter how easily obtained elsewhere, unless given
approval by the organization; personal information of a person other
than the poster;
N. Spamming or repetitive content;
O. Comments from children under 13 cannot be posted in order to comply
with the Children's Online Privacy Protection Act. By posting on a
§ 62-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-5
1:539
§ 62-6. Breach of policy.
§ 62-7. Terms of use of disclosure.
To be posted on all Borough social media sites.
Borough Media site, users acknowledge that they are at least 13 years
old. Parents are responsible for any minor child's posting or comments;
P. Content that incites violation;
Q. Comments unrelated to the particular post being commented upon;
R. Comments containing vulgar, offensive, threatening or harassing
language, personal attacks or accusations; and
S. Persons posting prohibited content are subject to being blocked and
barred from posting comments on Borough social media.
A. The Borough Administrator or Chief of Police or their designee shall be
required to remove internet postings on Borough social media sites
which are deemed to constitute a breach of policy, as determined by the
Borough Administrator or Chief of Police subject to applicable archiving
and retention requirements.
B. Any social media site created by the Borough remains the property of
the Borough, including all the followers and friends generated by the
site. If the person who created the site leaves the employment of the
Borough, they must immediately relinquish all information related to
the site including user names, passwords and/or access codes or
information.
A. Information disclaimer. By visiting this site, you understand and agree
that the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus site is provided "as is." The Borough of
Ho-Ho-Kus makes every effort to provide accurate and complete
information on this website. The information contained herein is not
official nor in any way shall it be deemed to constitute legal notice
where such legal notice is required by law. The information contained in
this site is provided as a service and convenience to people needing
information about the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus. Portions of the
information on this site may be incorrect or not current. The Borough of
Ho-Ho-Kus, its officers, employees or agents shall not be liable for
damages or losses of any kind arising out of or in connection with the
use or performance of information, including but not limited to,
damages or losses caused by reliance upon the accuracy or timeliness
of any such information, or damages incurred from the viewing,
distributing, or copying of those materials.
B. Linking policy; links to external sites.
(1) The Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus site contains links to outside websites.
These websites are not owned, operated, controlled or reviewed by
§ 62-5 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 62-7
1:540
the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus. These links are provided solely as a
courtesy and convenience to you, the visitor.
(2) The Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, its officers or employees, exercise no
control over the organizations, views, accuracy, copyright or
trademark, compliance or the legality of the material contained in
these outside websites. The Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, its officers or
employees, do not sponsor, endorse, or approve the information,
content, proceeds, materials, opinions or services contained on
such outside websites. The visitor proceeds to these outside
websites at his/her own risk. The Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus specifically
disclaims any and all liability from damages, which may result from
the accessing of a third-party site, which is linked to the Borough of
Ho-Ho-Kus website or from reliance upon only such information.
C. Endorsement disclaimer. Reference in this website to any specific
commercial products, processes, or services, or the use of any trade
firm or corporation name is for the information and convenience of the
public, and does not constitute endorsement, recommendation, or
favoring by the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus or its officers, employees or
agents.
D. Copyright and trademark limitations. The Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus makes
no warranty that materials contained herein are free of copyright or
trademark claims or other restrictions or limitations on free use or
display. Making a copy of such material may be subject to copyright or
trademark laws.
E. Use of material from this site.
(1) The Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus has made the content of these pages
available to the public and anyone may view, copy or distribute
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus information found here without obligations
to the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus for noncommercial, personal use only,
unless otherwise stated on particular material or information to
which a restriction on free use may apply.
(2) The design of this site, original graphics, and original content are
all copyrighted by the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus and may not be
reengineered, distributed, modified, transmitted, reused, reposted
or duplicated without the express written permission of the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus in each instance. All requests to use any
part of the original design, code, graphics or content of this site
should be made via e-mail to the Borough Administrator.
F. Unauthorized modifications. Unauthorized attempts to modify or
otherwise alter any information or image stored on any Borough of Ho-
Ho-Kus website may result in criminal prosecution.
§ 62-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-8
1:541
§ 62-8. Procedure.
This procedure sets forth the guidelines to having information posted on the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus' social media sites by an organization other than the
Borough.
§ 62-9. Repealer.
All other ordinances or parts of ordinances of the Borough which are
inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed but only to the extent of
such inconsistencies.
§ 62-10. Severability.
If any portion of this chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by the
Court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate
the remainder of this chapter but shall be confined in its effect to the
provision directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall
have been rendered.
A. Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus information, Borough events and meetings
announcements, and emergency notifications take precedent over any
other announcements.
B. Requests, including the text of the proposed messages, must be emailed
to the Borough Administrator and/or his/her designee at least 10
days prior to posting the information. The request must contain the
following information: full name of organization, time, date and place of
the event, contact name, e-mail address and telephone number.
C. Information shall be e-mailed as a Microsoft Word document in
paragraph form (Times New Roman, 12 Font), no PDF or fliers will be
accepted.
D. Organization shall include a maximum of two dates of when to post the
information.
E. Information will be disseminated for two weeks prior to the event.
F. Only Ho-Ho-Kus-sponsored clubs or organizations and organizations
hosting an event for a nonprofit organization in Ho-Ho-Kus shall be
permitted to seek approval to post information of Borough of Ho-Ho-
Kus' social media sites and public outreach tools.
G. Every effort will be made to accommodate all requests. If many
requests are received for the same period of time, the posting will be
determined on a first come, first serve basis. The dates of postings,
their duration, and content are the final decision of the Borough
Administrator and/or his/her designee.
§ 62-8 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 62-11
1:542
§ 62-11. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect upon passage and publication as required by
law.
Chapter 63
SOIL MOVEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Excavations and dredging — See Ch. 21.
Land subdivision and site plan review — See
Ch. 32B.
Soil importation — See Ch. 63A.
§ 63-1. Findings.
The Borough Mayor and Council do hereby find and declare that:
§ 63-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEVELOPER — An excavator.
DISTURBANCE — The cutting of trees, movement of soil, including plowing,
spading, cultivating, harrowing or disking of soil, landscaping and
gardening.
EXCAVATOR — Any person who moves soil.
A. Unregulated and uncontrolled disturbance, relocation, filling,
excavation and removal of soil on a large scale by developers and
excavators in and upon lands in the Borough has resulted in conditions
detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare,
substantially hampering and deterring the efforts of the Borough to
effectuate the general purpose of municipal planning.
B. Continuation of the unregulated and uncontrolled disturbance,
relocation, filling, excavation and removal of soil will result in serious
and irreparable damage to the public welfare by reason of consequent
soil erosion by water and wind; inadequate and improper surface water
drainage; a decrease in or destruction of the fertility of the soil; removal
of lateral support of abutting streets, lands and premises; creation of
dust storms and places for mosquito breeding; creation of dangerous
depressions or pits; deterioration of property values; rendering of lands
unfit or unsuitable for their most appropriate use; and creation of other
factors and elements hampering and deterring the coordinated,
adjusted and harmonious development of the Borough.
§ 62-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-2
1:543
INTERMEDIATE SOIL MOVING PERMIT — A permit for the moving of more
than 250 cubic yards of soil on any lot within any 12 consecutive months,
or the cumulative movement of more than 500 cubic yards within three
consecutive years, as required by this chapter.
LOT — Any parcel of land or portion thereof, the boundary lines of which
can be ascertained by reference to the maps or records in the office of the
Borough Tax Assessor or in the office of the Bergen County Clerk.
MAJOR SOIL MOVING PERMIT — A permit for the moving of soil on any lot
within any 12 consecutive months that has been classified as a major soil
moving application by the Soil Moving Committee and has been approved
by the Planning Board, as required by this chapter.
MINOR SOIL MOVING PERMIT — A permit for the moving of less than 150
cubic yards of soil or the disturbance of greater than 2,000 square feet of a
lot within any 12 consecutive months, as required by this chapter.
MOVE — To dig, excavate, remove, deposit, place, fill, grade, regrade, level
or otherwise alter or change the location or contour or to transport or
to supply. This term shall not be construed to include plowing, spading,
cultivating, harrowing or disking of soil or any other operation usually and
ordinarily associated with the tilling of soil for agricultural or horticultural
purposes, landscaping and gardening by homeowners or agents of
homeowners, provided that it does not substantially alter existing drainage
patterns. For the purpose of calculating the quantity of soil being moved,
the total soil movement shall be the sum of the total excavated soil and the
soil imported to the lot.
OWNER — Any person seized in fee simple of any lot or having such other
interest or estate therein as will permit exercise of effective possession
thereof or dominion thereover.
REDISTRIBUTION — Any change or alteration in the grade of any property.
SOIL — Any earth, sand, clay, loam, gravel, humus, rock or dirt, without
regard to the presence or absence therein of organic matter, including any
synthetic substance used as a substitute or in conjunction with soil, but not
limited to asphalt and concrete.
TOPSOIL — Soil that, in its natural state, constitutes the top layer of earth
and is composed of 2% or more, by weight, of organic matter and has the
ability to support vegetation.
UNSUITABLE SOIL — Unsuitable material such as organic materials,
vegetation, leaves, tree stumps, wood chips, sawdust, tree limbs, wooden
logs, waste building material, construction asphalt, concrete debris,
chemicals, drums, pails, plastic containers, tires and other compounds,
in addition to all items appearing on the Borough recycling list and any
materials appearing on the NJ DEP hazardous material list.
§ 63-3. Permit requirements.
§ 63-2 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 63-3
1:544
§ 63-4. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following operations:
§ 63-5. Permit limitations.
No soil movement permit shall be issued to any person other than the owner
of the lot, and only if the moving of soil from, in or upon the lot is necessary
for the immediate development of the property and the normal grading of
the lot concerning which the application is made. No permit shall be issued
for longer than one year.
§ 63-6. Minor soil moving permit.
Anyone engaged in the movement of soil of 150 cubic yards or less or
the disturbance of greater than 2,000 square feet of a lot within any
12 consecutive months shall make application to the Construction Code
Official for a permit prior to commencing operations. The Construction
Code Official, upon receipt of a complete application, shall refer the
application to the Borough Engineer, who shall make a field investigation
A. No person or excavator shall move any soil or change or alter the grade
of any property within the Borough without first obtaining a soil moving
permit as hereinafter provided. Any property that is in a floodplain,
floodway, contains wetlands or is subject to periodic flooding or
interferes with the Borough's stormwater system shall not be exempt
from the permit hearing requirement. No construction permit nor
certificate of occupancy shall be issued, as the case may be, until a soil
moving permit has been issued.
B. No person shall import soil to a site within the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus in
quantities of 50 cubic yards or more without first having procured a
permit.
A. The moving of 25 cubic yards or less of topsoil on any lot within a
twelve-month period.
B. The moving of soil in connection with the construction or alteration of
the basement or foundation of a building for which a proper building
permit has been issued by the Construction Official of the Borough,
provided the soil movement does not exceed 500 cubic yards.
C. The moving of soil for the installation of underground utility lines,
provided that all necessary permits have been issued.
D. The moving of soil for farming and gardening by homeowners, provided
it does not substantially alter the drainage patterns of the lot.
E. Abandoned wells, septic systems, cisterns or swimming pools may be
filled without a soil moving permit, provided that the owner of the lot or
its agent completes and files a permit form with the Building
Department prior to commencement of the work to be performed.
§ 63-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-6
1:545
and shall recommend the issuance of the permit or recommend denial of the
permit, giving his reasons for the denial.
§ 63-7. Intermediate soil moving permit.
Anyone engaged in the movement of soil of more than 150 cubic yards on a
lot within 12 consecutive months or the cumulative movement of more than
500 cubic yards within three consecutive years shall make application to
the Construction Code Official for a permit prior to commencing operations.
The Construction Code Official, upon receipt of the application, shall refer
the application to the Borough Engineer. The application shall be deemed
complete by the Borough Engineer, and the complete application shall be
reviewed by a Soil Moving Review Committee consisting of the Borough
Engineer, Construction Code Official, and a designee of the Planning Board,
if so appointed. The Committee shall make a field investigation and shall
recommend the issuance of the permit or recommend denial of the permit,
giving their reasons for the denial, or classify the application as a major
soil moving application and refer the application to the Planning Board for
a public hearing and approval by the Planning Board.
§ 63-8. Major soil moving permit.
A major soil moving permit is any soil moving permit classified by the Soil
Moving Review Committee as a major soil moving application and referred
to the Planning Board. The Soil Moving Review Committee may classify an
application as a major soil moving application because of drainage impacts
on adjoining properties, extensive regrading of the lot, extensive retaining
walls or the scale of the project. A major soil moving permit shall be
required to be approved by the Planning Board after a public hearing, with
notice being required to be given to all persons as set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-12. The Planning Board shall fix a date for the public hearing within
45 days after the receipt of the complete application as determined by the
Borough Engineer. The issuance of the major soil moving permit shall be
made by the Planning Board.
§ 63-9. Permit application procedure.
The procedure for applying for and issuance of a soil moving permit shall be
as follows:
A. Applications for minor soil permits shall be filed with the Construction
Code Official and shall be accompanied by the fee prescribed in this
chapter. Applications shall be made in triplicate on forms prescribed by
the Borough.
B. Applications for intermediate soil permits shall be filed with the
Construction Code Official and shall be accompanied by the fee
prescribed in this chapter. Five copies of the application form
prescribed by the Borough shall be submitted.
§ 63-6 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 63-9
1:546
C. Applications for major soil permits shall be filed with the Construction
Code Official and shall be accompanied by the fee prescribed in this
chapter. Applications shall be made in triplicate on forms prescribed by
the Borough for determination of completeness. Upon determination by
the Borough Engineer that a complete application has been submitted,
the applicant shall submit 15 copies to the Planning Board for
scheduling of a public hearing date.
D. Form of application:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The name and address of the owner of the property.
(3) The relationship between the applicant and owners.
(4) The name and address of the person having express charge,
supervision and control of the proposed soil moving operation;
provide telephone number and cellular number.
(5) The lot, block number and street address of the lot or lots involved.
(6) The purpose or reason for the moving of soil.
(7) The estimated quantity, in cubic yards, and type of soil to be moved,
with supporting calculations.
(8) A statement as to how the moving of the soil will affect all trees
with a diameter of six inches or more.
(9) The proposed date of commencement and completion of the work.
(10) A description of equipment to be used in the soil movement
operations; a list of the number and size of trucks and other
vehicles.
(11) A listing of the route to be used by the vehicles in the moving and
installing of the soil.
(12) The source, address and town, of the soil moved to the lot; a
certification from a certified laboratory as to the soil suitability or
the certification from an environmental consultant, based upon the
historical survey of the source site, of the soil suitability.
(13) Proof of liability insurance in such an amount and form as the
Planning Board may require.
(14) Method of abating noise and dust in the soil moving operation.
(15) A statement granting permission to the Borough officials or their
employees to enter the premises and make surveys and inspections
as the work progresses.
(16) Such other pertinent data as the Planning Board may hereinafter
reasonably require.
§ 63-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-9
1:547
E. Topographical map. Accompanying the application shall be a
topographical map prepared by a licensed professional engineer and a
licensed professional land surveyor. The map shall be prepared at a
scale not to exceed 30 feet to the inch. The topographical map shall
include the following:
(1) Boundary limits of the entire lot, including metes and bounds
information.
(2) Limits of the area to be disturbed or graded for which the permit is
sought.
(3) The present grades, at two-foot intervals, of the area to be
disturbed or graded and the area 25 feet outside the limits of the
area to be disturbed or graded.
(4) The proposed grades, at two-foot intervals, of the area to be
disturbed or graded and the area 25 feet outside the limits of the
area to be disturbed or graded, using a designation different than
those used for the present grades.
(5) The present grades, at two-foot intervals, of all adjacent properties
to a distance of at least 15 feet from the lot in question, including
the location of any structures within such 15 feet if the area to be
disturbed or graded is within 25 feet of the property line.
(6) The location and size of proposed structures, with first-floor and
basement elevations of all proposed buildings.
(7) All elevations shall be computed based on United States Coast and
Geodetic Survey datum.
(8) Location of all trees greater than four inches in diameter, plus
measures to provide tree protection.
(9) The quantity of soil for which the soil moving permit is sought,
together with the calculations used to arrive at such determination
of quantity. The quantity shall be calculated by accepted
earthmoving computations, such as the average end area method.
The quantity of soil to be moved shall be certified as accurate by a
licensed professional engineer.
(10) Details of retaining walls and other structures proposed for
support of soil, together with elevations of proposed grade above
and below any retaining wall and at the top of the wall. All retaining
walls must be designed, construction supervised and certified by a
licensed professional engineer.
(11) The plan must clearly delineate soil erosion and sediment control
measures and construction techniques that are to be implemented
to minimize the loss of soil due to erosion.
§ 63-9 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 63-9
1:548
§ 63-10. Review of application; issuance of permit.
An application for a soil moving permit shall be reviewed and considered in
the following manner:
§ 63-11. Appeals.
(12) The plan must provide construction details for the soil erosion and
sediment control measures and construction techniques that are to
be implemented to minimize the loss of soil due to erosion.
(13) A notation as to the method of restoration of disturbed areas; the
method of permanently stabilizing all disturbed areas.
(14) All easements and restrictions of record which may affect the
subject lot or lots.
(15) Existing surface and subsurface drainage conditions and patterns
of the lot and surrounding area.
(16) The presence, absence or location of freshwater wetlands on the lot
or within 150 feet of the area to be disturbed.
(17) The location of a Ho-Ho-Kus stream, as identified in the Borough of
Ho-Ho-Kus Stormwater Management Plan, on the lot or within 300
feet of the area to be disturbed.
(18) An indication if the lot is identified as an historic site in the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus Master Plan.
A. Minor soil moving permit; issuance. Within 30 days of the receipt of a
completed application, the Borough Construction Official shall render a
determination based upon the recommendation of the Borough
Engineer.
B. Intermediate soil moving permit; issuance. Within 30 days of the receipt
of a completed application, the Borough Soil Moving Review Committee
shall render a determination on the application; provided, however, that
should the Committee refer such application to the Planning Board, the
Planning Board shall have an additional 45 days from the date of the
referral of such application by the Committee to render its decision on
the application.
C. Major soil moving permit; issuance. The Planning Board shall review
and render a determination within 45 days after the submission of a
completed application.
A. In the event any applicant or person is aggrieved by the action of the
Soil Moving Committee, such person or the applicant may, not later
than 30 days after such action, appeal to the Borough Planning Board.
The Borough Planning Board may, by majority vote, sustain or, by twothirds
vote of its entire membership, overrule the Soil Moving
Committee recommendation. In the event any person or applicant is
§ 63-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-11
1:549
§ 63-12. Factors used in considering applications.
In considering and reviewing applications for minor, intermediate and major
soil permits, the Borough Planning Board and Borough Engineer and or
Soil Moving Review Committee shall be guided by the general purposes of
municipal planning and the following standards:
aggrieved by the action of the Planning Board, such person or the
applicant may, not later than 30 days after such action, appeal to the
Borough Council. The Borough Council may, by majority vote, sustain
or, by two-thirds vote of its entire membership, overrule the Planning
Board's recommendation.
B. Any proper party may appeal to a court of appropriate jurisdiction
pursuant to applicable law.
A. Soil erosion by water and wind.
B. No soil moving shall be permitted to result in any increase of velocity or
change in direction of surface water runoff without such water being
appropriately managed on site so as to not adversely affect other
properties.
C. Soil fertility and soil-bearing capacity.
D. Lateral support of abutting streets and lands.
E. Public health and safety.
F. Land values and uses.
G. The general welfare of the municipality and of the citizens of the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
H. The unsightliness of the premises after soil movement.
I. The effect of flooding upon the premises in question or surrounding
properties.
J. No soil moving permit shall be issued if the proposed soil moving would
have any reasonably conceivable detrimental impact upon any person,
surrounding property or the Borough.
K. In development of land, natural grades should be preserved wherever
possible, and soil moving shall only be permitted when good and
sufficient reason appears for such soil moving.
L. No soil moving shall be permitted which shall result in the removal or
destruction of trees in violation of the standards established under the
Tree Removal Ordinance of the Borough. In all respects, the applicant
shall provide a method for protection of trees acceptable to the
Borough and provide welling or mounding where appropriate.
§ 63-11 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 63-12
1:550
§ 63-13. Fees.
§ 63-14. Performance bonds; escrow fees.
M. All proposed structures shall be situated on the lot so as to require the
least amount of soil moving as is practical.
N. Whether the proposed removal of soil constitutes a commercial activity.
O. No slope created by soil moving shall be permitted to exceed a grade
which rises or falls one foot vertically for every four feet horizontally.
P. Such other factors as may bear upon or relate to the coordinated,
adjusted harmonious physical development of the Borough.
Q. Proposed soil and sedimentation control plan.
A. Soil application fee:
(1) Minor soil application fee: $100, plus a fee of $250 for the Borough
Engineer's review. An additional fee of $125 must be posted for
each plan revision.
(2) Intermediate soil application fee: $100, plus $1 per cubic yard of
soil moved, plus a fee of $500 for the Borough Engineer's review.
An additional fee of $125 must be posted for each plan revision.
(3) Major soil application fee: $1,500, plus a minimum escrow deposit
of $1,500 for the review by the Borough Engineer and a minimum
escrow deposit of $1,500 for the Planning Board Attorney.
(4) The soil application fee will not be refundable.
B. Exemption from fees. All utility companies, federal, state and local
authorities, including the Board of Education, and charitable
organizations may be exempt from the requirements of soil application
fees and soil movement fees at the discretion of the Planning Board.
A. A road restoration bond of a minimum of $3,000 must be posted for soil
moving permits. The purpose of this bond is to cover the cost of
municipal road repairs damaged during the soil moving operations.
B. A performance bond shall be posted for all intermediate and major soil
moving permits. The amount of the performance bond shall be
determined by the Borough Engineer and shall be an amount sufficient
to cover the cost of the property restoration, to cover the cost of
permanent soil erosion control measures if the work is not satisfactorily
completed by the applicant and to cover the costs of Borough review
and inspection. The bond amount shall be estimated by the Borough
Engineer.
C. The Planning Board may request additional bonds for improvements
shown on the soil moving application or plan, such as, but not limited
§ 63-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-14
1:551
§ 63-15. Form, date and expiration of permit; hours of operation;
delinquent taxes and assessments.
to, the following: retaining walls, planting, revegetation, drainage,
erosion, control damages to hauling route, etc. In ascertaining the
rate upon which to compute the amount of the bond, the Planning
Board shall take into consideration such factors as may bear upon the
facility with which the proposed work may be performed, including,
but not limited to, the type and character of soil; the extent of the
area over which the soil moving operations are to be conducted; the
extent and depth of the various cuts and fills; the extent to which the
area of operations is wooded; the proximity of the proposed operations
to streets, buildings, structures, natural or artificial streams or
watercourses; and general drainage conditions.
D. An engineering inspection escrow fee of a minimum of $1000 must be
posted for intermediate and major soil moving permits. Additional
engineering escrow monies must be posted upon notice of the depletion
of the escrow monies.
E. Requests for the release of any bonds posted or any unused escrow fees
in accordance with the terms of this section or the resolutions of the
Planning Board shall be accompanied by an affidavit stating that the
soil moving operation has been completed in accordance with the
application and all plans, maps and other data filed therewith and in
accordance with all resolutions and conditions therein adopted by the
Planning Board.
A. The soil moving permit shall be in such form as may be prescribed by
the Planning Board. A minor soil permit shall be signed by the
Construction Code Official. An intermediate soil moving permit shall be
signed by the Borough Engineer. A major soil permit shall be signed by
the Secretary of the Planning Board or the Chairman of the Planning
Board, and it shall contain any special conditions set forth in the
recommendation.
B. The soil moving permit shall be dated as of the date it is actually issued,
and the term of said permit shall not exceed one year.
C. All permits shall automatically expire on the termination date, unless
application for renewal has been made and approved, in writing,
extending such permit.
D. Hours of operation. There shall be no soil moving operations which
include loading and unloading at any time between 5:00 p.m. and 8:00
a.m., prevailing time, nor at any time on Saturday, Sunday or legal
holidays as defined by the Borough's current restrictions for
contractors.
§ 63-14 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 63-15
1:552
§ 63-16. Prohibited acts.
No person to whom a soil moving permit has been issued shall:
§ 63-17. General regulations.
Soil moving conducted in the Borough shall be performed in accordance
with the following regulations:
E. No soil permit shall be issued until it is determined that there are no
outstanding taxes or assessments for local improvements due or
delinquent on the property for which the application is made.
A. Conduct or maintain on the premises any sand, gravel or similar kind of
pit; any sand or gravel washing or screening machinery or equipment;
any business or industry not permitted in the district in which said
premises are located and classified by Chapter 85, Zoning, as amended
and supplemented; or any endeavor or enterprise other than the
grading or regrading of said premises in accordance with the provisions
of said permit and, where applicable, the necessary disposal of soil
incidental to said grading or regrading.
B. Conduct or maintain any soil moving operations without having first
made adequate provisions by means of water, calcium chloride, or
otherwise, for the prevention of dust incidental to the use of vehicles,
machinery and equipment on the lands described in the soil permit.
C. Neglect to dispose of, on or before the completion date stated in the
application, any partially or wholly excavated boulders or other
noncombustible debris resulting from the soil moving operations by
burial or removal and any partially or wholly excavated stumps felled or
uprooted trees or other combustible debris resulting from the soil
moving operations.
D. Conduct any soil moving operations beyond the expiration date as set
forth in the soil removal permit or extended expiration date as may duly
be granted by the Planning Board.
A. In all operations for which a permit is required:
(1) Prior to the start of soil movement operations, the disturbance of a
lot or construction, the following must be performed:
(a) The limits of disturbance must be delineated with construction
fencing.
(b) Sediment barriers must be installed and maintained
throughout the entire length of the project.
(c) Tree-protection measures must be installed and approved by
the Borough Engineer and/or the Shade Tree Commission.
§ 63-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-17
1:553
(2) Lands shall be graded to conform to the approved contour lines and
grades.
(3) Streets, roads and paved surfaces shall be cleaned, at the
applicant's expense, on a daily basis, of sediments and debris.
(4) The top layer of soil, to a depth of six inches, shall not be removed
from the premises, but shall be set aside and respread over the
premises when the remainder of the soil has been moved.
B. In all operations, whether or not a permit is required:
(1) Prior to the start of soil movement operations, the disturbance of a
lot or construction, the following must be performed:
(a) Sediment barriers must be installed and maintained
throughout the entire length of the project.
(b) Tree-protection measures must be installed and approved by
the Borough Engineer and/or the Shade Tree Commission.
(2) All boulders, tree stumps and other debris shall be removed from
the property.
(3) In dry weather, the person conducting such operation shall dampen
the ground where operations are conducted to prevent dust.
(4) No trucks used shall be loaded above the level of the sides of the
truck, to prevent spillage, and all streets shall be cleaned, at the
applicant's expense, each day, of any spillage or soil on such streets
resulting from truck operations.
(5) All truckloads shall be covered with tarpaulin and, if necessary,
treated by water or chemicals to prevent flying dust.
(6) No trucks, machinery or any part of the operation shall be
conducted before 8:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m. on weekdays nor at
any time on Saturday, Sunday or federal or state legal holidays.
(7) All vehicles engaged in such operations shall use as routes only
those Borough streets which have been approved by the Planning
Board. The applicant shall notify the Police Department as to the
route which will be utilized for transporting soil.
(8) The entire area covered by the work shall be maintained and left in
such manner as not to create or maintain a nuisance or condition
hazardous to life and limb or to the health or general welfare of the
inhabitants or the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
(9) All excavation, removal and other mandatory ground cover work,
including restoration of property to final grades and subsequent
seeding, must be completed within one year from the date of the
permit.
§ 63-17 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 63-17
1:554
§ 63-18. Topsoil removal, storage and replacement.
§ 63-19. Administration and enforcement.
For the purpose of administering and enforcing this chapter, any member
of the Planning Board and any duly authorized agent of the office of the
Borough Engineer and the Municipal Construction Code Official's office of
the Borough shall have the right to enter into and upon any lands in or upon
which soil moving operations are being conducted to examine and inspect
such lands. The Municipal Construction Code Official is hereby authorized
to issue stop-work orders and summonses for any violation of this chapter
as determined by the Municipal Construction Code Official or the Borough
Engineer.
§ 63-20. Violations and penalties.
(10)No more soil shall be removed than is reasonably necessary for the
development and use of the land.
(11)No soil removal shall be allowed which shall cause drainage to
adjacent property or prejudicially affect the values of adjacent
properties.
A. Whenever any developer or excavator shall move topsoil in or upon any
lot, provision shall be made for the storage of said topsoil within the
boundary lines of said lot.
B. Except as hereinafter provided, all of the topsoil so stored shall be
uniformly replaced over the entire area or surface of the lot on or
before the completion date set forth in the soil permit, so that the final
grade or grades of said replaced topsoil shall be in accordance with the
proposed final grades shown on the topographical map.
C. No developer or excavator shall remove to any point beyond the
boundary lines of the lot any topsoil whatsoever unless and until topsoil
not inferior in quality to that to be removed shall first have been
replaced uniformly to a depth of not less than six inches, measured from
the proposed final grades as shown on the topographical map, over the
entire surface or area of the lot, excepting only such portions thereof as
shall be or shall have become, since the date of filing of said
topographical map, permanently covered by a building or structure,
street pavement, curb, sidewalk, driveway or other paved area or by
any body of water or waterway. In no event shall the developer or
excavator remove from the lot more topsoil than that comprising the
surplus or excess remaining after the replacement of the topsoil as
aforesaid.
A. Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a minimum fine
of $500, to a maximum of $25,000 for the violation. The penalty shall be
based on a minimum of $5 per cubic yard of soil moved. The
§ 63-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-20
1:555
§ 63-21. Repealer.
All other provisions which are not affected by this chapter are hereby
ratified and confirmed and shall remain in full force and effect. However, all
ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent with the provisions
of this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency,
including former Chapter 63, Soil Removal, §§ 63-1 through 63-9.
§ 63-22. Severability.
If any portion of this chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate
the remainder of this chapter, but shall be confined in its effect to the
provision directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall
have been rendered.
§ 63-23. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect after final passage and publication as required
by law.
Chapter 63A
SOIL IMPORTATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Excavations and dredging — See Ch. 21.
Land subdivision and site plan review — See
Ch. 32B.
Soil movement — See Ch. 63.
§ 63A-1. Permit requirements; fee; professional review.
aforementioned penalty may, upon a written plea of guilty, be paid and
satisfied through the Violations Bureau of the Municipal Court without
the requirement of a court appearance.
B. All fines and penalties collected pursuant to this section shall be
deposited or credited to the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus Tree Replacement
Trust Fund, which shall be administered by the Department of Public
Works.
A. No person shall import soil to a site within the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus in
quantities of 50 cubic yards or more without first having procured a
permit therefor by the filing of an application for such soil importation
with the Borough Clerk. The application shall be accompanied by a
minimum fee of $100, plus $0.25 for every cubic yard in excess of 100
cubic yards, and a plan with information as set forth in the application.
§ 63-20 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 63A-1
1:556
§ 63A-2. Bond or performance guaranty required.
Before any permit shall be issued, the owner or applicant shall file with
the Mayor and Council a surety bond or cash performance guaranty in an
amount reasonably determined by the Borough Engineer, but in an amount
not less than $2,500, to secure proper performance of the work undertaken
in compliance with all ordinances and regulations of the Borough and
directives of the Borough Engineer.
§ 63A-3. Engineering escrow.
In addition to the surety bond or cash performance guaranty required
by the provisions of this chapter, the owner or applicant shall deposit
with the Clerk of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus at the time of application an
amount reasonably estimated by the Borough Engineer to be required for
engineering review of the plan and work involved in an amount of at least
$100. If, prior to completion of the permit requirements, the escrow account
should be depleted, the applicant shall replenish the deposit with additional
funds reasonably estimated to bring the project to completion. Upon release
of the performance bond, cash performance guaranty and payment of any
outstanding engineering fees, any balance shall be returned to the applicant
upon request, in writing, to the governing body.
B. The application shall disclose the address and location from which the
soil is to be obtained, the owner or representative of the owner of the
premises from which the soil is to be obtained and the kind and quality
of soil to be imported.
C. The Borough Engineer shall review all such applications and, if in the
opinion of said Engineer, professional review of the application,
including physical examination or testing of soil, is required, the
Engineer shall forward all pertinent materials to a soil consultant or
environmental consultant for review and for a certified testing soil
laboratory report which shall be delivered to the Borough Council
within 30 days from the date of a completed application. The report of
the consultant shall be accompanied by an invoice for the service
performed. The applicant shall establish an escrow fund in the Borough
Clerk's office to satisfy the cost of testing and professional review upon
an estimate of the cost involved by the Borough Engineer.
D. If during the course of soil importation, the Borough Engineer shall
determine that a physical examination of the material involved is
required for the protection of public health and safety, the Borough may
retain a soil consultant to examine the fill material at the sole expense
of the applicant, who shall establish an escrow account to cover the cost
as approved. If the results of such examination indicate the presence of
material which is harmful, dangerous, toxic or hazardous to the public,
all soil importation activities shall cease, and the soil in question shall
be removed in accordance with directions of the Borough Engineer.
§ 63A-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63A-4
1:557
§ 63A-4. Hours of work.
To preserve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Borough
of Ho-Ho-Kus, all of the work described in the within chapter shall only be
performed within the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any working day.
§ 63A-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $200 or imprisonment in
the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, in the discretion of the
Judge before whom such conviction shall be had. Each and every violation
and nonconformance of this chapter or each day that any provision of this
chapter shall have been violated shall be construed a separate and distinct
violation thereof.
§ 63A-6. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately after passage and publication as
required by law.
Chapter 64
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 34.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 47.
Public scavengers — See Ch. 48.
Recycling — See Ch. 52.
§ 63A-4 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 63A-6
1:558
ARTICLE I
Collection and Disposal
[Adopted 12-22-1992 by Ord. No. 711]
§ 64-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to enhance Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus
compliance with the New Jersey Statewide Mandatory Source Separation
and Recycling Act, Public Laws of 1987, Chapter 102,136 and the New
Jersey Recycling Act of 1981, Public Laws of 1981, Chapter 278,137 and to
supplement the regulation of the disposal of solid waste within the Borough
by requiring that every responsible solid waste generator shall arrange to
have regular collection and/or disposal of all solid waste generated on or
about property owned, occupied or leased within the Borough and that
written proof of collection be submitted upon request, as required by P.L.
1991, c. 170 (Assembly Bill A-1808), effective June 19, 1991.138
§ 64-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Both the singular and plural, as the case demands, and shall
include individuals, corporations, companies, societies and associations.
When construing and enforcing the provisions of this article, the act,
omission or failure of any employee, officer, agent or other person acting for
or employed by any individual, corporation, company, society or association,
within the scope of his employment or office, shall in every case be deemed
to be the act, omission or failure of such individual, corporation, company,
society or association, as well as that of the person.
PROOF OF COLLECTION — A written record, log, bill or document
evidencing receipt of service for the collection of solid waste for the
preceding year from a collector/hauler of solid waste holding a certificate of
public convenience from the Board of Public Utilities. Sufficient proof shall
contain the generator's name and the owner's name if the generator is a
tenant; address; total cost per unit or period of service; and the hauler's
name, address, license number and period of service. Records, logs, ledgers
or documents created by the generator or any other memorialized
generator records in any form will not be deemed sufficient proof of
collection.
REGULAR COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL — Removal of all solid waste
from a premises at a minimum of once a week. Additional collection and
disposal must be arranged should an extraordinary amount of solid waste be
generated between scheduled collections. Should a scheduled collection fall
136. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.11 et seq.
137. Editor's Note: See now N.J.S.A. 13:1E-213 et seq., the Clean Communities Program Act.
138. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:66-5.1 et seq.
§ 64-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-2
1:559
on a legal holiday recognized by Ho-Ho-Kus, the generator shall arrange for
additional collection if solid waste cannot be stored in leakproof containers.
RESPONSIBLE SOLID WASTE GENERATOR — Any property owner, tenant
or occupant of a residential, commercial or public dwelling, business or
structure who generates, produces and/or disposes of solid waste of any
type on, in or about property located in Ho-Ho-Kus.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse and other discarded materials resulting
from industrial, commercial and agricultural operations and from domestic
and community activities and shall include all other waste materials,
including liquids, except for solid animal and vegetable wastes collected by
swine producers licensed by the State Department of Agriculture to collect,
prepare and feed such wastes to swine on their own farms.
SOLID WASTE COLLECTION — The activity related to pickup and
transportation of solid waste from its source or location to a disposal site or
to a resource recovery facility.
§ 64-3. Proof of collection required.
Each responsible solid waste generator in the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus shall,
within 10 days of request from the Recycling Coordinator, provide proof
of collection and disposal of solid waste on, in or about property owned,
occupied or leased in the Borough. Proof of collection is to be submitted
to the Borough Clerk, who shall notify the Recycling Coordinator of any
noncompliance.
§ 64-4. Violations and penalties.
§ 64-5. Repealer.
Any ordinance or parts of ordinances inconsistent with this article are
hereby repealed, but only to the extent of any such conflict or inconsistency.
A. Any person who, after receipt of not less than 10 days' notice of
noncompliance, violates or fails to comply with the provisions of this
article shall be subject to the following violations and penalties:
(1) First offense: fine of $250.
(2) Each offense thereafter: fine of $500 and up to 30 days in jail. Such
person may also be ordered to perform community service in a
recycling program for a period of time not to exceed 240 hours of
community service.
B. Fines levied and recovered for noncompliance with any and all
provisions of this article shall be transmitted monthly by the Court
Clerk to the Borough Treasurer and placed in the current fund and
recorded as a dedication by rider to be utilized for the purposes of the
Borough's recycling program, to include but not be limited to
education, awareness and improvement in services, in accordance with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:4-39.
§ 64-2 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 64-6
1:560
§ 64-6. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or sentence is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
decision shall apply only to the section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision,
sentence, clause, phrase or provision so adjudged, and the remainder of this
article shall be deemed valid and effective.
§ 64-7. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately following passage and publication
according to law.
§ 64-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-7
1:561

ARTICLE II
Solid Waste Utility
[Adopted 11-25-1997 by Ord. No. 787]
§ 64-8. Public contracts for collection authorized.
§ 64-9. Creation; organization; rules and regulations; fees and
charges.
A. The Borough Council may make provision by exclusive contract or
otherwise, as circumstances may require, for the collection and
disposal of solid waste, including recyclables. By resolution, it may also
establish and promulgate reasonable regulations as to such collection
and disposal.
B. Definitions, regulations and requirements as to the preparation of solid
waste, including recyclables, for collection when set forth in public
contracts for collection made by the Borough shall also be considered
and deemed regulations adopted pursuant hereto. Such contracts, as
well as all regulations adopted pursuant hereto, shall be on file in the
office of the Borough Clerk, are incorporated herein by reference, and
may be examined by any member of the public on request.
A. Utility created.
(1) The Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus hereby creates a Solid Waste Utility
(SWU) of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus to transact the collection of
solid waste, including recyclables, within the territorial limits of the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
(2) The SWU shall be self-liquidating with a dedicated budget as
provided by N.J.S.A. 40A:4-34 to 40A:4-36.
B. Organization; promulgation of additional rules and regulations. At each
annual reorganization meeting, the Mayor shall appoint one member of
Council as Chairman of the SWU and two additional members of
Council which shall comprise the SWU of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
C. Recovery of costs; fees. The costs associated with the collection and
disposal of solid waste, including recyclables, shall be recovered in
accordance with uniform fees fixed from time to time by the Borough
Council and collected from the property owners to whom the services
are made available.
D. Service charge. There is hereby established a solid waste service
charge to be imposed annually upon the owners of those properties for
which solid waste collection and disposal service is made available by
the Borough. Funds so collected shall be paid into the dedicated Solid
Waste Utility Fund of the Borough.
E. Computation of service charge. The solid waste service charge shall be
fixed annually by resolution of the Mayor and Council as may be
§ 64-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 64-9
1:563
§ 64-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person, corporation or entity who violates or neglects to comply with
any provision of this article or any regulation promulgated hereunder shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000,
except that no person shall be convicted and fined for violation of any
regulation dealing with preparation and placement of solid waste and
recyclables for collection unless such person has previously received one
written warning of such person's failure to comply with the provisions
hereof.
required to meet budgetary requirements. Said charges may, from time
to time, be revised by resolution of the Mayor and Council to provide
for the financial requirements of the SWU.
F. Payment of service charge.
(1) Upon approval of the annual service charge by the Borough
Council, the Chief Financial Officer shall bill the owner of each
property to which the service is available. The solid waste service
charge for 1998 shall be paid in full on or before December 31,
1998, and thereafter each annual charge shall be paid in four equal
installments as follows: January 15, April 15, July 15 and October
15, 1999.
(2) The charges hereby imposed shall be payable to the Borough, and
each payment shall draw the same interest as taxes upon real
estate beginning 30 days after the due date and shall be a lien upon
the property to which service was made available until paid. The
Borough shall have the same remedies for collection of the charges
hereby imposed, with interest, costs and penalties as it has by law
for the collection of taxes on real estate.
§ 64-9 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 64-10
1:564
Chapter 65
STORAGE TANKS, UNDERGROUND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 26. Uniform Construction Code
Department — See Ch. 77.
§ 65-1. Testing procedures; definitions. [Amended 7-26-1988 by
Ord. No. 627]
§ 65-2. Test reports; repair, replacement and removal of leaking
tanks.
A. All persons, which shall herein be construed to include individuals,
partnerships, corporations or other entities, having custody, control or
ownership of an underground tank storage system with a capacity in
excess of 1,100 gallons of flammable liquids (motor fuel) or such an
underground tank storage system with a capacity in excess of 2,000
gallons containing combustible liquids (heating oil) shall cause such
tank system and all connecting piping to be tested for leakage within six
months after the date of final passage of this chapter or any amendment
thereto.
B. The owner of the real property on which any such tank system is
installed shall have the primary and ultimate responsibility for
compliance with this chapter.
C. The definitions of the terms "flammable liquid" and "combustible liquid"
as used herein are as set forth in Section 3400 of the International Fire
Code, New Jersey Edition (2006), and applicable definitions in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.A.C. 7:14B-1.6. [Amended
2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 977]
D. The Petro-Tite Tank and Line Test (formerly the Kent-Moore Test) or
other methods approved by the New Jersey Uniform Construction
Code139 shall be utilized in testing for leakage of such underground
tanks. [Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 977]
E. Testing shall be performed by a person, firm or corporation duly
qualified to test underground flammable liquid storage tanks. Each test
shall be conducted during normal working hours and under conditions
prescribed by the Ho-Ho-Kus Construction Department. All tests shall
be conducted so as to demonstrate proof of tightness in accordance
with the standards of National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 30.
[Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 977]
139. Editor's Note: See Ch. 77, Uniform Construction Code Department.
§ 64-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 65-2
1:565
§ 65-3. Out-of-service or abandoned tanks. [Amended 2-22-2011 by
Ord. No. 977]
Underground tanks removed from service or abandoned shall be
safeguarded or disposed of as prescribed by the Uniform Construction Code
and under conditions prescribed by the Fire Subcode Official and/or the
Building Subcode Official.
§ 65-4. Frequency of testing. [Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 977]
The Construction Department may require that a storage tank be tested at
more frequent intervals than required by this chapter if the Construction
Department has reason to believe that there may be a leakage.
A. The person having custody, control or ownership of the storage tank
shall furnish a written report of the test results to the Ho-Ho-Kus
Construction Department within 10 days of the completion of the test.
[Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 977]
B. In the event that the test reveals a leakage, the owner or occupant of
the land upon which the tank is located shall immediately remove all
liquid in such tank and shall cease use of the tank until replacement or
repair so as to correct the leakage. Any tank which must be repaired to
correct leakage shall not be put into operation until after the repairs
are completed and until a further test is made which demonstrates no
leakage and until the Construction Department has certified that the
tank may return to service. Within 10 days after completion of repairs,
written certification that the tank has been repaired satisfactorily shall
be submitted by the responsible person to the Construction
Department. [Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 977]
C. In all cases, the Construction Department shall have the discretion to
require that any tank which reveals a leakage be excavated and
removed. When the leaking tank is excavated and removed, the owner
or occupant of the land upon which the tank is located shall cause any
and all contaminated soil to be removed from the site to the satisfaction
of the Construction Department and the New Jersey State Department
of Environmental Protection. The soil shall be disposed of by an
approved hazardous waste firm, at the cost and expense of the person
responsible, under the direction of the Construction Department and
the Department of Environmental Protection. [Amended 2-22-2011
by Ord. No. 977]
D. In the event the Bureau of Fire Prevention requires removal of the tank,
such removal shall proceed no later than 30 days from the date leakage
was determined to exist. All replacement tanks shall comply with the
regulations regarding installation as promulgated by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
§ 65-2 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 65-5
1:566
§ 65-5. Notice of testing. [Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 977]
All testing and excavation of tanks shall be conducted only upon a minimum
of 72 hours' notice to the Construction Department and under conditions
prescribed by the Department for such testing and removal.
§ 65-6. Fees.
§ 65-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject
to a fine not exceeding $500 or imprisonment in the county jail for a term
not exceeding 90 days, in the discretion of the Judge of the Municipal
Court before whom such conviction shall be had. Each and every violation
and nonconformance with this chapter or each day that any provision of
this chapter shall have been violated shall be construed as a separate and
distinct violation thereof.
§ 65-8. Repealer. [Added 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 977140]
All other provisions of this chapter which are not affected by Ordinance
No. 977 are hereby ratified and confirmed and shall remain in full force
and effect. However, all ordinances or parts of ordinances which are
inconsistent with the provisions of Ordinance No. 977 are hereby repealed
to the extent of such inconsistency.
§ 65-9. Severability. [Added 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 977]
If any portion of this chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate
the remainder of this chapter, but shall be confined in its effect to the
provision directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall
have been rendered.
§ 65-10. When effective. [Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 977]
This chapter shall take effect after final passage and publication as required
by law.
A. The following fees shall be due and payable to the Bureau of Fire
Prevention of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus: [Amended 2-22-2011 by
Ord. No. 977]
(1) Inspection fee for tank testing: $100.
(2) Inspection fee for abandonment of tank: $100.
B. A separate fee shall be due and payable for each separate day that an
inspection is required pursuant to the terms of this chapter.
140. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former § 65-8, When effective, as § 65-10.
§ 65-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 65-10
1:567
Chapter 66
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Excavations and dredging — See Ch. 21.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 27.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 32A.
Land subdivision and site plan review — See
Ch. 32B.
Soil movement — See Ch. 63.
Zoning — See Ch. 85.
§ 66-1. Intent; purposes.
A. The general intent of this chapter is to manage the increased rate and
velocity of surface water runoff created by certain alterations of the
ground cover and natural runoff patterns.
B. This chapter is deemed essential and necessary to protect the public
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus
and the surrounding communities by accomplishing the following
purposes:
(1) To reduce flood damage to public health, life and property.
(2) To minimize increased stormwater runoff from any new land
development.
(3) To maintain the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts and
bridges.
(4) To induce water recharge into the ground, where practical.
(5) To prevent, to the greatest extent feasible, any increase in nonpoint
source pollution.
(6) To maintain the integrity of stream channels for their biological
functions as well as for drainage and other purposes.
(7) To reduce the impact of development upon stream erosion in areas
where this would be detrimental.
(8) To reduce erosion from any development or construction project.
(9) To minimize the increases in runoff pollution due to land
development which otherwise would degrade the quality of water
and might render it both unfit for human consumption and
detrimental to biological life.
(10) To preserve and protect water supply facilities and water resources
by means of controlling harmful flood discharges, stream erosion
and runoff pollution.
§ 65-10 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 66-1
1:568
§ 66-2. Word usage; definitions.
(11) To reduce public expenditures for replacement or repair of public
facilities resulting from artificially induced flood peaks.
A. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the
purpose of this chapter, have the meanings herein indicated. Words
used in the present tense include the future; the singular number
includes the plural and the plural the singular; and the word "person"
includes a corporation as well as an individual.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — Any person, partnership, corporation or public agency
requesting permission to engage in land disturbance activity,
construction or development.
APPROVED PLAN — A plan to control surface water runoff approved by
the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus Planning Board.
CHANNEL — A watercourse with definite bed and banks which confine
and conduct continuously or intermittently flowing water.
CONSERVATION EASEMENT — An agreement or covenant running
with the land which prohibits all land or vegetation disturbance in favor
of a permanent dedication to natural open space, with each agreement
to be entered into between the applicant and the municipality.
DRAINAGEWAY — Any watercourse, trench, ditch, depression or other
hollow space in the ground, natural or artificial, which collects or
disperses surface water from land.
ENGINEER — The Borough Engineer or his designee.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREA — Any area which should not
be disturbed by uses incompatible with the paramount public interest
in the prevention of surface water runoff and attendant environmental
damage. Examples of environmentally critical areas include but are not
limited to lakes, ponds, floodplains and flood hazard areas, designated
stream corridors, steep slopes, highly erodible soil wetlands, swamps,
bogs, marshes, aquifer recharge and discharge areas and heavily
wooded areas.
LAND DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving the clearing, grading,
transporting or filling of land and any other activity which alters land,
topography or vegetative cover.
NATURAL DRAINAGE FLOW — The topographical pattern or system of
drainage of surface water runoff from a particular site, including the
various drainageways and watercourses which carry surface water only
during periods of heavy rains, storms or floods.
NONPOINT SOURCE — Surface water entering a channel from no
definable discharge source.
§ 66-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-2
1:569
§ 66-3. Administration.
Except as may be hereinafter provided, this chapter shall be administered
by the Planning Board of the Borough.
§ 66-4. Plan approval required.
The surface water management plan shall be approved by the Planning
Board prior to site plan approval, except as hereafter provided, and for any
applications for preliminary approval of major subdivisions, as defined in
Chapter 32B, Land Subdivision and Site Plan Review, of the Code of the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, New Jersey.
RUNOFF — The part of precipitation as well as any other flow
contribution which appears in surface streams or watercourses, natural
or artificial.
SEASONAL HIGH GROUNDWATER TABLE — As shown in the Bergen
County Soil Survey, subject to field investigation.
SURFACE WATER — All water produced by precipitation, flood
drainage, springs, seeps or other man-made discharge flowing over the
land or contained within a natural or artificial watercourse.
SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan prepared by a New
Jersey licensed professional engineer, consistent with the purposes and
policies of this chapter, which fully indicates necessary land treatment
measures and techniques, including a schedule for implementation and
maintenance and discharge calculation.
SURFACE WATER RUNOFF — That part of runoff which travels over
the ground surface and through channels, natural and artificial.
SURFACE WATER RUNOFF DAMAGE — All damage or harm to
property values, land, vegetation and water supplies, including but
not limited to flooding, soil erosion, siltation and other pollution of
watercourses and diminished recharge of groundwater supply, which
damage results or is likely to result when the dispersion of surface
water typical of the land in a meadow of good hydrologic condition is
increased in rate, velocity or quantity.
TWO-, TEN-, OR ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR STORM — The most intense
probable precipitation to occur in a given region in a twenty-four-hour
period, with a frequency of once in two, 10 or 100 years.
WATERCOURSE — All rivers, streams, brooks, waterways, lakes,
ponds, marshes, swamps, bogs and all other bodies of water, natural or
artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through or
border on the municipality or any portion thereof.
WATERSHED — An area of surface water runoff related to a point of
concentration, such as the topographically determined confluence with
another body of water or a man-made culvert, etc.
§ 66-2 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 66-5
1:570
§ 66-5. Review procedure for plan approval; waiver.
§ 66-6. Required data.
The applicant shall submit a separate surface water management plan for
any proposed site plan or major subdivision, except as may be provided
in § 66-9. The surface water management plan shall be coordinated with
the sedimentation and erosion control plan required pursuant to P.L. 1975,
c. 251 (N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.), as amended. The plan shall contain the
following data:
A. No person shall engage in any land disturbance activity on any property
within the Borough unless he shall have submitted a surface water
management plan to the Planning Board and obtained approval of such
plan and permit or a written waiver of necessity from the Planning
Board.
B. The Planning Board may waive the need for a surface water
management plan for plats of one acre or less upon written
recommendation of the Engineer certifying that there is no appreciable
increase anticipated in rate or velocity of runoff based on the plan
submitted.
C. Approval by Planning Board.
(1) The surface water management plan and all major amendments
thereto shall be approved by the Planning Board as provided in this
chapter.
(2) The Planning Board, in approving said surface water management
plan, may impose lawful conditions or requirements designated or
specified thereon or in connection therewith. These conditions and
requirements shall be provided and maintained as a condition to
the establishment, maintenance and continuance of the use and
occupation of the affected land.
D. Minor amendments to a surface water management plan may be
approved by the Engineer, who shall notify the Planning Board of the
nature and reason for the change.
A. The lot and block numbers of the site as shown on the current Tax Map
of the Borough.
B. The name and address of the owner of the site and of the applicant, if
different from the owner.
C. A topographic survey of all watersheds tributary to and including the
site. Said survey shall be drawn at a scale which in the opinion of the
Borough Engineer is adequate to depict accurately all elements critical
to the plan. The use of aerial topography available from the Borough is
encouraged.
§ 66-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-6
1:571
D. A map of hydrologic soil types as extracted from the latest edition of the
Soil Survey of Bergen County, New Jersey, published by the United
States Department of Agriculture.
E. An inventory of existing features, both natural and man-made, including
topography, marshes, woods, agricultural lands, impervious areas and
the extent, location, description and rating of significant stormwater
structures such as swales, ditches, streams, diversions, ponds,
pipelines, culverts and other man-made devices.
F. The location, description and quantification of proposed changes to the
site, including an inventory of land uses and other features which will
alter runoff patterns, volumes and rates or which will otherwise have an
impact upon the ability of soils, vegetation and drainage facilities to
perform satisfactorily.
G. The designation of critical or other areas to be left undisturbed and
shown in sufficient detail to be accurately marked on the land.
H. A computation of the total surface water runoff before and after the
disturbance of the land and/or construction of the impervious surface.
I. The location, description and rating of proposed surface water facilities
with details, as necessary, to illustrate the construction of all significant
components.
J. The construction sequence of the surface water management plan.
K. Additional data and information and revisions as required by the
Planning Board.
L. Draft deed restrictions and agreements for joint ownership by the
developer and his assigns of detention or retention facilities and
drainage structures which are required by the development.
(1) Detention and retention basins and other structures which are not
to be within the right-of-way of roadways which will be dedicated to
the Borough shall remain the property of and shall be maintained
by the developer or his assigns.
(2) Retention and detention basins and the land on which they are
constructed and appurtenant structures shall be owned and
maintained by a property owners' association, which shall include
all of the proposed lots in the development.
(3) The Borough shall have the right to enter upon private property to
inspect the condition of all drainage structures, including retention
and detention basins, to determine if they are being maintained in a
manner which will permit them to operate as designed.
(4) In the event that maintenance is not being accomplished in an
adequate and proper manner in the opinion of the Borough Council,
the owners of the lands upon which such drainage structures exist
§ 66-6 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 66-6
1:572
§ 66-7. Review; approval or denial.
may be served written notice setting forth the manner in which
the owners have failed to maintain such drainage structures and
including a demand that such deficiencies of maintenance be
remedied within 45 days thereof and stating the date and place of
a hearing thereon, which shall be held within 15 days of notice.
At such hearing, the Borough Council may modify the terms of
the original notice as to deficiencies and may give a reasonable
extension of time, not to exceed 65 days, within which they shall
be remedied. If the deficiencies set forth in the original notice or
in the modification thereof shall not be remedied within said 45
days or any permitted extension thereof, the Borough Council may
enter upon such land for the purpose of maintaining the drainage
structures contained thereon.
(5) The cost of such maintenance by the Borough shall be assessed pro
rata against the properties within the development in accordance
with the assessed value at the time of imposition of the lien and
shall become a lien and tax on said properties and be added to and
be a part of the taxes to be levied and assessed thereon and shall be
enforced and collected with interest by the same officers and in the
same manner as other taxes.
(6) Design of all retention and detention facilities shall contain a flood
routing through the facility in the form of an inflow-outflow
hydrograph using any of the following methods: Puls Method,
Muskingum Method, Average Lag Method, Working Value Method
or any other method approved by the Borough Engineer. Inflow
hydrograph shall be determined by Triangular or Soil Conservation
Service (SCS) Method, whichever is applicable, or any other
method approved by the Borough Engineer.
A. Surface water management plans shall be reviewed by the Planning
Board with the advice and assistance of the Engineer. The Planning
Board's consideration of applications shall be guided by but not limited
to the following factors:
(1) The suitability of the applicant's proposed surface water
management measures, devices and planning techniques, whether
involving on-site or off-site measures, or some combination thereof
in respect to the total surface runoff, velocities and rates of
discharge which the applicant's proposed construction of land
disturbance may generate.
(2) The existing and proposed topography, present vegetation and
hydrologic soil features.
(3) The groundwater recharge and discharge areas, wet soils and
seasonal high groundwater table; alluvial, poorly drained and
somewhat poorly drained soils.
§ 66-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-7
1:573
§ 66-8. Standards.
(4) The design storm.
(5) The natural drainage flow and pattern throughout the
subwatershed affected by the plan.
(6) The land uses in both the immediate vicinity and the surrounding
drainage region.
(7) Any other applicable or relevant environmental and resource
protection statutes, regulations and provisions of this chapter.
(8) Any other factors relevant to the coordinated, adjusted and
harmonious development of the site, vicinity, municipality and
region.
B. If, after considering the above factors and after consultation with the
Engineer, the Planning Board determines that the proposed land
disturbance or construction will generate no surface water runoff that
will not be managed in accordance with the standards of this chapter or
will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare
in light of the paramount interest in the prevention of conditions which
may result in surface runoff damage, the Planning Board shall approve
the plan and issue the necessary permit. If the Planning Board shall
determine after consultation as provided above that the proposed land
disturbance or construction will be detrimental to the public interest as
defined above, the Planning Board shall deny the permit and shall
clearly and concisely state the reasons.
A. General standards.
(1) The rate of surface water runoff from the site for ten-, thirty-, and
one-hundred-year frequency storms considered individually
following project completion shall not exceed that which prevailed
prior to the disturbance or which would have prevailed under total
site coverage in a pasture of good hydrologic condition, whichever
is most restrictive.
(2) Efforts shall be made to minimize the land disturbance, the
introduction of impervious surfaces and the alteration of recharge
areas.
(3) Natural retention areas such as ponds, depressions and marshes
shall be preserved and integrated into the management plan to the
greatest extent possible.
(4) Surface water shall not be transferred from one watershed to
another.
(5) Surface water runoff shall be controlled in such a manner as to
avert the need for modification or addition of off-site drainage
structures unless adequate provision has been made therefor.
§ 66-7 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 66-8
1:574
B. Specific standards.
(1) The surface water management plan shall incorporate a detailed
collection system designed to convey satisfactorily all runoff
originating not only on the site but also from areas tributary to the
site.
(2) Surface water runoff to be accommodated by the collection and
retention/detention system shall be computed through the use of
methodology published in Technical Release No. 55, United States
Department of Agriculture, or by the rational formula:
Q = CiA
Where:
Q = The design runoff in cubic feet per second.
C = The runoff coefficient.
i = The rainfall intensity in inches per hour.
A = The area, in acres, tributary to proposed structure.
(3) Drainage design for all watersheds of 10 acres or less shall use the
rational formula, of 10 acres to 100 acres shall use the rational
formula or TR55 Method of Analysis and of over 100 acres shall use
the TR55 Method of Analysis. Where the rational formula is
employed, the following parameters shall govern:
(a) Runoff coefficient (C).
Topographic Grade
(percent)
Land Use 0 to 10 10 to 20 Over 20
Wooded 0.25 0.30 0.35
Pasture, lawn,
grassed areas and
cultivated fields
(except cornfields)
0.30 0.35 0.40
Cornfields 0.45 0.50 0.55
Impervious surfaces 0.95 0.95 0.95
Residential
1 unit per acre or
less
0.40 0.45 0.50
1 to 3 units per
acre
0.45 0.50 0.55
3 to 6 units per
acre
0.50 0.55 0.60
§ 66-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-8
1:575
Topographic Grade
(percent)
Land Use 0 to 10 10 to 20 Over 20
Above 6 units per
acre
0.60 0.65 0.70
Other As approved by Borough Engineer
(b) Rainfall intensity (i). The rainfall intensity for facility design
shall be based on rainfall intensity/duration curves applicable
to Bergen County. Consideration shall be given to the position
and use of the structure within the drainage system by
assuming conservative design storms in critical areas.
Generally, the following minimum recurrence intervals shall
apply:
[1] Cross drains, pipes or culverts crossing roadways: 25
years.
[2] Grassed waterways and diversions: 10 years.
[3] At low points subject to roadway flooding: 25 years.
[4] Riprap protection: 25 years.
[5] Retention or detention basins: 100 years.
(c) Times of concentration shall be representative of land use,
cover and slope and shall be acceptable to the Borough
Engineer.
C. Pipelines.
(1) Construction standards and details shall comply with Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, 1983, New Jersey
Department of Transportation (the "Red Book"), as amended.
(2) The pipe shall be sized by use of the Manning Formula. Actual pipe
design capacity shall not exceed 95% of flowing-full capacity with
head and tail water considerations, except that no pipe shall be less
than 15 inches in diameter. Minimum velocity at flowing-full
condition shall be three feet per second. Maximum velocity shall be
20 feet per second.
(3) Pipes under and adjacent to roadways or which are to be
maintained by the Borough shall be reinforced concrete.
(4) Friction factor "n" for concrete pipe shall be 0.013 and for
corrugated metal pipe shall be 0.024.
(5) In pipe sizes less than 48 inches in diameter, all transitions in slope,
horizontal direction and junctions shall be confined to manholes,
§ 66-8 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 66-8
1:576
catch basins or other accessible structures. In forty-eight-inch or
larger pipelines, vertical and horizontal deflections may be
accomplished using one-hundred-foot-radius curves or greater.
D. Open channel flow.
(1) Standards for design and construction shall comply with SCS
standards and/or the "Green Book."
(2) Maximum velocities shall be limited to values permitted in the SCS
standards for the soil types existing on the site.
(3) The Manning Formula shall be used for sizing open channels. The
values of "n" shall be consistent with the lining of the channel and
the velocity of flow.
E. Retention/detention basins.
(1) Retention or detention basins constitute an acceptable means of
achieving the goals stated in § 66-1. Innovative techniques for
limiting peak runoff are encouraged. All methods are subject to
review by the Borough Engineer and to approval by the Board.
(2) Where basins are used, they shall be so located on the site as to
pose the least potential hazard and nuisance to downstream and
surrounding properties. As a minimum, all portions of the basin,
including earthen embankments, shall comply with the setback
requirements applicable to the zone in which they are situated.
Notwithstanding conformance to the setback limitations, the
location must be satisfactory to the Board.
(3) Standards of design for detention of floodwater-retarding
structures shall conform to the following criteria or to those
promulgated pursuant to the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act of 1975.141 Should said standards be contradictory, the more
stringent shall apply. The design inflow shall be determined for the
drainage areas as stated above. [See § 66-6L(6).] A storm of onehundred-
year frequency and twenty-four-hour duration shall
govern the size of the basin. The basin shall have the demonstrated
capability to attenuate storms of the ten-, thirty-, and one-hundredyear
frequencies to the extent required. Emergency spillways shall
be adequate for a one-hundred-year storm flow plus 33%.
(4) Earthen embankments and slopes shall not exceed 3:1 on the
downstream slope and 2:1 on the upstream slope.
(a) Where embankments are proposed, they shall be provided with
a level top which affords sufficient stability and accessibility.
The following shall be considered as minimum top widths:
141. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
§ 66-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-8
1:577
§ 66-9. Exemptions.
The following are specifically exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
Height of Dam
(feet)
Top Width
(feet)
0 to 15 10
15 to 20 12
20 to 25 14
(b) Earthen dams and embankments shall be provided with an
adequate clay core. They shall be constructed from suitable
materials and shall be compacted to 95% of maximum
laboratory density as determined by American Society for
Testing and Materials (ASTM) 1557 Method D. The applicant
shall provide the services of a testing laboratory as directed by
the Borough Engineer to confirm that proper compaction has
been achieved. The entire basin construction shall be
subjected to inspection by the Borough Engineer.
Embankments shall be constructed to a height above the
design top elevation to accommodate settling plus two-foot
freeboard. The use of embankments as driveways is
discouraged. Dams and embankments must be maintained free
from trees, burrows and erosion during the life of the facility.
(5) Principal spillways and affiliated components must have a design
life at least equal to that of the entire basin. Outlets shall promote
stable downstream channel conditions. Trash racks to prevent
spillway fouling shall be considered. All basins shall also have an
emergency spillway in addition to the principal outflow structure.
Basins designed to retain waters during dry weather periods shall
provide a minimum depth of four feet for mosquito and algae
control. Such facilities shall also provide valved low-level outlets
capable of effecting complete draining when necessary.
(6) In general, fencing around the periphery of the basin for security
shall be provided only upon recommendation from the Board,
which shall also determine the type and height on a case-by-case
basis.
A. Minor subdivisions as defined in Chapter 32B, Land Subdivision and
Site Plan Review.
B. Site plans for development where the vegetative cover of the land will
not be disturbed.
C. Agricultural use of lands when operated in accordance with a
conservation plan approved by the local Soil Conservation District.
§ 66-8 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 66-9
1:578
§ 66-10. Implementation; responsibility of applicant; inspections.
§ 66-11. Fees.
Application and inspection fees shall be as established in Chapter 32A, Land
Use Procedures. If the project for which application has been made under
this chapter is included in a site plan or major subdivision, no additional
application or inspection fees will be charged.
§ 66-12. Enforcement.
If at any time the Engineer finds existing conditions not as stated in the
applicant's approved plan, the Planning Board or its designated agent shall
order cessation of all work and request the Borough to seek to enjoin the
violation or take such steps as may be necessary and lawful to enforce
compliance with the plan.
D. Single-family dwelling construction on individual lots not a part of any
larger development, together with the construction of permitted
accessory buildings and driveway construction thereof.
A. Critical impact areas and other areas to be left undisturbed shall be
physically marked with survey stakes or protected by a temporary snow
fence prior to any land disturbance.
B. The Planning Board shall require the construction and/or installation of
surface water management improvements in accordance with the
schedule of sequence of installation as approved.
C. The applicant shall bear full and final responsibility for the installation
and construction of all required surface water runoff control measures
according to the provisions of the approved plan and this chapter. The
Borough Engineer shall inspect the site during its preparation and
development and certify that all surface water management measures
have been constructed in accordance with the provisions of the
applicant's approved plan. During the 12 months subsequent to the
date of completion, the Engineer shall periodically inspect the site to
ascertain that the provisions of the applicant's approved plan are
complied with, including limit of contract for areas to be left
undisturbed. The Engineer shall give the applicant, upon request, a
certificate indicating the date on which the required measures were
completed and/or accepted.
§ 66-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-12
1:579
Chapter 66A
STORMWATER CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Excavations and dredging — See Ch. 21.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 27.
Land subdivision and site plan review — See
Ch. 32B.
Soil movement — See Ch. 63.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 66.
Stream corridor protection — See Ch. 66B.
Zoning — See Ch. 85.
§ 66-12 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 66-12
1:580
ARTICLE I
Requirements and Controls for Major Development
§ 66A-1. Policy; purpose; applicability; effect on other
requirements.
A. Policy statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low-impact techniques shall be
explored before relying on structural best management practices
(BMPs). Structural BMPs should be integrated with nonstructural
stormwater management strategies and proper maintenance plans.
Nonstructural strategies include both environmentally sensitive site
design and source controls that prevent pollutants from being placed on
the site or from being exposed to stormwater. Source control plans
should be developed based upon physical site conditions and the origin,
nature, and the anticipated quantity or amount of potential pollutants.
Multiple stormwater management BMPs may be necessary to achieve
the established performance standards for water quality, quantity, and
groundwater recharge.
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for major
development, as defined in § 66A-2.
C. Applicability.
(1) This article shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions for
the following major developments that require preliminary or final
site plan or subdivision review:
(a) Nonresidential major developments; and
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21.
(2) This article shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
D. Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
(1) Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans
pursuant to this article are to be considered an integral part of
development approvals under the subdivision and site plan review
process and do not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to
secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any
other applicable code, rule, act, or ordinance. In their
interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the
public health, safety, and general welfare.
§ 66A-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66A-1
1:581
§ 66A-2. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in common usage
and to give this article its most reasonable application. The definitions
below are the same as or based on the corresponding definitions in the
Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT — Land uses normally associated with
the production of food, fiber and livestock for sale. Such uses do not
include the development of land for the processing or sale of food and the
manufacturing of agriculturally related products.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving
the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and access to
public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County Board
of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management plans
and implementing ordinance(s). The county review agency may either be:
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGNATED CENTER — A State Development and Redevelopment Plan
Center as designated by the State Planning Commission, such as urban,
regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation
and development of project design and preparation of drawings and
specifications.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any mining
excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any building or
other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any person, for which
permission is required under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
(2) This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any
other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of
law, except that, where any provision of this article imposes
restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance,
rule or regulation, or other provision of law, the more restrictive
provisions or higher standards shall control.
A. A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A.
58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinances.
B.
§ 66A-1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 66A-2
1:582
et seq. In the case of development of agricultural lands, "development"
means any activity that requires a state permit; any activity reviewed by the
County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State Agricultural Development
Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any activity not exempted by
the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving water body
or to a particular point along a receiving water body.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood designated by the
Urban Coordinating Council in consultation and conjunction with the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — An area or feature which is
of significant environmental value, including but not limited to stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitats of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland forest;
steep slopes; and wellhead protection and groundwater recharge areas.
Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the
Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that provides for ultimately
disturbing one or more acres of land. "Disturbance," for the purpose of this
rule, is the placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement
of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of vegetation. Projects
undertaken by any governmental agency which otherwise meet the
definition of "major development" but which do not require approval under
the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., are considered major
development.
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, borough, town, township, or village.
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a compact
form.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, or political subdivision of this state
subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 66A-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66A-2
1:583
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
substance [except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as
amended (42 U.S.C. § 2011 et seq.)], thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, agricultural, and
construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or
indirectly to the land, groundwaters or surface waters of the state or
to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous and
nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into
the ground and is not evapotranspired.
REVIEW AGENCY — The Planning Board, the Zoning Board of Adjustment
or the Municipal Engineer of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or
gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has
occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
SOLID AND FLOATABLE MATERIALS — Sediment, debris, trash and other
floating, suspended or settleable solids.
SOURCE MATERIAL — Any material(s) or machinery, located at an
industrial facility, that is directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which could be a source of
pollutants in any industrial stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include but are not limited to raw materials; intermediate
products; final products; waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery
and fuels; and lubricants, solvents, and detergents that are related to
process, manufacturing, or other industrial activities that are exposed to
stormwater.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the State Plan Policy Map
and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended to be the
focus for much of the state's future redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies, and
the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities,
or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or embankment
and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater
§ 66A-2 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 66A-2
1:584
management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or
infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool (a retention basin), or
be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most constructed stormwater
wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater discharges into
stormwater conveyances.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or in
storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area which may be
influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas but which is primarily
caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— A neighborhood given priority access to state resources through the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — A zone designated by the New Jersey
Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise
Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions of
areas:
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries and all springs,
streams, wetlands, and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether
natural or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or
subject to its jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
§ 66A-3. Design and performance standards for stormwater
management measures.
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes;
A.
B. Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
C. Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
D.
§ 66A-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66A-3
1:585
§ 66A-4. Specific requirements.
A. Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality standards in
§ 66A-4. To the maximum extent practicable, these standards shall be
met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater management strategies
into the design. If these strategies alone are not sufficient to meet these
standards, structural stormwater management measures necessary to
meet these standards shall be incorporated into the design.
B. The standards in this article apply only to new major development and
are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on water
quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and maintain
groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to new major
development to the extent that alternative design and performance
standards are applicable under a regional stormwater management
plan or water quality management plan adopted in accordance with
Department rules. Such alternative standards shall provide at least as
much protection from stormwater-related loss of groundwater
recharge, stormwater quantity and water quality impacts of major
development projects as would be provided under the standards in this
article.
C. For site improvements regulated under the Residential Site
Improvement Standards (RSIS) at N.J.A.C. 5:21, the RSIS shall apply in
addition to this section, except to the extent the RSIS are superseded by
this section or alternative standards applicable under a regional
stormwater management plan or water quality management plan
adopted in accordance with Department rules.
A. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development in accordance with § 66A-10.
B. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitats for threatened and endangered species
as documented in the Department's Landscape Project or Natural
Heritage Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through
13:1B-15.150, particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or
Clemmys muhlenbergi (bog turtle).
C. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater
runoff quality requirements of § 66A-4F and G:
(1) The construction of an underground utility line, provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
§ 66A-3 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 66A-4
1:586
(2) The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(3) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is made of permeable material.
D. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of § 66A-4F and G may be obtained for the enlargement of
an existing public roadway or railroad or the construction or
enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided that the following
conditions are met:
(1) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(2) The applicant demonstrates, through an alternatives analysis, that
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of § 66A-4F and G to the maximum
extent practicable;
(3) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
of § 66A-4F and G, existing structures currently in use, such as
homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
(4) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain, through
condemnation, lands not falling under § 66A-4D(3) above within the
upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that would provide
additional opportunities to mitigate the requirements of § 66A-4F
and G that were not achievable on site.
E. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in § 66A-4F and
G shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies set forth at § 66A-4E into the design. The
applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures incorporated
into the design of the project. If the applicant contends that it is not
feasible for engineering, environmental, or safety reasons to
incorporate any nonstructural stormwater management strategies
identified under § 66A-4E(2) below into the design of a particular
project, the applicant shall identify the strategy considered and
provide a basis for the contention.
(2) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into the site design shall:
§ 66A-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66A-4
1:587
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
(d) Minimize the decrease in the time of concentration from
preconstruction to post construction. "Time of concentration"
is defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed;
(e) Minimize land disturbance, including clearing and grading;
(f) Minimize soil compaction;
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
[1] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy § 66A-4E(3) below;
[2] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
[3] Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
[4] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
(3) Site design features identified under § 66A-4E(2)(i)[2] above shall
comply with the following standard to control passage of solid and
floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For exemptions to
this standard, see § 66A-4E(3)(c) below.
(a) Grates.
§ 66A-4 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 66A-4
1:588
[1] Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a
storm drain or surface water body under that grate:
[a] The New Jersey Department of Transportation
(NJDOT) bicycle-safe grate, which is described in
Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle Compatible
Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
[b] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven square inches
or is no greater than 0.5 inch across the smallest
dimension.
[2] Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer
bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields,
open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than seven square inches or be no greater than
two inches across the smallest dimension.
(c) This standard does not apply:
[1] Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards.
[2] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in § 66A-4G(1) are conveyed through any device
(e.g., end-of-pipe netting facility, manufactured treatment
device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed, at a
minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
[a] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (This option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities.); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
§ 66A-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66A-4
1:589
[3] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars, to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in § 66A-4G(1).
[4] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
historic property listed on the New Jersey Register.
(4) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in § 66A-4F and G
shall meet one of the following requirements:
(a) Be dedicated to a government agency as approved by the
appropriate reviewing agency;
(b) Be subjected to a conservation restriction filed with the Bergen
County Clerk's office; or
(c) Be subjected to an approved equivalent restriction that
ensures that measure or an equivalent stormwater
management measure approved by the reviewing agency is
maintained in perpetuity.
(5) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 66A-7 or found on the Department's website
at www.njstormwater.org.
F. Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity standards.
(1) This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and
implementing rules.
(b) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
[1] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at § 66A-5, either:
§ 66A-4 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 66A-4
1:590
[a] Demonstrate, through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis, that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain 100% of the average annual
preconstruction groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
[b] Demonstrate, through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis, that the increase of stormwater runoff
volume from preconstruction to post construction for
the two-year storm is infiltrated.
[2] This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within the urban redevelopment area or to
projects subject to § 66A-4F(1)(b)[3] below.
[3] The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading.
"High pollutant loading areas" are areas in industrial
and commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or
applied; areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than reportable
quantities, as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
with a Department-approved remedial action work
plan or landfill closure plan; and areas with high risks
for spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[b] Industrial stormwater exposed to source material.
[4] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surficial ponding, flooding of basements, or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
downgradient of the groundwater recharge area.
(c) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at § 66A-5, complete one of the
following:
[1] Demonstrate, through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis,
that for stormwater leaving the site, post-construction
runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten-, and one-hundred-
§ 66A-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66A-4
1:591
year storm events do not exceed, at any point in time, the
preconstruction runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events;
[2] Demonstrate, through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis,
that there is no increase, as compared to the
preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten-, and onehundred-
year storm events, and that the increased volume
or change in timing of stormwater runoff will not increase
flood damage at or downstream of the site. This analysis
shall include the analysis of impacts of existing land uses
and projected land uses assuming full development under
existing zoning and land use ordinances in the drainage
area;
[3] Design stormwater management measures so that the
post-construction peak runoff rates for the two-, ten- and
one-hundred-year storm events are 50%, 75% and 80%,
respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff rates. The
percentages apply only to the post-construction
stormwater runoff that is attributable to the portion of the
site on which the proposed development or project is to be
constructed. The percentages shall not be applied to postconstruction
stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard
areas if the increased volume of stormwater runoff will not
increase flood damages below the point of discharge; or
[4] In tidal flood hazard areas, a stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with § 66A-4F(1)(c)[1], [2] and [3]
above shall only be applied if the increased volume of
stormwater runoff could increase flood damages below the
point of discharge.
(2) Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of "major development" at § 66A-2 shall be submitted to
the appropriate Soil Conservation District for review and approval
in accordance with the requirements of this section and any
applicable Soil Conservation District guidelines for stormwater
runoff quantity and erosion control.
G. Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(1) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
post-construction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in
stormwater runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from the
developed site, expressed as an annual average. Stormwater
management measures shall only be required for water quality
control if an additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is being
proposed on a development site. The requirement to reduce TSS
does not apply to any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated
§ 66A-4 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 66A-4
1:592
under a numeric effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules,
N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in a discharge specifically exempt under a
NJPDES permit from this requirement. The water quality design
storm is 1.25 inches of rainfall in two hours. Water quality
calculations shall take into account the distribution of rain from the
water quality design storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation
of the volume of runoff may take into account the implementation
of nonstructural and structural stormwater management measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
(2) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 66A-7 or found on the Department's website
at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual and other sources of
technical guidance are listed in § 66A-7. TSS reduction shall be
calculated based on the removal rates for the BMPs in Table 2
below. Alternative removal rates and methods of calculating
removal rates may be used if the design engineer provides
documentation demonstrating the capability of these alternative
rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of any approved
alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate shall be
provided to the Department at the following address: Division of
Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, P.O. Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0418.
§ 66A-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66A-4
1:593
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention systems 90%
Constructed stormwater
wetland
90%
Extended detention basin 40% to 60%
Infiltration structure 80%
Manufactured treatment device See § 66A-6C
Sand filter 80%
Vegetative filter strip 60% to 80%
Wet pond 50% to 90%
(3) If more than one BMP in a series is necessary to achieve the
required eighty-percent TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall
utilize the following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B - (A x B)/100
Where:
R = Total TSS percent load removal from application of both
BMPs.
A = The TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first
BMP.
B = The TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second
BMP.
(4) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the eighty-percent
TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the
runoff from the subareas converge on site, in which case the
removal rate can be demonstrated through a calculation using a
weighted average.
(5) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the post-construction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in § 66A-4F and G.
(6) Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may
be obtained from the address identified in § 66A-7 of this article.
§ 66A-4 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 66A-4
1:594
(7) In accordance with the definition of "FW1" at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
(8) Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated as Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and
perennial or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the
Category One waters as shown on the USGS quadrangle maps or in
the county soil surveys, within the associated HUC 14 drainage
area. These areas shall be established for the protection of water
quality, aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance,
exceptional recreational significance, exceptional water supply
significance, and exceptional fisheries significance of those
established Category One waters. These areas shall be designated
and protected as follows:
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[1] A three-hundred-foot special water resource protection
area shall be provided on each side of the waterway,
measured perpendicular to the waterway from the top of
the bank outwards or from the center line of the waterway
where the bank is not defined, consisting of existing
vegetation or vegetation allowed to follow natural
succession.
[2] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under § 66A-4G(8)(a)[1] above
shall only be allowed where previous development or
disturbance has occurred (for example, active agricultural
use, parking area or maintained lawn area). The
encroachment shall only be allowed where the applicant
demonstrates that the functional value and overall
condition of the special water resource protection area will
be maintained to the maximum extent practicable. In no
case shall the remaining special water resource protection
area be reduced to less than 150 feet, as measured
perpendicular to the top of bank of the waterway or center
line of the waterway where the bank is undefined. All
encroachments proposed under this subsection shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the standard for off-site stability in the Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established under
the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et
seq.
§ 66A-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66A-4
1:595
(c) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
standard for off-site stability in the Standards for Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established under the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.,
then the stabilization measures in accordance with the
requirements of the above standards may be placed within the
special water resource protection area, provided that:
[1] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One waterway;
[2] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a ninety-five-percent TSS postconstruction
removal rate;
[3] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
[4] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
[5] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation
District staff to identify necessary stabilization measures;
and
[6] All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan, or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to § 66A-4G(8) has been approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection, then the provisions
of the plan shall be the applicable special water resource
protection area requirements for that waterway. A stream
corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to § 66A-4G(8)
shall maintain or enhance the current functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection area
as defined in § 66A-4G(8)(a)[1] above. In no case shall a stream
corridor protection plan allow the reduction of the special
water resource protection area to less than 150 feet, as
measured perpendicular to the waterway subject to this
subsection.
§ 66A-4 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 66A-4
1:596
§ 66A-5. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge.
(e) Section 66A-4G(8) does not apply to the construction of one
individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
A. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
(1) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Section 4, Hydrology, and
Technical Release 55 (or superseding document), Urban
Hydrology for Small Watersheds; or
(b) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
(2) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the preconstruction condition
of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology at § 66A-5A(1)(a) and the Rational and
Modified Rational Methods at § 66A-5A(1)(b). A runoff coefficient
or a groundwater recharge land cover for an existing condition may
be used on all or a portion of the site if the design engineer verifies
that the hydrologic condition has existed on the site or portion of
the site for at least five years without interruption prior to the time
of application. If more than one land cover has existed on the site
during the five years immediately prior to the time of application,
the land cover with the lowest runoff potential shall be used for the
computations. In addition, there is the presumption that the site is
in good hydrologic condition (if the land use type is pasture, lawn,
or park), with good cover (if the land use type is woods), or with
good hydrologic condition and conservation treatment (if the land
use type is cultivation).
(3) In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, or
culverts, that may reduce preconstruction stormwater runoff rates
and volumes.
(4) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
§ 66A-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66A-5
1:597
§ 66A-6. Standards for structural stormwater management
measures.
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release 55 (or superseding document), Urban
Hydrology for Small Watersheds, and other methods may be
employed.
(5) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures. Notwithstanding the preceding, where
tailwater will affect the hydraulic performance of a stormwater
management measure, the design engineer shall include such
effects in the measure's design.
B. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following:
(1) The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32, A Method for
Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference, as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual; at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological
Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427, Trenton, New Jersey
08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
A. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
(1) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas; wetlands; flood-prone
areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
(2) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure, as appropriate, and shall have
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars to the
elevation of the water quality design storm. For elevations higher
than the water quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet
structure shall be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the
diameter of the orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum
§ 66A-5 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 66A-6
1:598
§ 66A-6.1. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
spacing between bars of one inch and a maximum spacing between
bars of six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must
comply with the requirements of § 66A-8D.
(3) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosion
resistant. Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
5:21-7.4, and 5:21-7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
(4) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in diameter.
(5) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
§ 66A-8.
B. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized, provided the
design engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its
design will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater
recharge and water quality design and performance standards
established by § 66A-4 of this article.
C. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of § 66A-4 of this article, provided the pollutant removal rates are
verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and
certified by the Department.
A. Buffers. Buffer areas are required along all lot and street lines
separating residential uses from arterial and collector streets,
separating a nonresidential use from either a residential use or
residential zoning district line, and along all street lines where loading
and storage areas can be seen from the street. The buffer area shall use
native vegetation, which requires less fertilization and watering than
non-native species. Buffer areas may be used for stormwater
management by disconnecting impervious surfaces and treating runoff
from these impervious surfaces. Preservation of natural wood tracts
and limiting land disturbance for new construction must be
incorporated where practical.
B. Curbs and gutters. Curb cuts or flush curbs with curb stops are
encouraged where practical to allow vegetated swales to be used for
stormwater conveyance and to allow the disconnection of impervious
areas where practical.
C. Drainage systems. Chapter 32B of the Ho-Ho-Kus Code may require
that all streets be provided with inlets and pipes where the same are
§ 66A-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66A-6.1
1:599
necessary for proper drainage. The use of natural vegetated swales in
lieu of inlets and pipes are encouraged where practical.
D. Driveways and accessways. The use of pervious paving materials to
minimize stormwater runoff and promote groundwater recharge should
be considered for driveways and accessways where practical.
Consideration should be given for subsurface soil conditions. The use of
crowned driveways is also encouraged to promote disconnectivity
between impervious surfaces and grass areas to promote groundwater
recharge.
E. Natural features. Natural features, such as trees, brooks, swamps,
hilltops, and views, are to be preserved whenever possible, and care
shall be taken to preserve selected trees to enhance soil stability and
landscaped treatment of the area. In addition, forested areas shall be
maintained to ensure that leaf litter and other beneficial aspects of the
forest are maintained in addition to the trees.
F. Off-site and off-tract improvements. Any off-site and off-tract
stormwater management and drainage improvements must conform to
the design and performance standards described.
G. Off-street parking and loading. Parking lots with more than 10 spaces
and all loading areas should allow for flush curb with curb stop or
curbing with curb cuts to encourage developers to allow for the
discharge of impervious areas into landscaped areas for stormwater
management. The use of natural vegetated swales for the water quality
design storm, with overflow for larger storm events into storm sewers,
should be utilized where practical. A developer may demonstrate that
fewer spaces would be required, provided area is set aside for
additional spaces if necessary. Pervious paving could be provided
overflow parking areas.
H. Performance standards. Pollution source control must be evaluated in
order to prohibit materials or wastes from being deposited upon a lot in
such form or manner that they can be transferred off the lot, directly or
indirectly, by natural forces such as precipitation, evaporation or wind.
Materials and wastes that might create a pollutant or a hazard shall be
enclosed in appropriate containers.
I. Shade trees. Chapter 32B of the Ho-Ho-Kus Code may require a
minimum of shade trees per lot to be planted in the front yard. This
article recognizes that the preservation of mature trees and forested
areas must be considered in the management of environmental
resources, particularly watershed management, air quality, and
ambient heating and cooling. Identification of forested areas and the
percentage of wooded areas to be protected from disturbance shall be
provided.
J. Sidewalks. Sidewalks should be designed to discharge stormwater to
neighboring lawns where feasible to disconnect these impervious
surfaces or use permeable paving materials where appropriate.
§ 66A-6.1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 66A-6.1
1:600
§ 66A-7. Sources for technical guidance.
§ 66A-8. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
K. Soil erosion and sediment control. The applicant shall comply with the
New Jersey Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Standards and should
incorporate signs to retain and protect natural vegetation; minimize
and retain water runoff to facilitate groundwater recharge; and install
diversions, sediment basins, and similar required structures prior to
any on-site grading or disturbance.
L. Further guidance on the implementation of these strategies can be
found in the NJDEP Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
April 2004, as amended.
A. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at § 66A-7A(1) and (2) below, which are
available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton,
New Jersey, 08625; telephone (609) 777-1038:
(1) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures, such as bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
(2) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
B. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
(1) The Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey, promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or
any of the Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)3.
The location, address, and telephone number of each Soil
Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625;
(609) 292-5540;
(2) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, (732) 932-9306; and
(3) The Bergen County Soil Conservation District, 700 Kinderkamack
Road, Oradell, New Jersey 07649; (201) 261-4407.
§ 66A-6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66A-8
1:601
A. This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This section applies to any new stormwater management basin. The
provisions of this section do not preempt more stringent municipal or
county safety requirements for new or existing stormwater
management basins. Municipal and county stormwater management
plans and ordinances may, pursuant to their authority, require existing
stormwater management basins to be retrofitted to meet one or more of
the safety standards in § 66A-8B(1), (2) and (3) for trash racks, overflow
grates, and escape provisions at outlet structures.
B. Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape provisions.
(1) A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than
six-inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net
area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion resistant and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(2) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(3) For purposes of this § 66A-8B(3), "escape provisions" means the
permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other features
that provide easily accessible means of egress from stormwater
§ 66A-8 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 66A-8
1:602
management basins. Stormwater management basins shall include
escape provisions as follows:
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in
§ 66A-8C, a freestanding outlet structure may be exempted
from this requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four feet to six feet
in width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2 feet
below the permanent water surface, and the second step shall
be located one to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent water
surface. See § 66A-8D for an illustration of safety ledges in a
stormwater management basin.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be
steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
C. Variance or exemption from safety standards. A variance or exemption
from the safety standards for stormwater management basins may be
granted only upon a written finding by the appropriate reviewing
agency (municipality, county or Department) that the variance or
exemption will not constitute a threat to public safety.
D. Illustration of safety ledges in a new stormwater management basin.
§ 66A-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66A-8
1:603
§ 66A-9. Requirements for site development stormwater plans.
A. Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(1) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this article, the applicant shall submit all of the required
components of the checklist for the site development stormwater
plan at § 66A-9C below as part of the submission of the applicant's
application for subdivision or site plan approval.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this article.
(3) The applicant shall submit 10 copies of the materials listed in the
checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance with
§ 66A-9C of this article.
B. Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the municipal board or official from which
municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official shall
§ 66A-8 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 66A-9
1:604
consult the engineer retained by the Planning and/or Zoning Board (as
appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist requirements have been
satisfied and to determine if the project meets the standards set forth
in this article.
C. Checklist requirements. The following information shall be required:
(1) Topographic base map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary. It is
recommended that the topographic base map of the site be
submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits
of the proposed development, at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet
or greater, showing two-foot contour intervals. The map, as
appropriate, may indicate the following: existing surface water
drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils, perennial or
intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters, wetlands and floodplains, along with their appropriate
buffer strips, marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or
vegetative surfaces, existing man-made structures, roads, bearing
and distances of property lines, and significant natural and manmade
features not otherwise shown.
(2) Environmental site analysis: a written and graphic description of
the natural and man-made features of the site and its environs. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
(3) Project description and site plan(s): a map (or maps) at the scale of
the topographical base map indicating the location of existing and
proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural
facilities for stormwater management and sediment control, and
other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show
areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high
groundwater elevations. A written description of the site plan and
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be
provided.
(4) Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall provide
a demonstration of how the goals and standards of §§ 66A-3
through 66A-6 are being met. The focus of this plan shall be to
describe how the site is being developed to meet the objective of
controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and
stormwater quantity problems at the source by land management
and source controls whenever possible.
§ 66A-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66A-9
1:605
§ 66A-10. Maintenance and repair.
(5) Stormwater management facilities map. The following information,
illustrated on a map of the same scale as the topographic base map,
shall be included:
(a) Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, and
details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
(b) Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention and emergency spillway provisions with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
(6) Calculations:
(a) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the predevelopment and post-development conditions for
the design storms specified in § 66A-4 of this article.
(b) When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depend on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soils present at the location of the
control measure.
(7) Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of § 66A-10.
(8) Waiver from submission requirements. The municipal official or
board reviewing an application under this article may, in
consultation with the Municipal Engineer, waive submission of any
of the requirements in § 66A-9C(1) through (6) of this article when
it can be demonstrated that the information requested is
impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship on the applicant
to obtain and its absence will not materially affect the review
process.
(9) Any other items as may be required by the appropriate Borough of
Ho-Ho-Kus ordinance(s) checklist(s), if applicable.
A. Applicability. Projects subject to review as in § 66A-1C of this article
shall comply with the requirements of § 66A-10B and C.
§ 66A-9 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 66A-10
1:606
B. General maintenance.
(1) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
(2) The maintenance plan shall include the following:
(a) Contain specific preventative maintenance tasks and
schedules; and the name, address, and telephone number of
the person or persons responsible for preventative and
corrective maintenance (including replacement).
(b) Maintenance guidelines for stormwater management
measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a
public agency or homeowners' association) as having the
responsibility for maintenance, the plan shall include
documentation of such person's agreement to assume this
responsibility or of the developer's obligation to dedicate a
stormwater management facility to such person under an
applicable ordinance or regulation.
(3) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project, unless such owner or tenant owns or
leases the entire residential development or project.
(4) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 66A-10B(2) above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan
and any future revisions based on § 66A-10B(7) below shall be
recorded upon the deed of record for each property on which the
maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be
undertaken.
(5) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and
ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
(6) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 66A-10B(2) above shall maintain a detailed log of all preventative
and corrective maintenance for the structural stormwater
management measures incorporated into the design of the
development, including a record of all inspections and copies of all
maintenance-related work orders.
(7) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 66A-10B(2) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
§ 66A-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66A-10
1:607
§ 66A-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains, or
uses any building, structure or land in violation of this article shall be
subject to the following penalties:
maintenance plan at least once per year. Any adjustments to the
management plan or deed shall require notification and approval
from the applicable board prior to the filing of a revised deed.
(8) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 66A-10B(2) above shall retain and make available, upon request
by any public entity with administrative, health, environmental, or
safety authority over the site, the maintenance plan and the
documentation required by § 66A-10B(6) and (7) above.
(9) The requirements of § 66A-10B(3) and (4) do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
(10) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and
repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the Municipal
Engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its discretion, may
extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for
good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform
such maintenance and repair, the municipality or county may
immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the
responsible person.
C. Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
A. Any person who refuses to correct or abate any violation or violations
within five days after written notice has been served upon such person,
by either mail or personal service, shall, for each and every violation, be
subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000, a term of imprisonment not
exceeding 90 days, or a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, or any combination thereof. The Judge before whom any person is
convicted of violating any of the provisions of this article shall have the
power to impose any fine or term of imprisonment not exceeding the
maximum fixed herein.
B. Each and every day that such violation continues after such notice shall
be considered a separate and specific violation of this article.
§ 66A-10 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 66A-12
1:608
§ 66A-12. Severability.
If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or
clause of this article shall be judged invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the
remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or clause of
this article.
§ 66A-13. Repealer.
All other ordinances of the Borough, or parts thereof, including Chapter 66,
Stormwater Management, to the extent inconsistent or in conflict with this
article, are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
§ 66A-14. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon the approval by the county
review agency, or 60 days from the receipt of the article by the county
review agency if the county review agency should fail to act.
§ 66A-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66A-14
1:609

ARTICLE II
Covering of Dumpsters
[Added 10-25-2011 by Ord. No. 999]
§ 66A-15. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to require dumpsters and other refuse
containers that are outdoors or exposed to stormwater to be covered at all
times and prohibit the spilling, dumping, leaking, or otherwise discharging
of liquids, semiliquids or solids from the containers to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus and/
or the waters of the state so as to protect public health, safety and welfare
and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 66A-16. Definitions; word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein, unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus or other
public body and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Any waste container that a person controls,
whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash cans,
garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries and all springs,
streams and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 66A-17. Covering of containers and dumpsters; prevention of
leaks and discharges.
§ 66A-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66A-17
1:611
§ 66A-18. Exceptions.
Exceptions are as follows:
§ 66A-19. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Municipal Construction Code Official
and the Municipal Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 66A-20. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine not exceeding $200.
§ 66A-21. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this article are hereby repealed to the extent of such
inconsistency.
§ 66A-22. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this article is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this article to be
unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause or reason shall not affect
any other portion of this article.
A. Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing.
B. Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semiliquids or solids to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
A. Permitted temporary demolition containers.
B. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
C. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers.
D. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit.
E. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods placed curbside for pickup).
§ 66A-17 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 66A-23
1:612
§ 66A-23. When effective.
This article shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption and
any publication as may be required by law.
§ 66A-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66A-23
1:613

ARTICLE III
Retrofitting of Storm Drains
[Added 10-25-2011 by Ord. No. 999]
§ 66A-24. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to require the retrofitting of existing storm
drain inlets which are in direct contact with repaving, repairing,
reconstruction, or resurfacing or alterations of facilities on private property
to prevent the discharge of solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles,
cans, food wrappers and other litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer
system(s) operated by the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare and to prescribe penalties for the failure to
comply.
§ 66A-25. Definitions; word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein, unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus or other
public body and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries and all springs,
streams and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 66A-26. Prohibited conduct.
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one
single-family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing
§ 66A-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66A-26
1:615
or altering of any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm
drain inlet on that property, unless the storm drain inlet either:
§ 66A-27. Design standard.
Storm drain inlets identified in § 66A-26 above shall comply with the
following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this section, "solid and floatable
materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or
settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard, see § 66A-27C below.
A. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid
and floatable materials; or
B. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in § 66A-27 below prior
to the completion of the project.
A. Grates.
(1) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever
they use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water
body under that grate:
(a) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle-safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning
and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
(b) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate
has an area of no more than seven inches or is no greater than
0.5 inch across the smallest dimension.
(2) Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate
inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates,
and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground
surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and stormwater basin floors.
B. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than seven
inches or be no greater than two inches across the smallest dimension.
C. This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the Municipal Engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards.
§ 66A-26 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 66A-27
1:616
§ 66A-28. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Municipal Construction Code Official,
Municipal Code Enforcement Officer and the duly authorized agent of the
Borough Engineer.
§ 66A-29. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine not exceeding $200.
§ 66A-30. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this article is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this article to be
unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause or reason shall not affect
any other portion of this article.
§ 66A-31. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this article are hereby repealed to the extent of such
inconsistency.
§ 66A-32. When effective.
This article shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption and
any publication as may be required by law.
(2) Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end-of-pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
(a) A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches wide
(This option does not apply for outfall netting facilities.); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars.
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the historic property listed on the New Jersey Register.
§ 66A-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66A-32
1:617
Chapter 66B
STREAM CORRIDOR PROTECTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Floodplain management — See Ch. 27.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 32A.
Land subdivision and site plan review — See
Ch. 32B.
Soil movement — See Ch. 63.
Soil importation — See Ch. 63A.
Stormwater control — See Ch. 66A.
Zoning — See Ch. 85.
§ 66B-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACID-PRODUCING SOILS — Soils that contain geologic deposits of iron
sulfide minerals (pyrite and marcasite) which, when exposed to oxygen
from the air or from surface waters, oxidize to produce sulfuric acid. Acidproducing
soils, upon excavation, generally have a pH of 4.0 or lower.
After exposure to oxygen, these soils generally have a pH of 3.0 or lower.
Information regarding the location of acid-producing soils in New Jersey can
be obtained from local Soil Conservation District offices.
APPLICANT — A person, corporation, government body or other legal entity
applying to the Planning Board, Board of Adjustment or the Construction
Office proposing to engage in an activity that is regulated by the provisions
of this chapter and that would be located in whole or in part within a
regulated riparian zone.
CATEGORY ONE WATERS or C1 WATERS — Shall have the meaning
ascribed to this term by the Surface Water Quality Standards, N.J.A.C.
7:9B, for purposes of implementing the antidegradation policies set forth in
those standards, for protection from measurable changes in water quality
characteristics because of their clarity, color, scenic setting, and other
characteristics of aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance,
exceptional recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
or exceptional fisheries resources.
INTERMITTENT STREAM — A surface water body with definite bed and
banks in which there is not a permanent flow of water and shown on
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Geographic
Information System (GIS) hydrography coverages or, in the case of a special
water resource protection area (SWRPA) pursuant to the Stormwater
Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as shown on the USGS
quadrangle maps or in the county soil surveys.
LAKE, POND or RESERVOIR — Any surface water body shown on the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Geographic Information
§ 66A-32 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 66B-1
1:618
System (GIS) hydrography coverages or, in the case of a special water
resource protection area (SWRPA) pursuant to the Stormwater
Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as shown on the USGS
quadrangle maps or in the county soil surveys; that is an impoundment,
whether naturally occurring or created in whole or in part by the building
of structures for the retention of surface water. This excludes sedimentation
control and stormwater retention/detention basins and ponds designed for
treatment of wastewater.
PERENNIAL STREAM — A surface water body that flows continuously
throughout the year in most years and shown on the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection Geographic Information System
(GIS) hydrography coverages or, in the case of a special water resource
protection area (SWRPA) pursuant to the Stormwater Management Rules at
N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as shown on the USGS quadrangle maps or in
the county soil surveys.
RIPARIAN ZONE — The land and vegetation within and directly adjacent
to all surface water bodies, including but not limited to lakes, ponds,
reservoirs, perennial and intermittent streams, up to and including their
point of origin, such as seeps and springs, as shown on the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection GIS hydrography coverages or, in
the case of a special water resource protection area (SWRPA) pursuant
to the Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h), C1 waters as
shown on the USGS quadrangle maps or in the county soil surveys. There is
no riparian zone along the Atlantic Ocean nor along any man-made lagoon
or oceanfront barrier island, spit or peninsula.
SPECIAL WATER RESOURCE PROTECTION AREA or SWRPA — A threehundred-
foot area provided on each side of a surface water body designated
as a C1 water or tributary to a C1 water that is a perennial stream,
intermittent stream, lake, pond, or reservoir, as defined herein and shown
on the USGS quadrangle maps or in the county soil surveys within the
associated HUC 14 drainage, pursuant to the Stormwater Management
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h).
SURFACE WATER BODY(IES) — Any perennial stream, intermittent stream,
lake, pond, or reservoir, as defined herein. In addition, any regulated water
under the Flood Hazard Area Control Act Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:13-2.2, or
state open waters identified in a letter of interpretation issued under the
Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:7A-3 by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, Division of Land Use
Regulation, shall also be considered surface water bodies.
THREATENED OR ENDANGERED SPECIES — A species identified
pursuant to the Endangered and Nongame Species Conservation Act,
N.J.S.A. 23:2A-1 et seq., the Endangered Species Act of 1973, 16 U.S.C.
§ 1531 et seq., or the Endangered Plant Species List, N.J.A.C. 7:5C-5.1, and
any subsequent amendments thereto.
TROUT MAINTENANCE WATER — A section of water designated as trout
maintenance in the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Surface Water Quality Standards at N.J.A.C. 7:9B.
§ 66B-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66B-1
1:619
TROUT PRODUCTION WATER — A section of water identified as trout
production in the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Surface Water Quality Standards at N.J.A.C. 7:9B.
§ 66B-2. Intent; authority.
It is the intent of this chapter to provide compliance with N.J.A.C.
7:15-5.25(g)3, which requires municipalities to adopt an ordinance that
prevents new disturbance for projects or activities in riparian zones.
Authority is provided or limited as follows:
§ 66B-3. Riparian zone protection.
Riparian zones adjacent to all surface water bodies as described below in
this section shall be protected from avoidable disturbance:
A. Compliance with the riparian zone requirements of this chapter does
not constitute compliance with the riparian zone or buffer requirements
imposed under any other federal, state or local statute, regulation or
ordinance.
B. Use powers given to Ho-Ho-Kus under the provisions of the New Jersey
Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., which authorizes
each municipality to plan and regulate land use in order to protect
public health, safety, and welfare through the protection and
maintenance of native vegetation in riparian areas. Ho-Ho-Kus is also
empowered to adopt and implement this chapter under provisions
provided by the following legislative authorities of the State of New
Jersey:
(1) Water Pollution Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq.
(2) Water Quality Planning Act, N.J.S.A. 58:11A-1 et seq.
(3) Spill Compensation and Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11 et seq.
(4) Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
(5) Flood Hazard Area Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:16A-50 et seq.
A. The riparian zone shall be 300 feet wide along both sides of any
Category One water (C1 water) and all upstream tributaries situated
within the same HUC 14 watershed.
B. The riparian zone shall be 150 feet wide along both sides of the
following waters not identified in Subsection A above:
(1) Any trout production water and all upstream waters (including
tributaries);
(2) Any trout maintenance water and all upstream waters (including
tributaries) within one linear mile, as measured along the length of
the regulated water;
§ 66B-1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 66B-3
1:620
§ 66B-4. Exceptions.
(3) Any segment of a water flowing through an area that contains
documented habitat for a threatened or endangered species of
plant or animal, which is critically dependent on the regulated
water for survival, and all upstream waters (including tributaries)
within one linear mile, as measured along the length of the
regulated water; and
(4) Any segment of a water flowing through an area that contains acidproducing
soils.
C. For all other surface water bodies, a riparian zone of 50 feet wide shall
be maintained along both sides of the water.
D. The portion of the riparian zone that lies outside of a surface water
body is measured landward from the top of bank. If a discernible bank is
not present along a surface water body, the portion of the riparian zone
outside the surface water body is measured landward as follows:
(1) Along a linear fluvial or tidal water, such as a stream or swale, the
riparian zone is measured landward of the feature's center line;
(2) Along a nonlinear fluvial water, such as a lake or pond, the riparian
zone is measured landward of the normal water surface limit; and
(3) Along an amorphously shaped feature, such as a wetland complex,
through which water flows but which lacks a discernible channel,
the riparian zone is measured landward of the feature's center line.
E. The applicant or designated representative shall be responsible for the
initial determination of the presence of a riparian zone on a site and for
identifying the area on any plan submitted to Ho-Ho-Kus in conjunction
with an application for a construction permit, subdivision, land
development, or other improvement that requires plan submissions or
permits. This initial determination shall be subject to review and
approval by the Municipal Engineer, governing body, or its appointed
representative and, where required, by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
A. The following disturbances are excepted:
(1) Redevelopment within the limits of existing impervious surfaces;
and
(2) New disturbance in the riparian zone necessary to protect public
health, safety or welfare; to provide an environmental benefit; to
prevent extraordinary hardship on the property owner peculiar to
the property; or to prevent extraordinary hardship, provided the
hardship was not created by the property owner, that would not
permit a minimum economically viable use of the property based
upon reasonable investment.
§ 66B-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66B-4
1:621
§ 66B-5. Adjustments to riparian zones.
Adjustments to the riparian zones established by this chapter are allowed
to the extent they comply with the Stormwater Management Rules (N.J.A.C.
7:8), the Flood Hazard Area Control Act Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:13), and the
Highlands Water Protection and Planning Act Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:38) and
shall be subject to review and approval by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, unless exempt.
§ 66B-6. Permits-by-rule.
The Flood Hazard Area Control Act Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:13), Subchapter 7,
Permits-By-Rule, establishes permits-by-rule for certain regulated activities.
This chapter hereby adopts by reference said subchapter, as it exists at the
time of passage of this chapter and as it may change from time to time,
as a means of allowing regulated activities in the riparian zone without
any other permits or approvals. In addition, any permit-by-rule provision
that requires notification to the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection shall also be copied to the Ho-Ho-Kus Municipal Engineer.
§ 66B-7. Enforcement.
A prompt investigation shall be made by the Code Enforcement Officer
of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus of any person or entity believed to be in
violation hereof. If, upon inspection, a condition which is in violation of
this chapter is discovered, a civil action may be brought in the Special
Part of the Superior Court, or in the Superior Court if the primary relief
B. An exception to any of the disturbances listed in Subsection A(1) above
shall be granted by the Borough Engineer upon proof, by virtue of
submission of appropriate maps and drawings, that the proposed
redevelopment is within the limits of impervious surfaces that existed at
the time of passage of this chapter and shall be in conformance with the
Stormwater Management Rules, N.J.A.C. 7:8, and the Flood Hazard
Area Control Act Rules, N.J.A.C. 7:13.
C. For all riparian zones, an exception to any of the disturbances listed in
Subsection A(2) above shall be granted by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment upon proof, by virtue of submission of appropriate maps,
drawings, reports and testimony, that the disturbance protects public
health, safety or welfare; provides an environmental benefit; prevents
extraordinary hardship on the property owner peculiar to the property;
or prevents extraordinary hardship, provided the hardship was not
created by the property owner, that would not permit a minimum
economically viable use of the property based upon reasonable
investment.
D. Appeals of a determination by the Borough Engineer made in
accordance with Subsection B above may be made to the Planning
Board. The party contesting the determination or decision shall have
the burden of proof in case of any such appeal.
§ 66B-4 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 66B-7
1:622
sought is injunctive or if penalties may exceed the jurisdictional limit of the
Special Civil Part, by the filing and serving of appropriate process. Nothing
in this chapter shall be construed to preclude the right of the Borough
of Ho-Ho-Kus, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-25, to initiate legal proceedings
hereunder in Municipal Court. The violation of any section or subsection
of this chapter shall constitute a separate and distinct offense independent
of the violation of any other section or subsection or of any order issued
pursuant to this chapter. Each day a violation continues shall be considered
a separate offense.
§ 66B-8. Repealer.
All ordinances, parts of ordinances, or other local requirements that are
inconsistent or in conflict with this chapter are hereby repealed to the
extent of such inconsistencies, and the provisions of this chapter apply.
§ 66B-9. Interpretation; severability; effect on other provisions.
§ 66B-10. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon final adoption and
publication as provided by law.
Chapter 67
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water and water rates — See Ch. 81. Zoning — See Ch. 85.
§ 67-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the words and phrases listed below shall
be defined as follows:
ARTIFICIAL POOL — A pool composed entirely of artificial construction.
A. Interpretation. This chapter shall be so construed as not to conflict with
any provision of New Jersey or federal law.
B. Notwithstanding that any provision of this chapter is held to be invalid
or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, all remaining
provisions of the chapter shall continue to be of full force and effect.
C. The provisions of this chapter shall be cumulative with, and not in
substitution for, all other applicable zoning, planning and land use
regulations.
§ 66B-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-1
1:623
PARTLY ARTIFICIAL POOL — A pool formed from a natural body of water
which has either so limited a flow or such an inadequate size that the
quantity or quality of water must be maintained by artificial means.
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL — Any pool designed, used and maintained for
swimming purposes by an individual for use by his household and guests
and located on a lot as an accessory use to a residence. Unless otherwise
qualified, the term "private swimming pool" shall be construed as including
both artificial and partly artificial pools.
WADING POOL — Any artificially constructed wading pool, not designed
or used for swimming, with a maximum area of 120 square feet and a
maximum water depth of 24 inches.
§ 67-2. Permit required for construction.
It shall be unlawful to construct or establish a private swimming pool or
wading pool as herein defined without having obtained a permit therefor in
the manner hereinafter prescribed.
§ 67-3. Application for permit; fees. [Amended 5-22-1962 by Ord.
No. 384]
Application for the construction and maintenance of a private swimming
pool or wading pool shall be made to the Building Inspector by the owner
of the property or by the contractor who will construct said pool. The
application shall be accompanied by duplicate sets of plans, specifications,
certified by a licensed engineer of the State of New Jersey, and plot plans
of the property. The plot plans shall show the accurate location of the
proposed pool on the property, together with any proposed bathhouses or
cabanas, all existing structures, existing and proposed elevation, and shall
be certified by a licensed land surveyor of the State of New Jersey. The plot
plan shall also show the location, height and type of all existing fencing
or walls on the boundary lines of the property, together with the type and
height of such fencing or enclosure as may be required by § 67-8 of this
chapter, to prevent, within reason, any person from gaining access beneath
or through said fence when the pool is unguarded or unattended. A fee of
$20 shall be paid to the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus for such private swimming
pool permit, which permit fee shall be exclusive of the permit fee required
for erection of any accessory structure to be used in connection with such
swimming pool. A fee of $10 shall be paid to the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus for
a wading pool permit as defined herein. No permit for a private swimming
pool or wading pool shall be issued by the Building Inspector until the
plans, specifications and plot plan have been approved by the Health Officer
and Borough Engineer of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, and such approval
has been properly certified on the plans. Such approval must be directly
obtained from the Health Officer and Borough Engineer by the applicant.
All fees charged by the Borough Engineer for his services shall be paid by
the applicant.
§ 67-1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 67-4
1:624
§ 67-4. Construction and maintenance.
All material used in the construction of artificial private swimming pools
and wading pools as herein defined shall be waterproof and easily cleaned.
Construction and design of said pools shall be such that same may be
maintained and operated as to be clean and sanitary at all times. The
owners of every private swimming pool shall be responsible for maintaining
said pool in such condition as to prevent breaks in the pool chassis or water
from the pool overflowing into adjacent property, private or public.
§ 67-5. Water supply.
There shall be no physical connection between a potable public or private
water supply system and such private swimming pools or wading pools at
a point below the maximum waterline of the pool or to a recirculating or
heating system of said pool.
§ 67-6. Discharge system.
All private swimming pools hereinafter constructed within the Borough of
Ho-Ho-Kus shall be provided with one drainage outlet, not in excess of
three inches in diameter, extending from said pool to either a brook, storm
sewer or lawn sprinkling system on the premises on which said private
pool is located. The discharge of water from such private swimming pools
into a brook or storm sewer shall be permitted only following approval by
the proper state, county and/or municipal officials, as the case requires.
Approval of an application shall only be given if it is feasible to discharge
water from a pool into an accessible brook or storm sewer or use such
water for purposes of lawn sprinkling on said premises. Approval shall not
be given to discharge in excess of 25 gallons per minute such water at the
curb or upon the surface of any Borough street.
§ 67-7. Location.
A. No private swimming pool or wading pool shall be erected nearer to a
street property line or nearer to a side or rear property line than herein
set forth for the respective zoning districts, as follows:
(1) All residence districts. Street and lot line setbacks shall be in
accordance with the Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of Ho-Ho-
Kus, adopted September 22, 1953, "Area and Bulk Schedule for
Residential Districts — Detached Accessory Building Setbacks," as
specified.142
(2) Business and industrial districts. Street and lot line setbacks shall
be in accordance with minimum requirements for residence
districts for detached accessory building setbacks, as set forth in
the Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.143
142. Editor's Note: For current provisions, see Ch. 85, Zoning.
143. Editor's Note: For current provisions, see Ch. 85, Zoning.
§ 67-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-7
1:625
§ 67-8. Fencing.
All private swimming pools hereafter constructed or installed within the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus which are located 200 feet or less from any property
line of the lot or plot upon which the same is situated shall be enclosed
by a substantial fence, the height of which shall be in accordance with the
provisions relating to fences under the relevant section of the Building Code
of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.144 Said fence shall be so constructed as to
prevent, within reason, any person from gaining access beneath or through
said fence and shall have similarly substantial gates or doors, with facilities
for locking said gates or doors at all times when the pool is unguarded,
unattended or not in actual use. A sign reading "Private — No Admittance"
can, at the discretion of the owner, be placed on the outside of all such gates
or doors leading into such private swimming pool. No provision contained
within this section, however, shall be applicable where a private swimming
pool now existing or hereafter constructed is located not less than 200 feet
from the front property line and where there is present on the side and
rear lot lines a wall or fencing, the height of which shall conform with the
provisions relating to fences under the relevant sections of the Building
Code and which shall be so constructed as to prevent, within reason, any
person from gaining access beneath or through said fencing.
§ 67-9. Lighting.
No artificial lighting shall be maintained or operated in connection with
private swimming pools in such a manner as to be a nuisance or an
annoyance to neighboring properties.
§ 67-10. Compliance required; abatement of nuisances.
Every private swimming pool or wading pool, as defined herein, constructed
or to be constructed in the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus shall at all times comply
with the requirements of the Board of Health of the Borough. Any nuisance
or hazard to health which may exist or develop in, in consequence of, or in
connection with any such swimming pool shall be abated and removed by
the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises on which the pool is located
within 10 days of receipt of notice from the Building Department, Borough
Engineer or Board of Health of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
§ 67-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates this chapter, or any part thereof, shall, upon
conviction, forfeit and pay a fine not exceeding $200 or be imprisoned for a
term not exceeding 90 days, or both, for each and every offense.
B. All private swimming pools and wading pools shall be considered as
structures in the determination of yard sizes and lot coverage.
144. Editor's Note: See Ch. 77, Uniform Construction Code Department.
§ 67-7 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 67-12
1:626
§ 67-12. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for
any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not
affect the remaining portions of this chapter.
§ 67-13. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon final passage and
publication according to law.
Chapter 69
(RESERVED)
Chapter 70
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 79.
§ 70-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
THE BUSINESS OR OCCUPATION OF THE TRANSPORTATION AND
CARRIAGE OF PASSENGERS FOR HIRE — Means and includes the
ownership and operation of any automobile or motor car, commonly called
"taxi," engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire and which is
held out, announced or advertised to operate or run, or which is operated
or run, over any of the streets or public highways in the Borough and
particularly accepts and discharges such persons as may offer themselves
for transportation from points or places to points or places within or without
the Borough.
§ 70-2. Prerequisites for operation.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation having an office or
place of business, telephone or branch office located within the limits of
the Borough to carry on, within the limits of the Borough, the business or
occupation of the transportation and the carriage of passengers for hire,
unless the owner thereof shall:
A. Secure the consent of the elective governing body or member thereof
having control of the public streets in the Borough.
§ 67-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 70-2
1:627
§ 70-3. Display of license.
The owner of every taxi within the meaning of this chapter, upon the
issuance to him of the license herein referred to, is hereby required to
exhibit such license whenever called upon so to do.
§ 70-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, forfeit and pay a fine of not more than $5 for each offense or
be imprisoned in the county jail for a term not exceeding five days, or both,
or, at the discretion of the Magistrate of the Municipal Court, suffer the
immediate revocation of the license theretofore issued under this chapter,
with reference to which such violation shall occur.
§ 70-5. Repealer.
All ordinances and parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith be and the
same are hereby repealed.
§ 70-6. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect when published and passed as required by law.
Chapter 72
B. Apply for and pay for and obtain a license, of the elective governing
body, at the rates of license fees as follows:
(1) An annual license fee of $25 for the first vehicle.
(2) An annual license fee of $15 for every additional vehicle.
C. Have filed with the Clerk of the Borough an insurance policy of a
company duly licensed to transact business under the insurance laws of
the State of New Jersey in the standard form provided for in the sum of
$5,000 to $65,000 against loss by reason of the liability imposed by law
upon the autocab owner for damages on account of bodily injury or
death suffered by any person as a result of an accident occurring by
reason of the ownership, maintenance or use of the autocab upon any
public street. The consent hereinbefore provided in Subsection A shall
continue effective, and operation thereunder shall be permitted only so
long as said insurance policy shall remain in force and effect.
D. Execute and deliver to the Clerk of the Borough, concurrently with the
filing of the insurance policy referred to in Subsection C hereof, a power
of attorney, whereby the owner shall appoint the Borough Clerk of the
Borough his true and lawful attorney to acknowledge service of any
process out of a court of competent jurisdiction, to be served against
the owner by reason of the indemnity granted him under said insurance
policy.
§ 70-2 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 70-6
1:628
(RESERVED)
Chapter 74
(RESERVED)
Chapter 75
TOWING SERVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 46. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 79.
§ 75-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTOMOBILE — A motor vehicle of a private passenger, sport utility or
station wagon type that is owned or leased and is neither used as a public
or livery conveyance for passengers nor rented to others with a driver;
and a motor vehicle with a pickup body or delivery sedan, a van or a
panel truck or a camper-type vehicle used for recreational purposes owned
by an individual or by husband and wife who are residents of the same
household, not customarily used in the occupation, profession or business
of the owner(s).
BASIC TOWING SERVICE — The removal and transportation of an
automobile from a highway, street or other public or private road or a
parking area or from a storage facility, and other services normally incident
thereto, but does not include recovery of an automobile from a position
beyond the right-of-way or berm or from being impaled upon any other
object within the right-of-way or berm.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Any vehicle other than that as defined as an
"automobile" pursuant to the definitions as contained in this chapter.
INSIDE BUILDINGS — A vehicle storage facility that is completely indoors,
having one or more openings in the walls for storage and removal of
vehicles, and that is secured by a locking device on each opening.
MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENT — An occurrence in which a private
passenger automobile comes in contact with any other object for which the
private passenger automobile must be towed or removed for placement in
a storage facility. This includes all situations which are accidental as to the
owner or operator of the motor vehicle, even if they were caused by the
intentional acts of a perpetrator where the perpetrator was not the owner
or operator of the motor vehicle.
§ 70-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-1
1:629
OUTSIDE SECURED — An automobile storage facility that is not indoors
and is secured by a fence, wall or other man-made barrier that is at least six
feet high. The facility is to be lighted at night.
OUTSIDE UNSECURED — An automobile storage facility that is not indoors
and is not secured by a fence, wall or other man-made barrier, and all
other storage facilities not defined above as "inside building" or "outside
secured."
RECOVERY — To retrieve from a location off the roadway, upright, a rolled
over vehicle; if the vehicle is underneath or impaled onto another object,
then it must be recovered.
STORAGE CHARGES FOR TWENTY-FOUR-HOUR PERIOD — The maximum
allowable amount to be charged by a storage facility for a calendar day
or fraction thereof. A new twenty-four-hour period begins at 12:01
a.m.[Amended 3-26-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-23]
TOW VEHICLE — Only those vehicles equipped with a boom or booms,
winches, slings, tilt beds, wheel lifts or underreach equipment specifically
designed by its manufacturer for the removal or transport of motor vehicles.
TOW VEHICLES BASE OF SERVICE — The towing operator's principal
places of business where the tow vehicle is stationed when not in
use.[Amended 3-26-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-23]
WINCHING — If a vehicle has flat tires and/or does not roll freely, then the
vehicle must be winched.
§ 75-2. Licensing of official towers; term of license; certification.
A. The Borough Council shall appoint persons or companies meeting the
criteria set forth in this chapter and engaged in the business of offering
the services of a motor vehicle towing or wrecker service, whereby
damaged or disabled motor vehicles are towed or otherwise removed
from the place where they are damaged or disabled, by use of a tow
vehicle, as defined in this chapter. Such persons or companies shall be
known as "official towers."
B. Official towers shall be identified by means of a license that shall be
issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
C. Not less than 75 days prior to the beginning of each three-year term of
an official towers license, the Borough shall advertise for applications
for towing licenses for providing towing services pursuant to this
chapter. The advertisement shall be published in the legal newspapers
of the Borough.
D. All applicants shall submit their applications at least 60 days prior to
the commencement date for each three-year period, and the
applications shall be reviewed in accordance with the procedures set
forth in this chapter. The award of a license to the successful applicants
shall be subject to compliance with the license requirements of this
chapter.
§ 75-1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 75-2
1:630
§ 75-3. Services to be furnished; use of subcontractors.
§ 75-4. Official towers list; application process.
E. For the purposes of the licenses to be awarded pursuant to this chapter,
in the year in which it is adopted, the initial term of the license shall be
from the date the license is issued until December 31 of that year. A
license issued thereafter shall be for a three-year period commencing
on January 1 of the year in which it was issued and terminating three
years thereafter.
F. Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter that provide for a threeyear
term of the license, official towers shall submit, no later than
December 1 of each year that the towing license is in effect, a detailed
certification certifying that the official tower meets the requirements of
this chapter in regard to the issuance of licenses. Said certification shall
be submitted to the Ho-Ho-Kus Police Department for review and
approval by the designated administrative officers. Failure to submit
the certification or failure to continue to abide by the requirements of
this chapter in regard to the issuance of a towing license shall subject
the official tower to revocation of the license in accordance with the
procedures contained herein.
A. Official towers shall furnish adequate and proper wrecking, towing,
storage and emergency repair services to motor vehicles damaged or
disabled within the limits of the Borough, when requested to do so by
the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus Police Department's authorized designee.
B. No official tower shall subcontract any work to be performed pursuant
to this chapter except in an emergency situation. The Borough of Ho-
Ho-Kus will, within reasonable discretion, maintain objective guidelines
on file as to emergencies and use of subcontractors. Any official tower
shall be responsible for the services performed by the subcontractor
and shall remain liable for any violation of this chapter by the
subcontractor.
A. Applications for inclusion on the official towers list shall be made to the
Borough Council upon a form prepared by the Police Department and
approved by the Borough Attorney and shall contain all of the following
information:
(1) The name, residence and business addresses and telephone
number of the owner of the towing company. If the owner is a
corporation, the application shall contain the name, residence and
business address and telephone number of every stockholder
owning more than 10% of the issued stock. [Amended 3-26-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-23]
(2) Such information as may be required by the Mayor and Council
concerning the personnel, vehicles, equipment and storage
§ 75-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-4
1:631
facilities of such applicant, as hereinafter provided, showing that
the applicant meets the minimum standards of performance.
(3) Policies or certificates of insurance coverage as hereinafter
provided.
(4) The names and addresses of two business references who have
known the applicant for at least two years.
(5) Certification that the applicant will be able to provide towing
services anywhere in the Borough with a maximum response time
of 20 minutes, except when extraordinary circumstances occur.
(6) Certification that the applicant will be available for service on
business premises 24 hours a day, seven days a week, and that they
will abide by the fees contained in or referred to in this section.
(7) Consent to certification that will consent to appointment of the
Borough Clerk as the applicant's true and lawful attorney for the
purpose of acknowledging service out of any court of competent
jurisdiction to be served against the applicant.
(8) A sketch plan showing the location of the storage area, the number
of cars that can be stored and the total square footage area of the
storage area.
(9) An agreement to abide by the general rules and regulations
established by the Police Department in connection with towing
procedures within the Borough.
B. The applicant shall submit completed duplicate applications to the
Borough Administrator, who shall forward a copy to the Public Safety
Director for his review and approval. The review by the Borough of Ho-
Ho-Kus Police Department shall consist of the following:
(1) A background check to determine if either the applicant or the
applicant's personnel have been convicted of a criminal offense or
have had their driver's license suspended or revoked within the
past year. Conviction of a criminal offense or suspension of a
driver's license within the past year shall be a cause for
disqualification from inclusion on the official towers list.
(2) An inspection of the personnel, vehicles, equipment and storage
area proposed to be utilized by the applicant to verify the accuracy
of the information contained in the application and to determine
compliance with applicable laws and regulations and the standards
of performance required by this chapter.
C. An applicant may be included on the official towers list by the Borough
Council, by resolution adopted at a regular public meeting, when, from
a consideration of the application and from such other information as
may otherwise be obtained, they find that all of the following
circumstances exist:
§ 75-4 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 75-4
1:632
§ 75-5. Issuance of license; revocation; fees; transferability.
(1) The applicant has not knowingly, and with intent to deceive, made
any false, misleading or fraudulent statements of material fact in
the application or in any other document required pursuant to this
chapter.
(2) The applicant has met the standards in this chapter and has
forwarded the required hold harmless agreement and policies or
certificates of insurance which shall be reviewed and approved by
the Borough's risk management consultant.
(3) The application has been reviewed and approved by the Police
Department designee.
(4) Neither the applicant nor the applicant's personnel have been
convicted of a criminal offense within the past year. [Amended
3-26-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-23]
D. The Ho-Ho-Kus Police Department shall conduct a review and render a
report to the Borough Council recommending either approval or denial
of the application within 45 days of receipt of the application. The
Borough Council shall take action with regard to the application within
45 days of receipt of the report of the Police Department. The applicant,
or its representative, shall be given notice of the date on which the
Borough Council will consider the application and shall be permitted to
appear and be heard at that time.
E. Written notice of the approval or denial of the application shall be
provided to the applicant within seven days of the decision of the
Borough Council.
F. If the Borough Council fails to take action within 60 days of receipt of a
complete application, the application shall be deemed to have been
denied.
A. Upon approval of the application as herein provided, the Borough
Administrator shall issue the applicant an official towers license to be
utilized in providing services pursuant to this chapter.
B. Said licenses shall be in a form approved by the Borough Council.
C. The licenses shall be valid for the three-year period as set forth in this
chapter, shall be nontransferable and shall be subject to revocation by
the Borough Council for any of the following reasons:
(1) If it is subsequently determined that the applicant knowingly, and
with intent to deceive, made false, misleading or fraudulent
statements of material fact in the application or in any other
document required pursuant to this chapter.
§ 75-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-5
1:633
§ 75-6. Minimum standards of performance.
To qualify for inclusion on the list of official towers, applicants must meet
the following minimum standards:
(2) Violation of any federal or state law or municipal ordinance or
regulation relating to the operation of a motor vehicle or the
provision of towing services.
(3) Violation of any rule or regulation promulgated by the New Jersey
Department of Insurance.
(4) Unsatisfactory service provided pursuant to this chapter.
(5) Failure to annually certify compliance with the requirements of this
chapter as required by § 75-2.
D. The license fee for the license issued under this section shall be $100
per year. The fee for the annual review of certification and inspection of
vehicles and equipment submitted by the official tower pursuant to
§ 75-2 of this chapter shall be $50.
E. Licenses shall not be transferable without the consent of the Borough
Council, if the licensee demonstrates that the transferee complies with
all of the requirements of this chapter.
A. Minimum vehicle requirements.
(1) Every official tower shall own or lease for use in performing the
services required by the license the following pieces of equipment:
(a) Two light-duty wreckers.
(b) Three flatbed trucks.
(c) One medium-duty wrecker. [Amended 3-26-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-23]
(d) One heavy-duty hydraulic wrecker, with at least thirty-ton
capacity and three-stage underreach. [Amended 3-26-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-23]
(2) Vehicle classes.
(a) Regular tow vehicles must be equipped with a boom or winch
assembly mounted on the chassis, a dolly assembly, a tow sling
or wheel lift assembly with at least 100 feet of either threeeighths-
inch or seven-sixteenths-inch wire rope attached to a
motor-driven winch.
(b) Flatbed vehicles must be equipped with a winch or
hydraulically operated bed which slides or tilts to
accommodate transporting of vehicles.
§ 75-5 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 75-6
1:634
(3) Every official tower shall have available a heavy-duty wrecker, and
underreach shall be rated at 35,000 pounds and shall be capable of
towing new-style buses and trucks with fiberglass front ends.
(4) All equipment shall comply with all state and federal regulations
and all vehicle operators shall possess a CDL license for over
26,000 pounds. [Amended 3-26-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-23]
(5) Each applicant shall submit, along with its application, proof of
ownership, lease or other written agreement demonstrating
availability as needed of the vehicles which will be utilized to
provide services pursuant to this section.
B. Minimum equipment requirements.
(1) Every tow vehicle or flatbed vehicle shall be equipped with the
following:
(a) At least one amber rotating beacon or strobe light mounted on
the highest practical location of the vehicles, visible from 360°
when in use and visible at a minimum distance of 500 feet
during daylight hours.
(b) One snatch block per winch.
(c) Safety tow lights or magnetic tow lights for towing vehicles at
night, amber colored.
(d) Appropriate chains/wire rope/nylon straps for pulling or
securing a towed vehicle.
(e) At least one heavy-duty broom, a shovel, a crowbar or prybar, a
set of jumper cables, a flashlight, one two-pound or larger fire
extinguisher of dry chemical type, one dozen flares or similar
warning devices for placement at the scene of an accident or
behind a disabled vehicle, at least 40 pounds of dry sand or a
drying compound for gasoline and oil spilled onto the roadway
and a container of sufficient size to remove the used
compound, and a sufficient quantity and types of tools to
enable the tow operator to perform proper and adequate
emergency repair services for the tow.
(2) Every tow vehicle or flatbed vehicle shall comply with any and all
state, federal and local laws, regulations and ordinances pertaining
to safety, lighting and towing equipment requirements and shall be
subject to inspection by the Police Department at any time. No
changes may be made in said vehicles or equipment unless prior
written approval is obtained from the Borough.
(3) Every tow vehicle or flatbed vehicle shall display the official towers
license and shall have the name of the official tower displayed on
the vehicle in such manner and of such lettering as conforms to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-46.
§ 75-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-6
1:635
(4) All towing operators' trucks must be equipped with either two-way
radio and/or mobile telephone communications equipment with
their principal place of business, including their garage and/or
office facilities, to ensure the proper availability of services and
equipment on behalf of the Borough and motorists.
(5) The towing operators' wrecker(s) and all other vehicles shall be
properly licensed and registered with the New Jersey Division of
Motor Vehicles.
(a) Towing operators' vehicles shall display New Jersey
commercial license plates and registrations issued to the
licensed towing service. [Amended 3-26-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-23]
C. Minimum personnel requirements; availability and response time.
(1) Official towers shall have available, at all times, a minimum of two
persons to provide the services required by this chapter. All
persons employed by official towers to provide the services
required by this chapter shall meet the following requirements and
be subject to the following regulations. They shall:
(a) Be competent mechanics able to provide minimum road service
for disabled vehicles;
(b) Have a valid driver's license having no restrictions or
conditional endorsements other than a condition requiring the
wearing of eyeglasses;
(c) Be mentally alert and present a neat appearance at all times;
(d) Obey all traffic laws and regulations;
(e) Be subject to inspection by the Police Department of the
Borough and shall be approved by the Borough prior to
rendering any services pursuant to this chapter;
(f) Not have been convicted of a crime within the past year.
[Amended 3-26-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-23]
(2) Employees of the towing operator, in responding to a call, shall
request and be afforded police assistance during the course of
providing towing, emergency road services or removal of
abandoned or accident vehicles when such employees find it
necessary to turn around, back up, tow in the opposite direction of
traffic, or cross the median.
(3) A towing operator shall not permit a vehicle to be removed from the
site of a vehicular accident, the scene of a crime or any other
instance or situation without the prior approval and permission of a
police officer and/or superior at the scene.
§ 75-6 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 75-6
1:636
D. Minimum storage requirements.
(1) Every official tower shall maintain an outside secured storage area
meeting the following requirements:
(a) The storage area shall be at least 6,000 square feet and
capable of storing a minimum of 10 passenger vehicles and one
tractor and trailer. The area shall have additional storage of at
least 800 square feet of storage facilities to hold and protect
police hold vehicles.
(b) The location of the towing facility and storage area shall be
within a one-mile radius from any borderline of the Borough of
Ho-Ho-Kus. This location is established to ensure reasonable
response and towing distances.
(c) The storage area shall be fully enclosed by a sturdy fence
having a minimum height of six feet, with at least one lockable
gate for ingress and egress, and shall be lighted from dusk to
dawn.
(d) The storage area shall be in an area legally zoned for such use
and shall have video surveillance. A certificate of occupancy
for towing and storage use is required. [Amended 3-26-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-23]
(e) The storage facility shall be available 24 hours a day, 365 days
per year and shall be open to the public on weekdays during
normal business hours and for four hours on Saturdays. The
applicant shall specify the hours on which the facility will be
open on Saturdays. The applicant is not required to be open on
Sundays or federal/state holidays. [Amended 3-26-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-23]
(f) The official tower shall have an employee on duty during all
hours in which the storage facility is open.
(g) The hours of release for any impounded vehicles are Monday
through Friday from 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. If the owner of the
vehicle is requesting that the vehicle be released after hours,
there will be a $75 fee for after-hours release when the tower
is available to do so. [Amended 3-26-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-23]
(h) The applicant shall, with its application, submit proof of
ownership or lease of the storage area.
(i) The official tower shall be responsible for ensuring the proper
and safe storage of all vehicles towed pursuant to this chapter.
The official tower shall be liable for any damage incurred by
such vehicles while in transit to or while stored in the storage
areas.
§ 75-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-7
1:637
§ 75-7. Utilization of official towers list.
§ 75-8. Hold harmless agreement.
The applicant shall agree, in writing, to assume the defense of and
indemnify and hold harmless the Borough, its elected officials, boards,
commissions, officers, employees and agents from all suits, actions,
damages or claims, fees, costs, expenses, fines or penalties to which the
Borough may be subjected of any kind and nature whatsoever resulting
from, caused by, arising out of or as a consequence of the provisions
of towing, wrecking, storage and/or emergency services provided at the
request of the Borough pursuant to this chapter. Official towers shall enter
into a hold harmless agreement in a form to be prepared by the Borough
Attorney prior to being included on the official towers list.
§ 75-9. Insurance requirements.
The tower shall maintain, during the life of its license, insurance policies
of the type and with the minimum limits indicated below and in a form
A. Official towers shall be placed on the official towers list at the beginning
of each three-year period in accordance with the procedures as set
forth in this chapter. The official towers shall rotate on the list for one
week at a time or for such a period as designated by the Borough of Ho-
Ho-Kus. The one-week rotation shall commence at 12:00 midnight
Sunday and terminate at 11:59 p.m. the following Saturday.
B. The Borough shall request wrecking, towing and storage services from
each official tower in rotation. When called, the tower shall advise the
dispatcher if a vehicle is available and the estimated time of arrival. If
no tow vehicle is available or if, in the discretion of the Borough official
making the request, the response time is insufficient under the
circumstances to properly protect the public health, safety or welfare,
the next official tower on the list shall be called for that particular
towing event.
C. All requests for service shall be made by the Police Department.
D. The Police Department shall request service only from official towers;
provided, however, that if no emergency or imminent road hazard
exists, the Borough shall request such service from such other person
as the owner of the motor vehicle in need of such services may request;
and provided further that, if none of the official towers are available or
able to provide such services as are requested by the Borough, or if an
emergency exists, the Borough may request such services from any
other available source.
E. During adverse weather conditions, heavy traffic conditions or
emergency conditions, official towers shall give priority to requests
from the Borough over any other requests which may be received by the
official towers.
§ 75-7 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 75-9
1:638
satisfactory to the Borough. The tower shall provide a certified copy of the
policies and/or certificates of insurance satisfactory to the Borough prior to
commencement of work. All policies and/or certificates shall be submitted
to the Borough risk management consultant for review and approval.
A. Garage liability insurance. Limit of liability shall not be less than
$1,000,000 combined single limit (bodily injury and property damage)
per occurrence, including premises operations and products/completed
operations.
B. Liability insurance.
(1) Automobile liability insurance. Limit of liability shall not be less
than $1,000,000 combined single limit (bodily injury and property
damage) per occurrence.
(2) General property damage and liability insurance. Limit of liability
shall not be less than $1,000,000 combined single limit.
C. Garage keepers insurance. Physical damage insurance policies shall be
specifically endorsed to provide direct primary insurance, where
applicable, for vehicles in tow, possession of, or storage on property
owned or controlled by the tower. Limit of said coverage shall be not
less than $100,000.
D. Excess umbrella insurance. Limit of liability shall be not less than
$1,000,000 providing protection in excess of the garage, auto liability
coverage and general property damage and liability coverage of
$1,000,000.
E. On all liability policies, the Borough shall be added as an additional
insured, and insurance policies and/or certificates shall indicate such
coverage as primary coverage notwithstanding any insurance carried
by the Borough.
F. Workers' compensation insurance: New Jersey statutory coverage,
including employer's liability coverage.
G. The tower shall indemnify the Borough and the public against any loss
due to injuries, accident or damages of any character whatsoever where
any such damage is the result of an act or omission of the tower, his
agents or employees in or due to the execution of the work called for
under the contract.
H. Certified copies of all insurance policies provided above or certificates
thereof satisfactory to the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus shall be furnished
forthwith. Each such policy or certificate shall contain a provision that
it is not subject to material change, cancellation or nonrenewal unless
30 days' prior written notice via certified mail/return receipt shall have
been given to the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus by the tower's insurer. These
must be received 30 days prior to commencement of work.
§ 75-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-9
1:639
§ 75-10. Towing and storage fees. [Amended 3-26-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-23]
I. The providing of any insurance required herein does not relieve the
tower of any of the responsibilities or obligations assumed by the tower
for which the tower may be liable by law or otherwise.
J. If any policies contain a deductible or copayments, it shall be the
responsibility of the tower to pay such sums at the same time a claim is
settled by the tower's insurance company.
K. If any policies contain limits of liability with an aggregate limit, the
tower or tower's insurance company shall provide the Borough,
quarterly during the policy period, a statement evidencing the limits of
liability required under the contract to be in force.
L. Policies of insurance required by this section shall be maintained in full
force and effect at all times. In the event that any coverage is canceled,
terminated or coverage decreased in amount, the same shall constitute
a material breach of the license, and the tower shall be immediately
removed from the official towers list until such time as required
coverage is reinstated.
M. All policies shall be written by either a company licensed to do business
in the State of New Jersey or a New Jersey eligible surplus lines
company, with a minimum best rating of A-VII (A minus seven). They
shall be written on an ISO (Insurance Services Office) form or better.
A. Fees for towing and storage of private passenger vehicles, damaged in
an accident or recovered after being stolen, may not exceed the fees
established by the New Jersey Department of Insurance.
B. The following is a fee schedule for basic automobiles, motorcycles,
motorized bikes, towing services and heavy-duty recovery.
C. (Reserved)
D. (Reserved)
E. (Reserved)
F. Additional services.
(1) If tower is called by police and arrives on the scene and owner
refuses services or no service is required, there is a fee of $75 for
the tow truck responding.
(2) The following fee schedule applies in lieu of the foregoing repealed
fees:
§ 75-9 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 75-10
1:640
Road Services Only
Type Fee
Cars (light) $125 per hour plus parts
Trucks (medium/heavy) $175 per hour plus parts
Towing: Basic
Type Fee
Light-duty - up to 8,000 pounds Hook up $150
Medium-duty - 8,001 to 16,000
pounds
$250 per hour
Heavy-duty - 16,001 and above $500 per hour
Decoupling fee (if tow is not
performed)
1/2 of basic rate
Light-Duty On Hook Mileage When Vehicle Is Not Towed To
Storage Yard Or Towed Out-of-Town
Type Fee
Light-duty $6 per loaded miles
Medium-duty N/A
Heavy-duty N/A
Note: Light-duty vehicles to be towed out-of-state will require an
agreed price and/or hourly rate.
Recovery/Winching (In Addition to Towing per truck
including driver)
Type Fee
Light/medium-duty up to 16,000
pounds
$350 per hour
Heavy-duty 16,001 and above $600 per hour
Specialized Recovery Equipment
Type Fee
Rotator/crane recovery unit $1,200 per hour
Tractor with landoll trailer or
detach trailer
$450 per hour
Tractor/transport hauler only $250 per hour
Refrigerated trailer with/tractor $450 per hour
Box trailer with tractor $400 per hour
Air cushion unit $1,000 per hour
Light tower $250 per hour
Pallet jack $200 per hour
§ 75-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-10
1:641
Specialized Recovery Equipment
Type Fee
Rollers $200 flat hour
Any other specialized
equipment
$250 per hour
Loader/backhoe/telescopic
handler/bulldozer/bobcat
$300 per hour each
Forklift $300 per hour
Dump truck/dump trailer with
tractor
$350 per hour
Roll-off with container $350 per hour plus disposal
Recovery supervisor vehicle $150 per hour
Scene safety equipment,
communication equipment,
traffic management equipment,
etc.
$250 per hour each type used
Recovery support vehicle/trailer,
additional recovery equipment
$350 per hour
Labor: All Labor Minimum of One Hour
Type Fee
Accident minor clean-up and
disposal of debris
$75 per hour one hour minimum
plus absorbant materials used
Recovery supervisor and/or
level III recovery specialist
$225 per hour
Certified towing operator $125 per hour per man
Manual laborers $100 per hour per man
Storage Per Calendar Day (Inside Rates Two Times Outside
Rate)
Type Fee
Cars/light trucks ten-foot by
twenty-foot space
$45 per day
Trucks (dual wheels)/single axle $90 per day
Tractor/dump truck/tractor and
trailer combo/trailers
$125 per unit per day
Buses $150 per day
Roll-off $125 per day for each
Cargo/accident debris/load
storage/vehicle components tenfoot
by twenty-foot space
$45 per space used per day
§ 75-10 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 75-10
1:642
Storage Per Calendar Day (Inside Rates Two Times Outside
Rate)
Type Fee
Rental of any tow company
supplied trailer post incident
$500 per day
Note: Storage billed per calendar day.
Additional Services/Notes
Type Fee
Fuel/hazmat/cargo spills cleanup
and disposal
Time and materials
Hazmat and trash recovery Surcharged 10%
Subcontractor mark-up 10%
Administrative charge. Only
after third visit to vehicle
Cars only: $50
Administration charge Medium/heavy truck: $200
After hours release $75
Notification documentation fee $50
Tarping/wrapping vehicle $90 per car; $250 per truck
Fuel surcharge Reserved for future need
G. Heavy vehicle recovery (over 16,000 pounds).
(1) To provide heavy vehicle recovery, the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus
requires that the licensee have on scene a recovery supervisor with
Level 3 certification from the Towing and Recovery Association of
America (TRAA) or another nationally recognized certification such
as wreck master.
(2) To perform heavy vehicle recovery under this chapter, the licensee
must:
(a) Visually document the recovery scene through photos or
videotape.
(b) Prepare a written report of all procedures employed, actions
taken, equipment used and manpower requirements to
complete the recovery process in the safest manner and
provide a copy to the vehicle owner with the statement of
services.
(c) Prepare an itemized billing invoice for all services rendered.
(3) If the licensee finds it necessary, due to the nature of the recovery
to contract additional recovery service to supplement its
equipment and manpower recovery, the contracted service
§ 75-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-10
1:643
§ 75-11. Miscellaneous provisions.
providers must work under the supervision of the licensee. The
licensee may not subcontract the entire recovery. In the event that
a heavy-duty operator is unable to handle the recovery, then the
next heavy-duty wrecker on the rotating list shall be called.
(4) There is a three-percent annual cost of living increase on all fees
listed herein.
(5) Acceptance of credit/debit cards are at the towing company's
discretion. A maximum of 4% service fee may be added to offset
expenses. Credit/debit cards do not have to be accepted for any
impounded vehicles.
A. Copies of this chapter and the schedule of fees that may be charged by
official towers shall be made available to the public during normal
business hours at the Borough Municipal Building and Police
Department. Copies shall also be made available to the public at each
official tower's place of business.
B. All official towers shall post, in a prominent place at each storage area
clearly visible to the public, a schedule of the fees that may be charged
for all services provided pursuant to this chapter.
C. The Borough reserves the right to make periodic unannounced
inspections of the personnel, vehicles, equipment and storage areas of
all official towers.
D. The relationship between an official tower and the Borough is one of an
independent contractor. Neither party shall be construed in any manner
whatsoever to be an employee of the other, nor shall any employee or
agent furnished by any party be construed to be an employee or agent
of the other party. Inclusion on the official towers list shall not be
construed or considered as a joint venture, partnership, association,
contract of employment or profit-sharing agreement.
E. The municipality shall not be liable or responsible for compensating the
official towers for any of the services performed under this chapter
unless those services are performed for the Borough vehicles.
Compensation shall be the responsibility of the owner of the towed
motor vehicle, and the official tower shall proceed directly against the
owner.
F. The official tower shall, at all times, be solely responsible for the
conduct of its employees. No licensee shall discriminate as to hiring or
employment practices. Licensees shall be required to sign a
nondiscrimination statement.
G. Each official tower shall keep and maintain adequate and complete
records showing all vehicles towed, stored and released, all services
rendered and all fees charged and collected. All records shall be
§ 75-10 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 75-11
1:644
§ 75-12. Dispute resolution; suspension or revocation of license.
available for inspection by the Borough at any time during normal
business hours. Records shall be kept and maintained by the official
tower at one central location and shall be retained for a period of seven
years. Records may be written, printed or computerized, as long as the
requirements of this subsection are met.
H. The official tower shall comply with all state and federal laws and
regulations concerning wages, hours and terms of employment.
A. In the event a complaint is received by the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus
involving the improper or unsatisfactory performance of services by an
official tower in violation of this chapter, excessive charges or damage
to a motor vehicle while in custody of the tower, written notice of same
shall be provided by the Borough Administrator to the official tower
involved. The tower shall have the opportunity to respond, in writing,
within seven days.
B. Within 14 days of receipt of the tower's response, or within 21 days of
receipt of the complaint if no response is received, the matter shall be
presented by the Borough Administrator to the Mayor and Council.
C. The Mayor and Council shall thereafter consider the matter at the
regular public meeting and may request that the complainant and the
tower involved appear and give testimony regarding the complaint.
D. After considering the matter and the evidence presented, the Mayor
and Council shall make certain findings and conclusions relative to the
complaint, which shall constitute its decision. If the Council finds in
favor of the complainant and against the official tower, the Council may
consider and impose the following penalties:
(1) Suspension of the official tower's license;
(2) Revocation of such license for a fixed period or duration;
(3) Permanent revocation of the official tower's license;
(4) Such other penalty as the Mayor and Council deems just and
appropriate under the circumstances. In considering the imposition
of a suspension, revocation or other penalty, the Council shall take
into account factors, including, but not limited to, any prior
violations of the tower, the nature and seriousness of the complaint,
and the danger to the health, safety and welfare of the public.
E. Failure to surrender the license upon revocation shall constitute a
violation of this chapter.
F. Nothing contained herein shall prevent or limit the right of any person
to commence or maintain an action for damages or any other relief
directly against an official tower in a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 75-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-13
1:645
§ 75-13. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
§ 75-14. Severability.
Each section of this chapter and every subsection hereof shall be deemed
independent, separate and distinct from all other sections, and the holding
of any section or a part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for
any cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of
any section or part hereof.
§ 75-15. Repealer.
All ordinances, codes or parts thereof that are inconsistent with this chapter
are repealed or otherwise modified, including former §§ 75-1 to 75-18.
§ 75-16. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon passage and publication as required by
law.
Chapter 75A
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddlers, solicitors and canvassers — See Ch.
40.
§ 75A-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Transient Merchant Licensing
Ordinance of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus."
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000, and each
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter and each day the same
is violated shall be deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct
offense.
B. In addition to the fine provided above, a violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be cause for suspension or revocation of
the official towers license.
C. The Borough Police Department or any member thereof is hereby
declared to be the enforcement agency of this chapter in accordance
with due process of law.
§ 75-13 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 75A-2
1:646
§ 75A-2. Findings and purpose.
It is hereby found and determined by the Borough Council of the Borough
of Ho-Ho-Kus that citizens of this Borough are often subjected to improper
sales techniques by transient merchants who leave the Borough before such
purchasers can take appropriate action to correct the damages resulting
from such improper sales techniques; that it is desirable that the Borough
take all reasonable steps to protect residents from misleading sales
techniques and monetary losses that may result therefrom; that such
transient merchants often conduct business in violation of local zoning
codes and/or site plan approvals to the detriment of the welfare and safety
of the Borough; and that this chapter is designed to provide for the
licensure and regulation of transient merchants and to thereby protect
citizens and the Borough accordingly.
§ 75A-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this chapter:
LICENSING OFFICIAL — The Borough Clerk of Ho-Ho-Kus.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, association or other
entity.
TEMPORARY OR TRANSIENT BUSINESS — Any business conducted for the
sale or offer for sale of goods, wares or merchandise, which is carried on
in any building, structure, motor vehicle, railroad car or real estate, for a
period of less than one year.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT — Any person, firm, corporation, partnership
or other entity which engages in, does or transacts any temporary or
transient business in the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, either in one locality
or by traveling from place to place in the Borough, offering for sale or
selling goods, wares, merchandise or services, with intent to close out or
discontinue such business within one year from the date of commencement,
and includes those merchants who, for the purpose of carrying on such
business, hire, lease, use or occupy any building, structure, motor vehicle,
railroad car or real estate for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares
or merchandise. "Transient merchant" shall also include any person who, as
a private enterprise, schedules, organizes or promotes any entertainment,
concerts, athletic events, contests or competitions or beauty pageants to
be held on a nonregular basis and which require the payment of a fee for
entry or admission, wherein such event is to take place within the confines
of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus; provided, however, that no such person shall
be classified as a transient merchant if he is sponsored by any bona fide
civic, fraternal, educational or religious organization having a local chapter
in the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
§ 75A-4. Exceptions.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
§ 75A-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75A-4
1:647
(1) Sales at wholesale to retail merchants by commercial travelers or
selling agents in the usual course of business.
(2) Wholesale trade shows and/or conventions.
(3) Sales of goods, wares or merchandise by sample catalogue or
brochure for future delivery.
(4) The retail sale of ice cream and/or flavored water ice by motor
vehicles during the summer months.
(5) Any general sale, fair, auction or bazaar sponsored by any civic,
fraternal, educational or religious organization.
(6) Garage sales held on the premises devoted to residential use.
(7) Sale of crafts or items made by hand and sold or offered by sale by
the person making such crafts or handmade items.
(8) Any new home construction contractor, residential developer,
master plumber or electrical contractor who is licensed or
regulated by any state, county or municipal agency, division,
department or professional board and any contractor of home
improvements, as defined in N.J.A.C. 13:45A-16.1, who, in the
normal course of business, advertises or performs his services in
the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, provided that any such tradesman
complies with all state, county and municipal regulations
enforceable by the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus Construction Official.
(9) The sale of fruits, vegetables and farm products such as meat,
poultry, butter and eggs.
(10) Any charitable or religious society that shall conduct sales of
personal property when the proceeds thereof shall be applied to
the payment of the expenses thereof and to the charitable or
religious object for which the society exists.
(11) Any art, antique or historical society that shall conduct an
exhibition and sale of art objects, pictures, paintings, prints,
historical articles and furniture generally known and designated as
"antiques" and "kindred objects."
(12) Any agricultural show, fair or garden society selling or closing out
certain of their exhibits.
(13) Sale(s) of Christmas trees, provided that such sale(s) are
conducted from the seller's property.
B. A transient merchant not otherwise exempted from the provisions of
this chapter shall not be relieved or exempted from the provisions
hereof by reason of associating himself temporarily with any local
dealer, auctioneer, trader, contractor or merchant or by conducting
§ 75A-4 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 75A-4
1:648
§ 75A-5. License required.
§ 75A-6. Application for license.
Any transient merchant desiring to transact business within the confines of
the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus shall make application for and obtain a license
therefor. The application for license shall be filed with the Licensing Official
and shall include the following information:
§ 75A-7. Registered agent for service of process.
such temporary or transient business in connection with or in the name
of any local dealer, auctioneer, trader, contractor or merchant.
A. It shall be unlawful for any transient merchant to transact business
within the confines of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus unless such merchant
shall have first secured a license and shall have otherwise complied
with the requirements of this chapter.
B. A separate license shall be obtained for each branch, establishment or
separate place of business in which the occupation of a transient
merchant is carried on, and each license shall authorize the licensee to
carry on, pursue or conduct the business of a transient merchant only at
the location indicated thereby.
A. The name and permanent address of the transient merchant making the
application and, if the applicant is a firm or corporation, the name and
business and home address of the owners of the firm or the officers of
the corporation, as the case may be.
B. If the applicant is a corporation, there shall be stated on the application
form the date of incorporation, the state of incorporation and, if the
applicant is a corporation formed in a state other than the State of New
Jersey, the date on which such corporation qualified to transact
business as a foreign corporation in the State of New Jersey.
C. A statement showing the kind of business proposed to be conducted,
the length of time for which the applicant desires to transact such
business and the location or locations of such proposed place of
business.
D. The average quantity and kind, as nearly as can be stated, and the value
of the personal property intended to be sold or exposed for sale in the
Borough.
E. The names and post office addresses of the persons from which goods
making up the stock were or are to be purchased.
A. Before a license shall be issued, the applicant shall file with the
licensing official an instrument in writing nominating and appointing
the Licensing Official his true and lawful agent with full power and
authority to acknowledge service or notice of process for and on behalf
§ 75A-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75A-7
1:649
§ 75A-8. Fee.
Each application for a transient merchant license shall be accompanied by
a license fee of $250.
§ 75A-9. Bond.
Before a license shall be issued, the applicant shall execute and deliver
to the Licensing Official of the Borough a good and sufficient bond with
good and sufficient surety, to be approved by the Licensing Official, equal
in amount to 25% of the value of the personal property shown in the
declarations and disclosures required under the provisions of this chapter,
but in no event shall the bond be less than $1,000. It shall remain in force
for one year and be conditioned to indemnify and pay the Borough any
penalties or costs incurred in the enforcement of any of the provisions of
this chapter and to indemnify or reimburse any purchaser of such personal
property in a sum equal to at least the amount of any payment such
purchaser may have been induced to make through the misrepresentation
as to the kind, quality or value of the personal property, whether the
misrepresentations were made by the owners or their servants, agents
or employees, either at the time of making the sale or through any
advertisement printed or circulated with reference to such personal
property or any part thereof.
§ 75A-10. Issuance of license; transferability; expiration.
A transient business license may be issued hereunder only by the Licensing
Official and only when all requirements of this chapter have been met. Such
license shall not be transferable, shall be valid only within the territorial
limits of the Borough and shall be valid only for a period of not more than
180 days.
of the applicant in respect to any matters connected with or arising
out of the license and the bond given as required by the provisions
of this chapter or for the performance of the conditions of the bond
or for any breach thereof. It shall also contain recitals to the effect
that the applicant consents and agrees that service of any notice or
process may be made upon such agent and when so made, shall be as
valid as if personally served upon the applicant according to the laws
of this state and waiving all claim or right of error by reason of such
acknowledgment of service or manner of service.
B. When any such process, notice or demand is served on the Licensing
Official, such person shall immediately cause one copy thereof to be
forwarded by certified mail to the permanent address of the transient
merchant. The provisions of this chapter shall not limit or otherwise
affect the right of any person to serve any process, notice or demand in
any other manner now or hereafter authorized by law.
§ 75A-7 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 75A-11
1:650
§ 75A-11. Revocation of license; hearing.
The Borough Council, following notice and hearing to the licensee, may
revoke any license issued hereunder for a knowing violation of the
requirements of this chapter, or any part thereof, or if it finds that the
conduct of the licensee or the continued existence of the license is
inimicable to the health, safety and/or welfare of the citizens of the Borough
of Ho-Ho-Kus. The licensee shall be entitled to appear with an attorney at
said hearing and to present witnesses and other proofs tending to show that
continuance of his license is not inimical to the health, safety and/or welfare
of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
§ 75A-12. Enforcement.
It is the duty of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus Police Department and the
Borough Construction Official to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 75A-13. Violations and penalties.
Any transient merchant who fails to comply with the requirements of this
chapter, or any part thereof, or makes a false or fraudulent representation in
any statement required by this chapter to be filed by it or falsely represents
by advertising any material fact concerning such personal property or
makes any false statement as to the previous history or character of such
personal property shall be subject, upon conviction, to penalty as follows:
Chapter 76
TREES IN HIGHWAYS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 47. Shade Tree Commission — See Ch. 57.
§ 76-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
A. First offense: a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $200 or 90 days
in jail or a period of community service not to exceed 90 days.
B. Second offense: a fine of not less than $150 nor more than $500 or 90
days in jail or a period of community service not to exceed 90 days.
C. Third offense and subsequent offenses: a fine of not less than $300 nor
more than $750 or 90 days in jail or a period of community service not
to exceed 90 days.
§ 75A-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-1
1:651
PERSON — Every person, firm, association, partnership, corporation and
individual.
SHADE TREE — Shade and ornamental trees and shrubbery now located
or which may hereafter be planted in any public highway, park or parkway
in the Borough, except those located or planted on county highways, parks
and parkways and state highways.
SHADE TREE COMMISSION — The Shade Tree Commission of the Borough
of Ho-Ho-Kus and its duly authorized representatives.145
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive
or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway or
which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law or which
is approved by official action as provided by the Municipal Land Use Act
or which is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the
County Recording Officer prior to the appointment of a Planning Board
and the grant to such Board of the power to review plats and includes the
land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may
comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas and
other areas within the street lines. For the purpose of this chapter, "street"
shall be classified as follows:[Amended 9-23-2003 by Ord. No. 876]
§ 76-2. Prohibited acts.
ARTERIAL — Those streets which are used primarily for fast or heavy
traffic.
A.
COLLECTOR — Those streets which carry traffic from minor streets to
the major system of arterial streets, including the principal entrance
streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within
such development.
B.
MINOR — Those streets which are used primarily for access to the
abutting properties.
C.
MARGINAL ACCESS — Those streets which are parallel to and adjacent
to arterial streets and highways and which provide access to abutting
properties and protection from through traffic.
D.
ALLEYS — Minor streets which are used primarily for vehicular service
access to the back or side of the properties otherwise abutting on a
street.
E.
A. No person, firm, corporation or individual connected with such firm or
corporation shall do or cause to be done by others to any tree, shrub or
plant on a public highway or place, either purposely, carelessly or
negligently, without the permission of the Shade Tree Commission, any
of the following acts:
(1) Cut, prune, climb with spikes, break, damage or remove.
145. Editor's Note: See Ch. 57, Shade Tree Commission.
§ 76-1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 76-2
1:652
§ 76-3. Obstructions.
§ 76-4. Injurious substances.
§ 76-5. Laying of sidewalks; construction and paving of streets.
No person, firm or corporation is permitted to lay any sidewalk along or to
open, construct, curb or pave any street or do any like act so as to interfere
with or do injury to any highway shade tree without the consent of the
Shade Tree Commission.
§ 76-6. Construction and excavation work.
(2) Cut, disturb or interfere in any way with any root.
(3) Spray with any chemical.
(4) Fasten any rope, wire, sign or other device.
(5) Remove or damage any guard or device placed to protect any tree
or shrub.
B. Nothing herein shall prevent any governmental agency from tying a
public notice upon a tree in connection with administering
governmental affairs.
A. No person or corporation shall, without the permission of the Shade
Tree Commission, place or maintain or cause to be placed or
maintained upon the ground in any public highway or place any stone,
cement or other sidewalks, or any stone, cement or other substance,
which shall impede the free access of air and water to the roots of any
tree or shrub in any public highway or place.
B. An open space of not less than two feet outside the trunks of trees at
their bases on all sides must be maintained on all trees on public
highways except where limited by curbs and/or sidewalks.
A. No person shall place salt, brine, oil or other substances injurious to
plant growth in any public highway or place in such a manner as to
injure any tree or shrub growing thereon.
B. No person shall build any fire or station any tar kettle, road roller or
other engine in any public highway in such a manner that the heat
vapors or fumes therefrom may injure any tree or shrub growing
thereon.
A. In the erection, altering, or repairing of any building or structure, the
owner or contractor thereof shall place such guards around all nearby
trees in public highways or places as will effectually prevent injury to
such trees.
§ 76-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-6
1:653
§ 76-7. Wires; utility trimming.
§ 76-8. Application for permit.
Where the permission, consent or approval of the Shade Tree Commission
is required by the provisions of this chapter, any person, firm or corporation
required to obtain such permission, consent or approval shall first make
application therefor to the Shade Tree Commission, Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus,
County of Bergen.
§ 76-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction by the Magistrate of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, be
fined a sum not exceeding $200 for each offense. Each day any violation of
this chapter shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 77
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Development fees — See Ch. 17.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 26.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 32A.
Land subdivision and site plan review — See
Ch. 32B.
Plumbing Code — See Ch. 44.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 47.
Zoning — See Ch. 85.
B. No person, firm or corporation shall do any excavating within two feet
of any tree or shrub without the permission of the Shade Tree
Commission.
C. Shovels and all other implements, machines and tools shall be used or
operated in such a manner as not to damage or destroy any tree, shrub
or plant in any public highway or place.
D. Where, in authorized excavations, it becomes necessary to expose or
cut roots more than one inch in diameter, it shall be the duty of the
contractor to protect such roots under advice from the Shade Tree
Commission.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall, without written permission of the
Shade Tree Commission, attach or fasten any wire, insulator or other
device for holding any wire to any tree or shrub in any public highway
or place.
B. Any utility company or its agents may, with prior permission from the
Shade Tree Commission, prune and remove trees for line clearance of
utility wires.
§ 76-6 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 76-9
1:654
ARTICLE I
Uniform Construction Code Enforcing Agency
§ 77-1. Establishment; composition; procedures.
§ 77-2. Examination and approval of permits; expiration and
cancellation.
A. Pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, known as the "Uniform Construction Code
Act of the State of New Jersey" (hereinafter referred to as "the Act"),146
there is hereby established in the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus a State
Uniform Construction Code enforcing agency to be known as the
"Uniform Construction Code Department of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus,"
consisting of a Construction Official, Building Subcode Official,
Plumbing Subcode Official, Electrical Subcode Official and Fire
Protection Subcode Official. The Construction Official shall be the chief
administrator of the enforcing agency. He shall have the power to
overrule a determination of a subcode official, based on an
interpretation of a substantive provision of the subcode which such
subcode official administers, only if the Construction Official is qualified
to act, pursuant to the Act, as a subcode official for such subcode. He
may serve as a subcode official for any subcode which he is qualified
under the Act to administer. A subcode official or Municipal Engineer
may serve as a Construction Official if otherwise qualified under the
provisions of the Act. The Plumbing Subcode Official shall be the
Plumbing Inspector as appointed by the Board of Health of the Borough
of Ho-Ho-Kus. Subcode officials or assistance staff may be employed on
a part-time basis or hold other positions within the Borough of Ho-Ho-
Kus.
B. Each official position created in Subsection A hereof shall be filled by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, as
amended, and N.J.A.C. 5:23, provided that, in lieu of any particular
subcode official, an on-site inspection agency may be retained by
contract pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position
may be held by the same person, provided that such person is qualified
pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, and N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold each such
position.
C. The public shall have the right to do business with the Uniform
Construction Code Department of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus at its
offices located in the Borough Hall, except for emergencies and
unforeseen or unavoidable circumstances.
A. The enforcing agency shall examine each application for a construction
permit. If the application conforms with the Act, the code and the
requirements of other applicable laws and ordinances, it shall be
deemed a completed application, and the enforcing agency shall
approve the application and shall issue a construction permit to the
146. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 77-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-2
1:655
applicant. Every completed application for a construction permit shall
be granted, in whole or in part, or denied within 20 business days. If
a completed application is denied, in whole or in part, the enforcing
agency shall set forth the reasons therefor in writing. If an enforcing
agency fails to grant, in whole or in part, or deny a completed
application for a construction permit within the period of time
prescribed herein, such failure shall be deemed a denial of the
application for purposes of an appeal to the Construction Board of
Appeals, unless such period of time has been extended with the consent
of the applicant. The enforcing agency may approve changes in plans
and specifications previously approved by it, if the plans and
specifications when so changed remain in conformity with law.
B. A construction permit, issued in accordance with the foregoing
provisions, pursuant to which no construction has been undertaken
above the foundation walls within one year from the time of issuance
shall expire. The enforcing agency may suspend, revoke or cancel a
construction permit in case of neglect or failure to comply with the
provisions of this Act or the code or upon a finding by it that a false
statement or representation has been made in the application for the
construction permit.
C. The enforcing agency shall have all other powers as enumerated in the
Act.
§ 77-2 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 77-2
1:656
ARTICLE II
Administration
§ 77-3. Appeals; record of decisions. [Amended 3-28-1978 by Ord.
No. 514]
§ 77-4. Appeal procedure.
A. Whenever the Uniform Construction Code Department of the Borough
of Ho-Ho-Kus, in its capacity as the enforcing agency of the Uniform
Construction Code Act and the State Uniform Construction Code,
refuses to grant an application or refuses to act upon an application for
a construction permit or makes any other decision pursuant or related
to the Act or the code, an owner or his authorized agent may appeal in
writing to the Construction Board of Appeals established by the County
of Bergen.
B. The procedure for filing appeals shall be governed by the rules
established by the said Construction Board of Appeals in accordance
with the Uniform Construction Code Act and the regulations
established by the Commissioner of Community Affairs of the State of
New Jersey.
C. A record of all decisions made by the said Construction Board of
Appeals, properly indexed, shall be kept by the enforcing agency of the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus and shall be subject to public inspection during
business hours.
A. Whenever the enforcing agency shall deny a completed application for
a construction permit, refuse or fail to act upon a completed application
for a construction permit, refuse to grant a variation pursuant to Article
6 of the Act or make any other decision pursuant or related to the Act or
code, including the assessment of any monetary penalties, an owner or
his authorized agent may appeal to the Construction Board of Appeals.
B. The application for appeal shall be taken within 20 days of the receipt of
written notice of the denial or other decision on the application for a
construction permit. Where no notice of denial has been forthcoming,
appeal may be taken within 20 days after the expiration of 20 days from
the time of filing of a completed application for a construction permit.
C. The application for appeal shall be in writing, filed with the Board,
briefly setting forth the appellant's position. Such application shall state
the name and address of the appellant, the address of the building or
site in question and the permit number and shall reference the specific
sections of the code in question and the extent and nature of the
appellant's reliance on them. The appellant may append to his written
application any data or information that he may deem appropriate to his
cause. The enforcing agency shall make available to the Board the full
record of the application below, which shall include a detailed
explanation of the reasons for the denial of the appellant's request.
§ 77-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-4
1:657
§ 77-5. Construction Code Official; construction permits.147 [Added
2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 978]
D. The application for appeal shall be accompanied by a fee in the sum of
$50. An application for appeal shall not be considered complete unless
accompanied by the appeal fee.
E. The time for appeal may be extended upon application to the Secretary
of the Board and shall be in writing or may be extended at any regular
or special meeting of the Board, by the affirmative vote of a majority of
the Board.
A. The Construction Code Official shall in no case grant any permit for the
construction or alteration of any building or grant a certificate of
occupancy in respect to any building where the proposed construction
or alteration thereof would be in violation of this chapter and all other
applicable chapters of the Borough.
B. It shall be the further duty of the Construction Code Official to keep
records of all applications for construction permits and of all such
permits issued, with a notation of all special conditions involved. The
Construction Code Official shall file and safely keep copies of all plans
and specifications submitted with such application, and the same shall
form a part of the records of his office and shall be available to the
Mayor and Council and all other officials of the Borough until such time
as he is directed by the Mayor and Council to dispose of same.
C. In addition to the complete plans and specifications, certified by a New
Jersey licensed architect or professional engineer, all applications for
construction permits for new and extended buildings and structures
shall be accompanied by a plot plan, in duplicate, drawn to scale,
showing the actual dimensions, radii and angles of a lot to be built
upon, the exact size and location on the lot of the building to be erected
and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the
enforcement of this chapter and all other pertinent chapters of the
Borough. Plot plans shall be certified by a New Jersey licensed civil
engineer or land surveyor.
D. No construction permit shall be issued until written approval has been
received from the Plumbing Subcode Official and Health Official, where
applicable, and also, in appropriate cases, by the Borough Engineer and
Fire Protection Subcode Official.
E. No construction or building permit shall be issued until written
certification has been received from the Tax Department and Water
Department that no taxes or assessments for local improvements are
due or delinquent on the property for which any application is made.
The Construction Code Official is hereby authorized to promulgate
147. Editor's Note: Former § 77-5, Hearing procedure, was repealed 3-28-1978 by Ord. No. 514.
§ 77-4 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 77-5
1:658
§ 77-6. Certificate of occupancy; certificate of continued occupancy;
temporary certificate of continued occupancy.148 [Added 2-22-2011
by Ord. No. 978]
appropriate procedures and forms to effect compliance with the
provisions herein.
A. Certificate of occupancy.
(1) No land shall be occupied or used and no residential or
nonresidential building hereafter erected or altered shall be
occupied or used, in whole or in part, for any purpose whatsoever
until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the
Construction Code Official stating that the premises or building
complies with all the provisions of this section. An application for a
certificate of occupancy shall be made in triplicate upon forms
provided by the Construction Code Official and accompanied by
such plans, fees and other information as may be required. A
record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the
Construction Code Official, and copies shall be furnished upon
request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in
the building affected.
(2) No permit for the excavation for or the erection of any building
shall be issued before application has been made for a certificate of
occupancy. No building or premises may be occupied until such
certification shall have been issued.
(3) No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all of the
ordinances of Ho-Ho-Kus have been complied with and a certificate
has been issued by the Board of Health stating that all of the
provisions of its ordinances have been complied with. This
provision shall apply to new construction only.
(4) No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless the house fronts
on a street improved in accordance with Borough specifications.
B. Certificate of continued occupancy.
(1) No residential or nonresidential property may be changed in
tenancy, use or ownership unless a certificate of continued
occupancy has been issued by the Borough Construction Code
Official on forms provided and the required fee paid for such
inspection. The Construction Official, or his designee, shall inspect
any residential or nonresidential property not more than 30 days
prior to the change of any tenancy, use or ownership. The
Construction Official, with the approval of the Property
Maintenance Officer and Zoning Officer, shall issue a certificate of
continued occupancy, provided that there are no violations of law
148. Editor's Note: Former § 77-6, Decisions, was repealed 3-28-1978 by Ord. No. 514.
§ 77-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-6
1:659
§ 77-6.1. Violations and penalties. [Added 2-22-2011 by Ord. No.
978]
Any person, firm or corporation who fails to submit a completed application
for a certificate of continued occupancy upon any change in tenancy, use
or ownership shall be liable to a fine of up to $1,000, to be charged
against the owner of record of the property at the time the change of
use, ownership or occupancy occurred. Said owner(s) shall also be subject
or order of the Construction Official, Property Maintenance Officer
and Zoning Officer pending and it is established after inspections
and investigation of available municipal records that the use of the
property has lawfully existed. The certificate shall evidence that
a general inspection of the visible parts of the building, property
and all equipment has been performed, and there are no apparent
visible violations of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus ordinances, the New
Jersey Construction Code, the New Jersey Fire Code or any other
applicable county, state or federal codes, statutes or regulations.
When a residential or nonresidential structure is occupied by
multiple users, a certificate of continued occupancy shall be
required for each change of ownership, use, occupancy or tenancy
for each such user.
(2) An application for a certificate of continued occupancy shall be
made in writing on forms provided by the Ho-Ho-Kus Building
Department. Applications shall be submitted 25 business days prior
to the proposed change of tenancy, use or ownership. A certificate
of continued occupancy shall remain valid for one year from the
date of issue. Upon receiving the required completed application
and fees, the Construction Code Official, or his designee, shall
inspect the property within 10 business days. In the event that the
Construction Code Official or his designee declines to issue a
certificate of continued occupancy, his reason(s) for doing so shall
be stated on a copy of the application, and said application(s) shall
be returned to the applicant. The applicant may then resubmit the
application once all of the violations have been corrected to the
satisfaction of the Construction Code Official or his designee and
request a reinspection.
C. Temporary certificate of continued occupancy (TCCO). A temporary
certificate of continued occupancy (TCCO) may be issued in the event
that the violation(s) are not corrected and that a change in tenancy, use
or ownership is scheduled at a time that makes it impossible for the
violation(s) to be corrected. In such event, the applicant will be subject
to an additional fee and shall be required to post a cash bond in the
amount of $1,000 to guarantee that all violations will be corrected by a
specific date. Failure to correct the violation(s) which led to the
issuance of a TCCO by the date set forth shall result in a forfeiture of
the cash guarantee and also subject the applicant to a fine under the
penalty section set forth herein.
§ 77-6 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 77-6.1
1:660
to a per diem charge of $100 for each day that a completed application
is not submitted, commencing from the day of discovery by the Ho-Ho-
Kus Building Department. Failure to correct any violation(s) that led to the
issuance of a TCCO by the date set forth shall subject the applicant to a per
diem charge of $100 for each day until the violation(s) has been corrected.
§ 77-6.2. Application fees. [Added 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 978]
A. The application fee for a certificate of continued occupancy shall be
$100. An additional fee in the amount of $75 is required for each
resubmission.
B. The application fee for a TCCO shall be $200. An additional fee in the
amount of $75 is required for each resubmission.
§ 77-6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-6.2
1:661

ARTICLE III
Fee Schedule
[Amended 6-24-1980 by Ord. No. 547; 2-26-1985 by Ord. No. 578;
8-25-1987 by Ord. No. 610]
§ 77-7. Construction permit fees. [Amended 3-28-1995 by Ord. No.
744; 2-27-1997 by Ord. No. 758; 12-16-1997 by Ord. No. 789;
5-22-2001 by Ord. No. 840; 7-26-2005 by Ord. No. 900; 5-24-2011 by
Ord. No. 990; 9-23-2014 by Ord. No. 1031]
The fees and charges required under the Code of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus
entitled Construction Codes, Uniform, shall be as follows:
A. The fee for a construction permit shall be the sum of the subcode fees
listed in Subsection A(1) through (10) hereof and shall be paid before
the permit is issued.
(1) New construction and additions are based on the volume of
structure:
(a) Volume of building in cubic feet x $0.05.
(2) Reconstruction, alterations, renovations, repairs are based on the
cost of the work:
(a) Based on cost of work: $22 per $1,000.
(3) Demolition or removal permit:
(a) For all principal buildings, the fee is $150.
(b) For all residential accessory structures, the fee is $50.
(c) For all nonresidential accessory structures, the fee is $80.
(d) For all fuel tank removals, the fee is $75.
(e) For removal of sheds over 100 square feet, the fee is $40.
(f) For removal of sheds 100 square feet, or less, the fee is $40.
(4) Fence permits:
(a) Fences six feet or less, the fee is $25.
(b) Fences for pool barriers and over six feet in height, the fee is
$50.
(5) Signs: The fee is $1 per square foot. (Note: Fee to be based on one
side of double-sided signs.)
(6) Certificate of occupancy fees:
(a) The fee for certificate of occupancy is $60.
§ 77-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-7
1:663
§ 77-8. Plumbing subcode fees. [Amended 3-28-1995 by Ord. No.
744; 5-22-2001 by Ord. No. 840; 7-26-2005 by Ord. No. 900;
5-24-2011 by Ord. No. 990; 9-23-2014 by Ord. No. 1031]
The plumbing subcode fees shall be:
(b) The fee for a certificate of occupancy based on change of use is
$150 for nonresidential.
(c) The fee for the first issuance and the renewal of a temporary
certificate of occupancy shall be $30; provided, however, there
shall be no fee for the first issuance of the temporary
certificate of occupancy if the certificate of occupancy fee is
paid at that time. [Added 4-26-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-05]
(7) Pools:
(a) Aboveground pools are a flat fee of $50.
(b) In-ground pools are a flat fee of $150.
(8) Asbestos removal permit is $50.
(9) Minimum fee for building permit is $50.
(10) Miscellaneous permit fees:
(a) Commercial roof, the fee is $150.
(b) Residential roof or siding, the fee is $50.
(c) Detached (residential) building: roof or siding, the fee is $25.
(d) Fireplaces and stoves, the fee is $50.
(e) HVAC duct work, the fee is $50.
(f) Fuel storage tank installation, the fee is $100.
(g) Plan review credit: 20%.
A. For new construction, additions, renovations and alterations:
Item Fee
Each fixture and device $20
Floor drain $20
Dishwasher, residential $20
Dishwasher, commercial $20
Disposal unit $20
Drinking fountain $20
Washing machine $20
Hose bib $20
§ 77-7 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 77-8
1:664
§ 77-9. Electrical subcode fees. [Amended 3-28-1995 by Ord. No.
744; 12-16-1997 by Ord. No. 789; 5-22-2001 by Ord. No. 840;
7-26-2005 by Ord. No. 900; 5-24-2011 by Ord. No. 990; 9-23-2014 by
Ord. No. 1031]
The electrical subcode fees shall be as follows:
Item Fee
Gas piping $20
Fuel oil piping $20
Water heater $50
Steam or hot-water boiler $50
Interceptor/separator $50
Backflow preventor $20
Grease trap $50
Air-conditioning units and
refrigeration
$50
Sewer connections $50
Water service connection $50
Gas service connection $50
Water softener $50
Lawn sprinkler $50
Fire sprinkler $50
Sewer ejector $50
Vent stack $20
B. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, the minimum fee for any
plumbing subcode permit shall be $50.
C. Plan review credit: 20%.
A. Fixtures and devices to be counted for these items include outlets, wall
switches, fluorescent fixtures, convenience receptacles or similar
fixtures and motors and devices of one horsepower or one kilowatt or
less:
Item Fee
First 25 $75
Increments of 5 $10
Pool with U/lights $125
Storage pool/spa $75
Aboveground pool $75
§ 77-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-9
1:665
§ 77-10. Fire subcode fees. [Amended 3-28-1995 by Ord. No. 744;
5-22-2001 by Ord. No. 840; 7-26-2005 by Ord. No. 900; 5-24-2011 by
Ord. No. 990; 9-23-2014 by Ord. No. 1031]
B. For the purpose of calculating the following electrical fees, all motors
except those in plug-in appliances shall be counted, including control
equipment, generators, transformers and all heating, cooking or other
devices consuming or generating electric current:
Item Fee
Motors/electrical devices,
horsepower
1 to 5 $20
6 to 9 $30
10 to 15 $50
Above 26 $100
Transformer/generator, kilowatts
To 10 $50
To 45 $100
To 112.5 $150
Above 112.5 $200
Service/panels/subpanels, amperes
To 100 $50
To 200 $90
To 300 $150
To 400 $200
To 800 $250
To 1,000 $400
HVAC and Central AC, per unit $50
C. Minimum fee: $50.
D. Plan review credit: 20%.
A. The fire subcode fees shall be as follows:
Item Fee
Fireplace $60
Woodburning stove $60
Residential mechanical equipment $50
Residential smoke or heat detectors
Each $5
§ 77-9 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 77-10
1:666
§ 77-10.1. Elevator devices. [Amended 3-28-1995 by Ord. No. 744;
2-27-1996 by Ord. No. 758; 12-16-1997 by Ord. No. 789; 7-26-2005
by Ord. No. 900; 5-24-2011 by Ord. No. 990; 9-27-2011 by Ord. No.
995; 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 1001; 9-23-2014 by Ord. No. 1031]
The fees for elevator devices shall be as follows:
Item Fee
Minimum $50
Restaurant extinguishing systems $75
Automatic fire sprinkler
Per head $3
Minimum $50
Industrial/commercial fire alarm
system
$50
Flammable/combustible liquid tank
installation, except commercial
shall be $100 per 1,000 gallons
$100
Flammable/combustible liquid tank
removal/abandonment; includes
aboveground or underground
storage tanks
$75
Chimney liner $50
Egress emergency and exit lighting
systems
$50
Industrial/commercial mechanical
systems
$50
LPG or LNG tanks $50
Standpipes $50
Pool heaters (excluding
aboveground pools)
$60
B. Plan review credit: 20%.
A. New and altered elevator devices not of group R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5
shall be as follows:
(1) Traction and winding drum elevators:
(a) One to 10 floors: $306.
(b) Over 10 floors: $510.
(2) Hydraulic elevators: $272.
(3) Roped hydraulic elevators: $306.
§ 77-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-10.1
1:667
(4) Escalators, moving walks: $272.
(5) Dumbwaiters: $68.
(6) Stairway chairlifts, inclined and vertical wheelchair lifts and man
lifts: $68.
(7) Additional charges for devices equipped with the following features
shall be as follows:
(a) Oil buffers (charge per oil buffer): $54.
(b) Counterweight governor and safeties: $136.
(c) Auxiliary power generator: $102.
B. New and altered elevator devices of group R-3, R-4 or R-5, or otherwise
exempt devices in structures of group R-2, shall be as follows: $204.
C. The fee for routine and periodic tests and inspections for elevator
devices in structures not of group R-3, R-4 or R-5, or otherwise exempt
devices in structures of group R-2, shall be as follows:
(1) The fee for the six-month routine inspections:
(a) Traction and winding drum elevators:
[1] One to 10 floors: $190.
[2] Over 10 floors: $244.
(b) Hydraulic elevators: $136.
(c) Roped hydraulic elevators: $190.
(d) Escalators; moving walks: $190.
(2) The fee for the one-year periodic inspection and witnessing of tests
of elevator devices:
(a) Traction and winding drum elevators:
[1] One to 10 floors: $272.
[2] Over 10 floors: $326.
(b) Hydraulic elevators: $175.
(c) Roped hydraulic elevators: $240.
(d) Escalators; moving walks: $375.
(e) Dumbwaiters: $102.
(f) Stairway chairlifts, inclined and vertical wheelchair lifts and
man lifts: $150.
§ 77-10.1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 77-10.1
1:668
§ 77-10.2. Mechanical subcode fees. [Added 2-23-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-01]
§ 77-11. Annual review of fees.
The Construction Official shall, with the advice of the subcode officials,
prepare and submit to the Mayor and Council, biannually, a report
recommending a fee schedule based on the operating expenses of the
agency and any other expenses of the municipality fairly attributable to the
enforcement of the State Uniform Construction Code Act.149
(3) Additional yearly periodic inspection charges for elevator devices
equipped with the following features shall be as follows:
(a) Oil buffers (charge per oil buffer): $54.
(b) Counterweight governor and safeties: $108.
(c) Auxiliary power generator: $68.
D. Plan review credit: 20%.
E. Surcharge fees as per State Uniform Construction Code.
A. Mechanical subcode fees shall be:
(1) For the installation and replacement of heating and cooling
equipment, or other mechanical equipment in existing buildings of
R-3, R-4 and R-5 use groups, $100. Other equipment shall include
refrigeration, airconditioning, gas piping, ventilation apparatus,
heating systems or standby power generators. The fee of $100 shall
be for each item.
(2) The fee for a chimney liner is $50.
(3) The fee for a hot water heater or water storage tank is $50.
(4) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, the minimum fee for any
mechanical subcode permit shall be $50.
B. Severability. If any portion of this section is adjudged unconstitutional
or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not
affect or invalidate the remainder of this section but shall be confined in
its effect to the provision directly involved in the controversy in which
such judgment shall have been rendered.
C. Repealer. All other ordinances or parts of ordinances of the Borough
which are inconsistent with this section are hereby repealed, but only to
the extent of such inconsistencies.
D. When effective. This section shall take effect upon passage and
publication as required by law.
149. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 77-10.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-12
1:669
§ 77-12. Surcharge fee. [Amended 10-24-1989 by Ord. No. 646;
5-28-1991 by Ord. No. 678; 3-28-1995 by Ord. No. 744; 7-26-2005 by
Ord. No. 900; 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 978; 5-24-2011 by Ord. No.
990; 9-27-2011 by Ord. No. 995]
§ 77-12.1. Waiver of fees. [Added 12-19-2000 by Ord. No. 833]
A. In order to provide for the training, certification and technical support
programs required by the Uniform Construction Code Act and the
regulations,150 the enforcing agency shall collect, in addition to the fees
specified above, a surcharge fee of $0.00334 per cubic foot of volume
for new structures and additions and $1.70 per $1,000 of construction
costs for alterations and renovations. Said surcharge fee shall be
remitted to the Division of Codes and Standards, Department of
Community Affairs, on a quarterly basis for the fiscal quarters ending
September 30, December 31, March 31 and June 30 and not later than
one month next succeeding the end of the quarter for which it is due. In
the fiscal year in which the regulations first become effective, said fee
shall be collected and remitted for the third and fourth quarters only.
B. The enforcing agency shall report annually to the Division of Codes and
Standards, at the end of each fiscal year and not later than July 31, the
total amount of the surcharge fee collected in the fiscal year. In the
fiscal year in which the regulations first become effective, said report
shall be for the third and fourth quarters only.
A. No person shall be charged a construction permit, surcharge fee or
enforcing agency fee for any construction, reconstruction, alteration or
improvement designed and undertaken solely to promote accessibility
by disabled persons to an existing public or private structure or any of
the facilities contained therein.
B. A disabled person or a parent or sibling of a disabled person shall not be
required to pay any municipal fee or charge in order to secure a
construction permit for any construction, reconstruction, alteration or
improvement which promotes accessibility to his own living unit.
150. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq. The "regulations" refers to the regulations
established by the Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs.
§ 77-12 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 77-12.1
1:670
ARTICLE IV
Fire Limits
§ 77-13. Establishment of fire limits; report.
A. The following fire limits are established pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23: All
lands within the business and industrial zones as shown on the current
Zoning Map of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
B. The Construction Official shall prepare and submit to the Mayor and
Council, biannually, a report reevaluating the delineation of the fire
limits. This report shall indicate the recommendations of the
Construction Official, the Building Subcode Official and the Fire
Subcode Official regarding those areas which should be designated as
within fire limits, with the reasons therefor.
§ 77-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-13
1:671

ARTICLE V
Penalties
§ 77-14. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person or corporation, including an officer, director or employee of
a corporation, who:
(1) Violates any of the provisions of the Act or rules promulgated
thereunder;
(2) Constructs a structure or building in violation of a condition of a
building permit;
(3) Fails to comply with any order issued by the enforcing agency; or
(4) Makes a false or misleading written statement or omits any
required information or statement in any application or request for
approval to the enforcing agency shall be subject to a penalty of not
more than $500.
B. Anyone who knowingly refuses entry or access to an inspector lawfully
authorized to inspect any premises, building or structure pursuant to
this Act or who unreasonably interferes with such an inspection shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $250.
C. With respect to Subsection A(3) of this section, a person shall be guilty
of a separate offense for each day that he fails to comply with a stopconstruction
order validly issued by an enforcing agency and for each
week that he fails to comply with any other order validly issued by an
enforcing agency. With respect to Subsection A(1) and (4) of this
section, a person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each violation
of any provision of the Act or rules promulgated thereunder and for
each false or misleading written statement or omission of required
information or statement made in any application or request for
approval to an enforcing agency. With respect to Subsection A(2) of this
section, a person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each violation
of the conditions of a construction permit.
D. The above-mentioned penalties are subject to change through
amendments or supplements to the Act. Payment of a money judgment
brought by the municipality pursuant hereto shall be remitted to the
Municipal Treasurer of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
§ 77-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-14
1:673

ARTICLE VI
Severability and Interpretation
§ 77-15. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, subdivision, paragraph, subsection or section of
this chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid, such judgment shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof, but shall be confined in
its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, subsection or
section thereof directly involved in the controversy in which said judgment
shall have been rendered.
§ 77-16. Interpretation.
The powers enumerated in the Act shall be interpreted broadly to effectuate
the purposes thereof.
§ 77-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-16
1:675
Chapter 79
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Automobile and motorcycle racing — See Ch.
6.
Sidewalks, curbs and streets — See Ch. 58.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 70.
Towing services — See Ch. 75.
§ 77-16 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 77-16
1:676
ARTICLE I
Traffic Regulations
[Adopted 9-28-1965 by Ord. No. 417]
§ 79-1. Definitions.
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this article, the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey151 shall be deemed to apply to such words and
phrases herein.
§ 79-2. Prohibited parking, stopping or standing; time-limit
parking; exemption.
A. Regulations not exclusive. The provision of this section imposing a time
limit on parking shall not relieve any person of the duty to observe other
and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping,
standing or parking of vehicles as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any
other New Jersey statute or as hereinafter provided.
B. Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets. No person shall park
a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts thereof described
in Schedule I, attached to and made a part of this article.
C. Parking prohibited during certain hours on certain streets. No person
shall park any vehicle upon the east side of Lloyd Road southbound
from its intersection with Hollywood Avenue for a distance of 300 feet
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday,
inclusive. No person shall park any vehicle on the parking lot at the
public school on Lloyd Road or upon any street in the Borough of Ho-
Ho-Kus during the hours of 4:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. No person shall park
any vehicle on the west side of Lloyd Road between Rich Court and the
third driveway of the Ho-Ho-Kus Public School (70 Lloyd Road) (west
side of Lloyd Road distance is 328.4 feet between Rich Court and third
driveway), from Monday to Friday, 8:15 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:45 p.m.
to 3:15 p.m. [Amended 12-23-1969 by Ord. No. 452; 7-24-1990 by
Ord. No. 658; 4-26-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-08]
D. Stopping or standing prohibited during certain hours on certain streets.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle between the hours specified in
Schedule II of any day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of
the streets or parts of streets described in said Schedule II, attached to
and made a part of this article.
E. Parking time limited on certain streets. No person shall park a vehicle
for longer than the time limit shown in Schedule III at any time between
the hours listed in said Schedule III of any day (except Sundays and
public holidays) upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in
Schedule III, attached to and made a part of this article.
151. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq.
§ 79-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 79-2
1:677
§ 79-3. Use of certain vehicles restricted.
Trucks over four tons' gross weight are hereby excluded from the streets or
parts of streets described in Schedule IV, except for the pickup and delivery
of materials, said Schedule IV being attached to and made a part of this
article.
§ 79-4. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule V, attached to and
made a part of this article, are hereby designated as one-way streets in the
direction indicated.
§ 79-5. Through streets and stop intersections.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedule VI, attached to and made a part of this article, are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided
therein.
F. Stopping or standing shall be prohibited at all times on certain streets.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts
of streets described in Schedule IX, attached to and made a part of this
article. [Added 11-28-1972 by Ord. No. 471]
G. (Reserved)152
H. Metered parking on certain streets. Parking shall be limited and
regulated on the streets shown in Schedule XI by the imposition of fees
for the privilege of parking thereon, to be determined by the length of
time for which a vehicle may be parked. Such fees are to be collected
through parking meters installed on said streets in accordance with the
provisions of the statutes. The Borough shall suitably subdivide the
areas designated in Schedule XI into parking meter space. The
provisions of Article II, §§ 79-11, 79-15, 79-20, 79-25, 79-26 and 79-27,
concerning definitions; operation of parking meters; purchase of
meters; damage to meters; slugs in meters; and enforcement,
respectively, shall apply to parking meters installed on the streets
shown on Schedule XI and are incorporated in this article as though set
forth herein at length. [Added 9-26-1978 by Ord. No. 520]
I. Exemptions to Chapter 79. All emergency vehicles and Borough of Ho-
Ho-Kus owned vehicles shall be exempt from the parking regulations
set forth in this section of Chapter 79. [Added 11-24-2015 by Ord.
No. 1042]
152. Editor's Note: Former Subsection G, Restrictive parking, added 9-28-1976 by Ord. No. 496,
was repealed 6-27-1978 by Ord. No. 519.
§ 79-2 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 79-6
1:678
§ 79-6. Loading zones.
The locations described in Schedule VII, attached to and made a part of this
article, are hereby designated as loading zones.
§ 79-7. Bus stops.
The locations described in Schedule VIII, attached to and made a part of
this article, are hereby designated as bus stops.
§ 79-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-24-2004 by Ord. No.
885]
Unless another fine is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, every
person convicted of a violation of a provision of this article or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a fine of not more than $60 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 79-9. Effect; short title; schedules.
A. Time. All references as to time in this article are to be the prevailing
time.
B. Effect. If any part or parts of this article are for any reason held to be
invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of this article.
C. Repeal. Ordinance Nos. 308 and 383 of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus are
hereby repealed, and all ordinances and resolutions or parts of
ordinances and resolutions in conflict with or inconsistent with the
provisions of this article are hereby repealed, except that this repeal
shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person
for any act done or committed in violation of any ordinance hereby
repealed prior to the taking effect of this article.
D. Short title. This article may be known and cited as the "Traffic
Ordinance."
E. Effective date. This article shall take effect 10 days after publication
and final passage as provided by law and after approval by the Director
of Motor Vehicles of the State of New Jersey.
SCHEDULE I
In accordance with the provisions of § 79-2B, no person shall park a
vehicle at any time upon any of the following described streets:
§ 79-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 79-9
1:679
Name of Street Side Location
Barnert Place [Added
9-22-1981 by Ord. No.
560]
East For a distance of 125 feet north
of its intersection with First
Street
Barnert Place [Repealed
2-26-1985 by Ord. No.
579]
Bogert Road South Between East and West Saddle
River Roads
Brookside Avenue South Between North Maple Avenue
and a point 50 feet westerly
therefrom
Cliff Street East Brookside Avenue to First Street
East Franklin Turnpike North From Sycamore Avenue to
Sheridan Avenue
East Franklin Turnpike South Between Sycamore Avenue and
the Ridgewood town line
Edgewood Road [Added
10-22-2002 by Ord. No.
860]
West From Warren Avenue north to
the dead end for a total of
approximately 250 feet
Elmwood Avenue East From East Franklin Turnpike to
Sherwood Road
Enos Place [Added
7-22-2008 by Ord. No.
938]
North Between Sheridan Avenue and
Elmwood Avenue
First Street West From Warren Avenue Bridge to
Cliff Street
Hollywood Avenue Both For 200 feet east and west from
its intersection with Route 17
Hollywood Avenue South Between East and West Saddle
River Roads
Hollywood Avenue South Between Route 17 and
Cleverdon Road
North Franklin Turnpike Any side The triangle at Warren Avenue
North Franklin Turnpike East Between Warren Avenue and
the Waldwick line
North Franklin Turnpike West Between Garden Court and
Rosencrantz Lane
Sheridan Avenue East East Franklin Turnpike to Orvil
Court
Sheridan Avenue East Between Enos Place and
Hollywood Avenue
§ 79-9 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 79-9
1:680
Name of Street Side Location
Sheridan Avenue East For a distance of 375 feet north
of its intersection with Warren
Avenue
Sheridan Avenue West Between Ross Place and Warren
Avenue
Sheridan Avenue [Added
2-24-2004 by Ord. No.
885]
West From Warren Avenue south for a
total of 53 feet
Sycamore Avenue (west
side of the Street) by rear
driveway of Borough Hall
[Added 6-27-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-07]
West For a distance of 20 feet north
and 20 feet south of the
driveway
Sycamore Avenue
[Added 7-22-2008 by
Ord. No. 938]
East Between Enos Place and Warren
Avenue
Warren Avenue
[Amended 5-23-1966
by Ord. No. 422]
Both Between Carton Avenue and
North Franklin Turnpike
Warren Avenue South From Sycamore Avenue to
Elmwood Avenue
West Saddle River Road
[Added 4-23-1991 by
Ord. No. 677]
Both For 200 feet south and north
from its intersection with
Hollywood Avenue
SCHEDULE II
In accordance with the provisions of § 79-2D, no person shall stop or
stand a vehicle between the hours of 5:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m. upon any
of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Brookside Avenue North Between Cliff Street and First
Street
Warren Avenue South Between the Warren Avenue
Bridge and North Franklin
Turnpike
SCHEDULE III
In accordance with the provisions of § 79-2E, no person shall park a
vehicle for longer than the time limit shown upon any of the following
streets or parts of streets between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.:
§ 79-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 79-9
1:681
Name of Street Side
Time
Limit Location
Brookside Avenue
[Added 5-23-1995
by Ord. No. 745]
Both 1 hour Between Cliff Street and
Maple Avenue
Brookside Avenue North 3 hours From North Maple Avenue
to First Street
Brookside Avenue South 3 hours From First Street to a
point 100 feet west of
North Maple Avenue
Carlton Avenue
[Added 5-23-1995
by Ord. No. 745]
Both 90 minutes Between Warren Avenue
and Ross Place
Cliff Street West 3 hours
East Franklin
Turnpike [Added
5-23-1995 by
Ord. No. 745]
North 1 hour Between Sycamore
Avenue and Elmwood
Avenue
East Franklin
Turnpike
North 90 minutes From Sycamore Avenue
intersection to Elmwood
Avenue
East Franklin
Turnpike
South 90 minutes From North Maple Avenue
to Sycamore Avenue
Elmwood Avenue
[Added
10-22-2002 by
Ord. No. 860]
East 90 minutes From the south corner of
Sherwood Road To East
Franklin Turnpike (268
feet)
Elmwood Avenue
[Added
10-22-2002 by
Ord. No. 860]
East 90 minutes From Warren Avenue to
the north corner of
Sherwood Road (306 feet)
Enos Place [Added
5-23-1995 by
Ord. No. 745]
South 30 minutes From Sheridan Avenue to
Sycamore Avenue for a
distance of 60 feet as
posted
First Street East and
north
3 hours South from Brookside
Avenue to Ho-Ho-Kus
Brook
First Street
[Added 5-23-1995
by Ord. No. 745]
North 1 hour Between Cliff Street and
Barnert Place
Maple Avenue
[Added 5-23-1995
by Ord. No. 745]
Both 1 hour Between First Street and
Brookside Avenue
§ 79-9 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 79-9
1:682
Name of Street Side
Time
Limit Location
Maple Street Both 90 minutes From the Ridgewood line
to the Ho-Ho-Kus Bridge
North Franklin
Turnpike
Both 90 minutes From Warren Avenue to
Sheridan Avenue
North Franklin
Turnpike [Added
5-23-1995 by
Ord. No. 745]
North 1 hour From the corner of
Sheridan Avenue heading
in a northerly direction on
North Franklin Turnpike
for a distance of 370 feet
Orvil Court Both 3 hours
Sheridan Avenue
[Added 5-23-1995
by Ord. No. 745]
East 1 hour Between Orvil Court and
Warren Avenue
Sheridan Avenue East 90 minutes South of Warren Avenue to
Orvil Court
Sheridan Avenue
[Added 5-23-1995
by Ord. No. 745]
West 1 hour Between intersection of
North Franklin Turnpike
and Warren Avenue
Sheridan Avenue West 90 minutes South of Warren Avenue
Sycamore Avenue East 90 minutes Between East Franklin
Turnpike and Orvil Court
Sycamore Avenue
[Added 5-23-1995
by Ord. No. 745]
East 1 hour Between East Franklin
Turnpike and Warren
Avenue
Sycamore Avenue West 3 hours Between East Franklin
Turnpike and Warren
Avenue
Warren Avenue
[Added 5-23-1995
by Ord. No. 745]
Both 90 minutes Between North Franklin
Turnpike and Sycamore
Avenue
Warren Avenue
[Amended
5-23-1966 by
Ord. No. 422]
Both 3 hours From North Franklin
Turnpike to Warren
Avenue Bridge and
between Sheridan Avenue
and Sycamore Avenue
Warren Avenue
[Added 7-24-2018
by Ord. No.
2018-08]
Both 6 hours From North Franklin
Turnpike to Warren
Avenue Bridge
§ 79-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 79-9
1:683
Name of Street Side
Time
Limit Location
Warren Avenue
[Amended
5-23-1966 by
Ord. No. 422]
North 3 hours Sheridan Avenue to
Carlton Avenue
Warren Avenue
[Added 5-23-1995
by Ord. No. 745]
North 90 minutes From Sycamore Avenue to
Elmwood Avenue
Warren Avenue
[Amended
5-23-1966 by
Ord. No. 422]
South 90 minutes Between Sheridan Avenue
and Carlton Avenue
SCHEDULE IV
No motor vehicle or combination of vehicles, including loads or
contents of any part or portion thereof, shall exceed 22 feet in length
and 10,000 pounds in gross vehicle weight on the following streets:
[Amended 1-23-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-01]
Name of Street Location
Addison Place Between Route 17 and Beechwood
Road
Beechwood Road Between Addison Place and Bernard
Place
Blauvelt Avenue Between Sheridan Avenue and North
Franklin Turnpike
Boiling Spring Road [Added
5-23-1966 by Ord. No. 422]
From Mill Road to Saddle Brook Drive
Gilbert Road [Added
6-23-2015 by Ord. No.
1040; amended 11-24-2015
by Ord. No. 1042]
Between Sheridan Avenue and
Blauvelt Avenue
Glenwood Road [Added
1-23-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-01]
From the Village of Ridgewood
Boundary to the intersection of
Brookside Avenue/First Street/Warren
Avenue intersection
Powderhorn Road Between Wearimus Road and East
Saddle River Road
Ross Place [Added
6-23-2015 by Ord. No.
1040; amended 11-24-2015
by Ord. No. 1042]
Between Sheridan Avenue and N.
Franklin Turnpike
Saddle Brook Drive [Added
5-23-1966 by Ord. No. 422]
From East Saddle River Road to
Saddle Ridge Road
§ 79-9 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 79-9
1:684
Name of Street Location
Saddle Ridge Road [Added
5-23-1966 by Ord. No. 422]
From Mill Road to Saddle Brook Drive
Warren Avenue Between Sheridan Avenue and North
Franklin Turnpike
Washington Avenue Between West Saddle River and Route
17
SCHEDULE V
In accordance with the provisions of § 79-4, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way streets in
the direction indicated:
Name of Street Direction
Brookside Avenue Westbound from Maple Avenue to
First Street
First Street Southbound from Brookside Avenue to
Cliff Street
Gilbert Road [Added
11-28-1972 by Ord. No.
471]
Northbound from Sheridan Avenue to
Glendon Road
Lloyd Road [Added
5-23-1966 by Ord. No. 422]
Southbound from Hollywood Avenue
to Warren Avenue
SCHEDULE VI
In accordance with the provisions of § 79-5, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections:
Intersection Stop Sign On
Ackerman Avenue and Gilbert Road
[Added 5-23-1966 by Ord. No. 422]
Gilbert Road
Blauvelt Avenue and Elmwood Avenue
[Added 5-23-1966 by Ord. No. 422]
Elmwood Avenue
Blauvelt Avenue and Gilbert Road Gilbert Road
Brandywine Road and West Saddle
River Road [Added 5-25-2004 by
Ord. No. 889]
Brandywine Road
Carlton Avenue and Ross Place
[Added 12-20-1988 by Ord. No.
633]
Carlton Avenue
Copper Beach Lane and Wearimus
Road [Added 5-25-2004 by Ord. No.
889]
Copper Beach Lane
§ 79-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 79-9
1:685
Intersection Stop Sign On
Deerhill Drive and Eastgate Road
[Added 5-25-2004 by Ord. No. 889]
Deerhill Drive
Enos Place and Elmwood Avenue
[Added 5-25-2004 by Ord. No. 889]
Enos Place
Gilbert Road and Blauvelt Avenue [Added 12-20-1988 by Ord. No.
633; repealed 7-24-1990 by Ord. No. 658]
Glendon Road and Blauvelt Avenue
[Added 5-25-2004 by Ord. No. 889]
Glendon Road
Paddock Road and Wearimus Road
[Added 5-25-2004 by Ord. No. 889]
Paddock Road
Powderhorn Road, easterly leg, at its
intersection with Timberline Road
[Added 2-24-2004 by Ord. No. 885]
Powderhorn Road
Powderhorn Road, westerly leg, at its
intersection with Timberline Road
[Added 2-24-2004 by Ord. No. 885]
Powderhorn Road
Sherwood Road and Edgewood Drive
[Added 5-25-2004 by Ord. No. 889]
Sherwood Road
Sherwood Road and Elmwood Avenue
[Added 5-25-2004 by Ord. No. 889]
Sherwood Road
Warren Avenue and Edgewood Drive
[Added 5-25-2004 by Ord. No. 889]
Warren Avenue
Warren Avenue and Elmwood Avenue Elmwood Avenue
Warren Avenue and Sycamore Avenue Sycamore Avenue
Washington Avenue and West Saddle
River Road [Added 5-25-2004 by
Ord. No. 889]
Washington Avenue
West Saddle River Road and Bogert
Road north ramp [Added 5-23-1978
by Ord. No. 517]
Northerly ramp of Bogert
Road facing northbound
traffic exiting Bogert Road
West Saddle River Road and Pitcairn
Avenue [Added 5-23-1978 by Ord.
No. 517]
Pitcairn Avenue
SCHEDULE VII
In accordance with the provisions of § 79-6, the following described
locations are hereby designated as loading zones:
Street Side Location
Brookside Avenue South Starting at a point 50 feet west of
North Maple Avenue for a distance
of 50 feet
§ 79-9 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 79-9
1:686
SCHEDULE VIII
In accordance with the provisions of § 79-7, the following described
locations are hereby designated as bus stops:
Street Side Location
North Franklin
Turnpike
North Starting at a point approximately
160 feet westerly along the curbline
from its intersection with the
building line on the west side of
Sheridan Avenue. The bus stop shall
extend the entire distance
(approximately 90 feet) between
curb openings in a westerly
direction
North Franklin
Turnpike
South Commencing at a point 140 feet
west from its intersection with
North Maple Avenue and thence
running approximately 120 feet
westerly
Sheridan Avenue
[Added 11-28-1972
by Ord. No. 471]
East Commencing at a point 50 feet north
from its intersection with Hollywood
Avenue and thence running
approximately 90 feet northerly
Sheridan Avenue
[Added 11-28-1972
by Ord. No. 471]
West Commencing at a point 50 feet south
from its intersection with Hollywood
Avenue and thence running
approximately 90 feet southerly
SCHEDULE IX [Added 11-28-1972 by Ord. No. 471]
In accordance with the provisions of § 79-2F, no person shall stop or
stand a vehicle at any time upon any of the following described streets
or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Gilbert Road Both For a distance of 100 feet north from
its intersection with Sheridan
Avenue
Hollywood Avenue Both For a distance of 250 feet east and
west from its intersection with
Sheridan Avenue
Hollywood Avenue
[Added 4-23-1991
by Ord. No. 677]
Both For a distance of 300 feet east and
west from its intersection with West
Saddle River Road
Sheridan Avenue Both For a distance of 250 feet north and
south from its intersection with
Hollywood Avenue and Gilbert Road
§ 79-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 79-9
1:687
Name of Street Side Location
West Saddle River
Road [Added
5-23-1978 by Ord.
No. 517]
Both Race Track Road to a point 200 feet
north of the northerly ramp of
Bogert Road
SCHEDULE X
(Reserved)153
SCHEDULE XI [Added 9-26-1978 by Ord. No. 520]
In accordance with the provisions of § 79-2H, parking shall be limited
and regulated by the imposition of fees for the privilege of parking
thereon by way of parking meters on the following described streets
or parts of streets. Parking meters shall not be installed at any
locations where parking is prohibited under the provisions of N.J.S.A.
39:4-138.
Name of
Street
Time
Limit Side Days Location
Brookside
Avenue
13 hours North Monday
through
Friday, except
holidays
From Cliff Street to
Warren Avenue
First
Street
13 hours West Monday
through
Friday, except
holidays
Commencing 50 feet
south of the
Brookside/Glenwood
crossing intersection
and running south
for a distance of 110
feet
SCHEDULE XII
Turn Prohibitions [Added 4-22-2003 by Ord. No. 872]
No person shall make a turn at any location listed and only in the
manner described:
153. Editor's Note: Former Schedule X, regarding parking spaces reserved for authorized
personnel, was repealed 6-27-1978 by Ord. No. 519.
§ 79-9 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 79-9
1:688
Intersection
Turn
Prohibited Hours
Movement
Prohibited
Hollywood Avenue
and North
Franklin Turnpike
(CR No. 502)
Left 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m. and
4:00 p.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Eastbound on
Hollywood Avenue
to northbound on
North Franklin
Turnpike (CR No.
502)
Hollywood Avenue
and North
Franklin Turnpike
(CR No. 502)
Left 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m. and
4:00 p.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Westbound on
Hollywood Avenue
to southbound on
North Franklin
Turnpike (CR No.
502)
§ 79-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 79-9
1:689

ARTICLE II
Parking Lots
[Adopted 5-25-1965 by Ord. No. 413]
§ 79-10. Revocation of prior ordinances.
All prior ordinances relating to parking lots insofar as the same relate to the
regulation of such lots or the establishing of the same by the Borough are
hereby revoked and superseded by this article.
§ 79-11. Definitions. [Amended 11-22-1966 by Ord. No. 426]
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUSINESSMAN — Any person, corporation or partnership conducting or
operating a business in premises owned or leased by him in the Borough.
BUSINESSMAN'S PERMIT — A permit issued by the Borough to a
businessman or his employees which shall entitle the owner or operator
of the vehicle to which the permit is issued to park the same in any
parking meter space within the Borough, including any parking space in
any municipal lot, including Commuter Lot No. 1, with the exception of
any parking or parking meter space in Commuter Lot No. 2, subject to
the provisions of this article.[Amended 7-23-1991 by Ord. No. 683;
5-23-1995 by Ord. No. 745]
COMMUTER LOT — Any parking lot primarily designed for commuter
parking in which the maximum period for which any vehicle may be parked
continuously while the parking meters are in effect shall be 13 hours.
HEAD-IN — All vehicles parking in a parking meter space shall face the
parking meter controlling such space.
MUNICIPAL LOT — Any parking lot primarily designed for parking of
shoppers, businessmen or their employees.
PARKING METER — Includes any mechanical device or meter placed or
erected for the regulation of traffic by authority of this article. Each parking
meter installed shall indicate by proper legend the legal parking time
established by the Borough and when operated shall at all times indicate
the balance of legal parking time and at the expiration of such period shall
indicate illegal or overtime parking.
PARKING METER SPACE — Any space adjacent to a parking meter which
is duly designated for the parking of a single vehicle by lines painted or
otherwise durably marked on the surface of the pavement.
PARKING SPACE — The space in any lot in which meters are not installed
which is duly designated for the parking of a single vehicle by lines painted
or otherwise durably marked on the surface of the pavement. In construing
this article, "parking space" is deemed to be synonymous with the words
"parking meter space."
§ 79-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 79-11
1:691
RESIDENT — A person having bona fide residence in the Borough of Ho-Ho-
Kus, in the County of Bergen.
RESIDENT PERMIT — A permit issued by the Borough to a resident which
shall entitle the owner or operator of the vehicle for which the permit is
issued to park the same in any parking meter space or parking space in a
commuter lot or municipal lot, subject to the provisions of this article.
§ 79-12. Parking lots established. [Amended 11-22-1966 by Ord. No.
426]
The following described lots and premises are hereby established and
designated as parking lots for the parking of vehicles subject to the
provisions of this article, and it is further determined that said lots are
necessary for the orderly control of traffic in the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus,
County of Bergen:
A. Commuter Lot No. 1. Beginning at a point in the westerly line of Cliff
Street 50 feet in width, where the same is intersected by the northerly
line of lands now or formerly of R. & J. Bench and from said point or
place of beginning running thence:
(1) Westerly along said northerly line of Dench and others, a distance
of 310.55 feet; thence
(2) Northerly along the easterly line of First Street, 60 feet in width, a
distance of 250 feet more or less; thence
(3) Easterly along the southerly side of Brookside Avenue, 50 feet in
width, a distance of 399.9 feet more or less; thence
(4) Southerly along said westerly line of Cliff Street, a distance of
23.71 feet; thence
(5) Westerly along lands now or formerly of V.F.W. Post 192, a distance
of 101.46 feet; thence
(6) Southerly, still along lands now or formerly of said V.F.W. Post 192,
a distance of 40.17 feet; thence
(7) Easterly, still along lands now or formerly of said V.F.W. Post 192, a
distance of 98 feet; thence
(8) Southerly along said westerly line of Cliff Street a distance of 25.09
feet to a point or place of beginning.
B. Commuter Lot 2. Beginning at a point in the easterly R.O.W. line of the
Erie-Lackawanna R.R. where the same is intersected by the westerly
extension of the southerly edge of the concrete platform for the Ho-Ho-
Kus Railroad Station, and from said point or place of beginning running
thence:
(1) Southerly along said easterly line of the Erie-Lackawanna R.O.W., a
distance of 370 feet more or less; thence
§ 79-11 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 79-12
1:692
(2) Easterly a distance of 60 feet more or less; thence
(3) Northerly parallel to or concentric with the first course herein run,
a distance of 370 feet, more or less; thence
(4) Westerly along the southerly edge of said railroad station platform
and its extension easterly a distance of 60 feet more or less to the
point or place of beginning.
C. Municipal Lot A. Beginning at a point in the northerly line of Brookside
Avenue 50 feet wide, said point being distant 106.18 feet westerly from
the intersection of the said northerly line of Brookside Avenue with the
westerly line of Maple Avenue, 60 feet in width, and from the said point
or place of beginning running thence:
(1) Westerly along said northerly line of Brookside Avenue 100.87 feet
to a point in the same; thence
(2) Northerly along lands now or formerly of Rickbar Corp., a distance
of 110 feet more or less; thence
(3) Easterly along the center line of the Ho-Ho-Kus Brook, a distance of
100 feet more or less; thence
(4) Southerly along lands now or formerly of E. H. Platt, a distance of
73.04 feet to the point or place of beginning.
D. Municipal Lot B. Being known as a portion of Lot 6 in Block 26 as shown
on the current tax assessment map of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, and
being more particularly bounded and described as follows: Beginning at
a point formed by the intersection of the northerly line of Warren
Avenue [50 feet in width as now laid out and used] and the westerly line
of Sycamore Avenue [50 feet in width as now laid out and used], and
from said point or place of beginning running thence: [Added
11-22-1966 by Ord. No. 426]
(1) North 65° 08' west, along the northerly line of Warren Avenue, a
distance of 150 feet to a point in the same; thence
(2) North 24° 33' east, a distance of 248 feet, more or less, to the
center line of a brook; thence returning to the point or place of
beginning and running thence;
(3) North 24° 33' east, along the westerly line of Sycamore Avenue, a
distance of 252.7 feet, more or less, to the center line of a brook;
thence
(4) Along the center line of a brook, in a general northwesterly
direction, a distance of 150 feet, more or less, to a point in the same
and the end of the second course herein run.
§ 79-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 79-13
1:693
§ 79-13. Fees for parking.
It is hereby determined and stated that the parking of vehicles in the
parking lots provided and maintained by the Borough shall be limited and
regulated by the imposition of fees for the privilege of parking thereon, to
be determined by the length of time for which a vehicle may be parked,
except as otherwise herein provided. Such parking fees shall be payable in
advance, except as herein otherwise provided. Such fees are to be collected
through parking meters installed in said parking lots, or by the purchase of
permits as herein provided.
§ 79-14. Parking meter spaces.
The area available for the parking of vehicles in every parking lot
maintained by the Borough shall be suitably subdivided into parking meter
spaces. Every vehicle using such lots shall be parked head-in and entirely
within the parking meter space. Any vehicle not parked head-in or in such a
position so as to be entirely within the parking meter space or in any area
not designated as a parking meter space shall be deemed to be in violation
of this article.
§ 79-15. Operation of parking meters.
Except in a period of emergency determined by an officer of the Police
Department, or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic
control sign or signal, or except as otherwise herein provided, when any
vehicle shall be parked in a parking meter space, the operator of such
vehicle shall, upon entering the said parking meter space, immediately
deposit or cause to be deposited in such meter such proper coin of the
United States of America hereinafter referred to as "coin or coins," as is
required for such parking meter, and as is designated by the directions of
the meter, and by this article, and after the deposit of the proper coin or
coins, shall also set in operation the timing mechanism on such meter in
accordance with the directions thereon; and the failure to deposit such coin
or coins and to set the timing mechanism in operation when so required
shall constitute a violation of this article. Upon the deposit of such coin or
coins and the setting of the timing mechanism in operation, the parking
meter space may be lawfully occupied by such vehicle for the period of
time prescribed for such parking meter space for the payment made by
such person. Should any person place a vehicle in a parking meter space
which indicates that unused time has been left in the meter by the previous
occupant of the space, such person shall not be required to deposit a coin so
long as his occupancy of such space does not exceed the indicated unused
parking time. If any vehicle shall remain in any parking meter space beyond
the unused time limit left in such meter or the time paid for, and such meter
shall indicate such illegal parking, then such vehicle shall be considered to
be parked overtime and in violation of this article.
§ 79-16. Hours of parking. [Amended 11-22-1996 by Ord. No. 426;
6-25-1991 by Ord. No. 682; 12-19-2006 by Ord. No. 920]
§ 79-13 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 79-16
1:694
§ 79-17. (Reserved)154
§ 79-18. Permits. [Amended 11-22-1966 by Ord. No. 426;
12-17-1968 by Ord. No. 445; 11-28-1978 by Ord. No. 527; 8-28-1979
by Ord. No. 535; 11-25-1986 by Ord. No. 600; 6-25-1991 by Ord. No.
682; 7-23-1991 by Ord. No. 683; 12-19-2006 by Ord. No. 920]
A. The time limitations and parking meter fee deposits required by this
article shall apply to the parking lots designated as commuter lots,
specifically Lower Lot 1 and Upper Lot 2, from 5:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday, inclusive, and to the parking lots designated as
municipal lots, specifically Lot A and Lot B, from 6:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.,
Monday through Saturday, inclusive. The aforementioned time
limitations and parking machine fee deposits shall not be in effect on
Sundays and legal holidays, except that it shall be prohibited and a
violation of this article for any vehicle to be parked in any commuter lot
or Municipal Lot A on any day between the hours of 4:00 a.m. and 5:00
a.m., except as to residents of the Borough to whom an overnight
permit (7:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.) has been issued for Municipal Lot A, or
in Municipal Lot B from 7:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m., unless permission
therefor shall have been obtained first from the Chief of Police of the
Borough.
B. Any vehicle parked in any parking lot established herein during the
period when parking in said lot is prohibited may be towed, under the
direction of the officer in charge of the Police Department, to a parking
area designated by the Chief of Police and there impounded subject to
redemption by the owner upon payment of the cost of towing and
storage to the person providing this service, in addition to any fine
imposed for the violation of this article.
A. The Borough Clerk of Ho-Ho-Kus, (or the Clerk's designee) is hereby
authorized to issue the permit described by this article to residents and
local businesses or their employees who request the same for a
calendar year only, and all permits shall terminate on the last day of the
calendar year for which each permit is issued.
B. The fee to be charged by the Borough Clerk for the resident permits
shall be $375 and businessman permits shall be $100. No fee shall be
required for permits issued to Borough employees for parking during
the regular course of business in Municipal Lot B. [Amended
11-26-2010 by Ord. No. 974; 11-22-2011 by Ord. No. 1000;
8-22-2014 by Ord. No. 1025; 11-25-2014 by Ord. No. 1034;
11-24-2015 by Ord. No. 1044; 11-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-13]
C. The lawful possession of a local business permit and the display of the
permit as herein directed in and upon the vehicle for which it is issued
shall authorize the parking of such vehicle within the period for which
154. Editor's Note: Former § 79-17, Reserved parking spaces, was repealed 6-27-1978 by Ord.
No. 519.
§ 79-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 79-18
1:695
§ 79-19. Time limitations; fees for commuters. [Amended
11-22-1966 by Ord. No. 426; 12-17-1968 by Ord. No. 445; 3-25-1980
by Ord. No. 546; 11-27-1990 by Ord. No. 671; 5-28-1996 by Ord. No.
761; 12-19-2006 by Ord. No. 920]
such permit shall be valid in any available parking machine space
within Municipal Lots A and B maintained by the Borough for which the
permit is issued as hereinbefore provided without depositing a coin in
the parking machine.
D. All permit fees are payable in full in advance and shall be collected by
the Borough Clerk who shall account therefor and pay the same over to
the Borough Treasurer as required by law. Every such permit shall be
valid only for the period and vehicle for which it is issued. No refund
may be had of all or any part of the fee paid for any permit for any
reason. No portion of any such lot or parking machine space shall be
deemed reserved for the parking of such vehicle nor shall any such
permit assure the holder thereof of the availability of any space for the
parking of any vehicle for which such permit may be valid.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, a local business
permit shall not be valid for the parking in Upper Commuter Lot 2
under the provisions of this article.
E. All applications for permits must be accompanied by the registration for
the vehicle for which the permit is requested to be issued. Other
evidence of residence or that the applicant is a bona fide local business
or employee of the same may be required if deemed necessary by the
Borough Clerk. A permit shall be issued which shall be placed upon the
lower left corner of the right rear window of the vehicle for which the
permit is issued; provided, however, that if such vehicle has no rear
window, the permit may be placed at such other place on the vehicle as
the Police Department shall direct which shall conform to the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 39:3-74. Said permit shall designate the year for which it
shall be in effect, the license number of the vehicle for which it is issued
and the legend "Resident Permit" or "Local Business Permit."
F. Where the owner of a vehicle for which a permit has been issued sells or
otherwise disposes of such vehicle and the permit issued for such
vehicle is in force and unexpired, the permit may be transferred to
another vehicle if the owner shall apply to the Borough Clerk for a
replacement of the original permit and submit the registration for the
substituted vehicle. Upon satisfaction of these requirements, the
Borough Clerk shall issue a replacement permit without charge, to be
affixed to the substitute vehicle as hereinbefore provided.
A. In the Upper Commuter Lot 2, parking shall be by permit only and only
during the hours from 6:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
B. In the Lower Commuter Lot 1 and Municipal Lot A and for machines
installed on public streets, the fee to be charged for parking during the
period that the parking machines are in effect shall be $6 for 14 hours.
§ 79-18 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 79-19
1:696
§ 79-20. Purchase of parking machines. [Amended 11-22-1966 by
Ord. No. 426; 1-25-1977 by Ord. No. 501; 12-19-2006 by Ord. No.
920]
The Borough shall purchase, lease, install, remove or revise the parking
machine metering system as the Mayor and Council shall from time to time,
pursuant to resolution, determine necessary or desirable to carry out its
purposes in furnishing controlled parking.
§ 79-21. Entrances and exits. [Amended 11-22-1966 by Ord. No.
426]
§ 79-22. Compliance with directional signs required.
All operators of vehicles using the parking lots established hereunder and
the entrances and exits thereto shall comply with all directional signs
painted on the pavement and posted in the area and with all of the
requirements of this article, and any violation thereof shall constitute a
violation of this article and shall be punishable as hereinafter provided.
§ 79-23. Truck parking.
All trucks over a one-and-one-half-ton capacity are prohibited from parking
in any of the lots established hereunder.
§ 79-24. Through traffic prohibited.
All through traffic is prohibited in the parking lots established hereunder,
and it shall be a violation of this article for any vehicle to be operated in, on,
or over said lots, except for the purpose of ingress to and egress from said
lots in connection with the use thereof in parking such vehicle.
§ 79-25. Damage to meters prohibited.
It shall be a violation of this article for any person to deface, damage,
tamper with, open, remove or willfully break, destroy or impair the
usefulness of any parking meter installed hereunder.
[Amended 4-23-2013 by Ord. No. 1019155; 2-28-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-01]
A. The driveways to Commuter Lot 1 are located on the west side of First
Street, and the more northerly driveway is hereby designated as the
entrance only, and the more southerly driveway is hereby designated as
the exit only.
B. The entrance and exit to Municipal Lot B shall only be from the
driveway located on Sycamore Avenue.
155. Editor's Note: This ordinance stated that the rate set forth therein would become effective
on 5-1-2013.
§ 79-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 79-26
1:697
§ 79-26. Deposit of slugs in meters prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to deposit, or cause to be deposited, any slug, device,
substance or metallic or other article other than a United States coin in any
parking meter.
§ 79-27. Enforcement.
The Police Department of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus shall enforce this
article, and the officer observing a violation shall make a record of such
violation, including the number of the parking meter designated for the
parking meter space where the violation occurred, the state license or
registration number of the vehicle, the date concerning overtime parking
and any other pertinent details.
§ 79-28. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-24-2004 by Ord. No.
885]
Unless another fine is expressly provided for by the New Jersey statutes,
every person convicted of a violation of a provision of this article or any
supplement thereto shall be liable for a fine of not more than $60 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 79-29. References to time.
All references in this article to time are to prevailing time.
§ 79-30. Severability.
The provisions of this article shall be severable, and if for any reasons any
section or provision hereof shall be determined to be unconstitutional or
invalid, the same shall not be held to affect any other section or provision
hereof.
§ 79-31. Repealer; when effective.
All ordinances and parts of ordinances or amendments or supplements
thereto, inconsistent with the provisions of this article, are repealed, and
this article shall take effect at the time and in the manner prescribed by law.
§ 79-26 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 79-31
1:698
ARTICLE IIA
Borough Hall Parking Lot
[Adopted 6-22-2010 by Ord. No. 965]
§ 79-31.1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH HALL PARKING LOT — The parking lot located directly behind
the Ho-Ho-Kus Borough Hall, located at 333 Warren Avenue, Ho-Ho-Kus,
New Jersey, and having entrances and exits from Sheridan Avenue and
Sycamore Avenue.
§ 79-31.2. Parking or standing prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to park or stand any motor vehicle in the Borough
Hall parking lot unless such person is engaged in municipal business at the
Borough Hall.
§ 79-31.3. Enforcement.
The Police Department of Ho-Ho-Kus shall enforce this article, and the
officer observing a violation shall make a record of such violation, including
the license plate or registration number of the vehicle, the date and time of
the violation and any other pertinent details.
§ 79-31.4. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by the New Jersey statutes,
every person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement
thereto shall be liable for a penalty of not more than $50 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 79-31.5. Repealer.
All other provisions of this chapter which are not affected by this article
are hereby ratified and confirmed and shall remain in full force and effect.
However, all ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent with
the provisions of this article are hereby repealed to the extent of such
inconsistency.
§ 79-31.6. Severability.
If any portion of this article is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate
the remainder of this article, but shall be confined in its effect to the
provision directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall
have been rendered.
§ 79-31.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 79-31.7
1:699
§ 79-31.7. When effective.
This article shall take effect after final passage and publication as required
by law.
§ 79-31.7 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 79-31.7
1:700
ARTICLE III
Fire Lanes
[Adopted 12-17-1985 by Ord. No. 592; amended in its entirety
2-23-1999 by Ord. No. 813]
§ 79-32. Designation of fire lanes; parking prohibited; enforcement.
§ 79-33. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding $200 or
imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both, in
the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge before whom such hearing shall
be had.
A. Fire lanes designated.
(1) The Fire Official, with the approval of the chief executive officer of
the Fire Department and Mayor and Council, may designate fire
lanes on private property to which the public is invited, or which is
devoted to public use, if it is necessary to provide safety for the
public or to provide proper access for the Fire Department
operations in the event of an emergency.
(2) A list of such designated fire lanes shall be maintained in the office
of the Fire Official.
B. Parking prohibited. The parking of motor vehicles in the area of any fire
lane described herein, or otherwise obstructing the fire lane, is hereby
prohibited at all times.
C. Enforcement. The provisions of this article may be enforced by the Fire
Official or his authorized designee or the Borough Police Department.
§ 79-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 79-33
1:701

ARTICLE IV
Handicapped Parking
[Adopted 2-15-2005 by Ord. No. 895]
§ 79-34. On-street handicapped parking spaces.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following onstreet
locations are designated as handicapped parking spaces. Such spaces
are for use by persons who have been issued special identification cards or
plates or placards by the Division of Motor Vehicles or a temporary placard
issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to park in
these spaces.
Street
Number of
Spaces Location
Ross Place [Added
6-27-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-07]
One 216 Ross Place
Warren Avenue156 One 333 Warren Avenue
§ 79-35. Off-street handicapped parking areas.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-1 and 39:4-197, the
following municipal off-street parking yards and Board of Education
property are designated as handicapped parking areas. Such places are for
use by persons who have been issued special identification cards, plates or
placards issued by the Motor Vehicles Commission or a temporary placard
issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to park in
these areas.
Property
Number of
Spaces Location
First Street Train Station
lot
Two As indicated on site plan
Borough Hall lot, 333
Warren Avenue
Three As indicated on site plan
Ho-Ho-Kus Public School,
70 Lloyd Road
Two As indicated on site plan
§ 79-36. Violations and penalties.
No person shall park in any such aforementioned restricted parking space
who has not been issued a special vehicle identification card by the Division
of Motor Vehicles pursuant to the provisions of Public Law 1949, Chapter
280, and Section 1 of Public Law 1977, Chapter 202.157 Any person parking
156. Editor's Note: This space was also added 6-27-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-07.
157. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 39:4-204 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.5, respectively.
§ 79-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 79-36
1:703
a motor vehicle in any restricted parking space without a special vehicle
identification card shall be liable to a fine of $250 for the first offense
and, for subsequent offenses, a fine of at least $250 and up to 90 days'
community service on such terms and in such form as the court shall deem
appropriate, or any combination thereof.
§ 79-36 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 79-36
1:704
Chapter 80
VOLUNTEER INCENTIVES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ambulance Corps — See. Ch. 3. Fire Department — See Ch. 25.
§ 79-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 79-36
1:705

ARTICLE I
Volunteer Incentive Program
[Adopted 8-20-2002 by Ord. No. 857]
§ 80-1. Program created.
A Volunteer Incentive Program (VIP) is hereby created to reward members
of the Ho-Ho-Kus Volunteer Fire Department and Volunteer Ambulance
Corps, Inc., for their loyal, diligent and devoted services to the residents of
the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
§ 80-2. Points for volunteer services.
Each active volunteer member shall be credited with points for volunteer
services provided to the Volunteer Fire Department/Ambulance Corps in
accordance with the schedules attached hereto158:
§ 80-3. Annual stipend. [Amended 8-26-2014 by Ord. No. 1030]
The annual stipend for each eligible member shall be up to $1,650 per year.
§ 80-4. Estimated cost. [Amended 8-26-2014 by Ord. No. 1030]
The estimated annual cost of the program has been calculated as follows:
not to exceed $1,650 per year for eligible members of the Volunteer Fire
Department and Volunteer Ambulance Corps., Inc.
§ 80-5. Status of organizations.
Nothing in this VIP program is intended to change the status of the
Volunteer Fire Department and/or Volunteer Ambulance Corps, it being
the intent and purpose herein that both organizations remain as volunteer
organizations by law.
§ 80-6. Employer-employee relationship.
Nothing in this VIP is intended to create an employer-employee relationship
between a volunteer firefighter or Ambulance Corps member and the
Borough.
§ 80-7. No entitlement to benefits.
Nothing in this VIP will entitle any volunteer firefighter or Ambulance Corps
member to any medical, pension or other like benefits provided by the
Borough to its employees.
A. Ho-Ho-Kus Volunteer Fire Department: Schedule A.
B. Ho-Ho-Kus Volunteer Ambulance Corps, Inc.: Schedule B.
158. Editor's Note: Said schedules are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 80-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-8
1:707
§ 80-8. Members serving both organizations.
Any person who is a member of both the Volunteer Fire Department and
Ambulance Corps will be eligible to earn points for services to both
organizations.
§ 80-9. Services performed during regular work hours.
An employee of the Borough who is also a volunteer firefighter and/or
Ambulance Corps member will not be entitled to earn points while
performing such volunteer services during regular work hours.
§ 80-10. When effective.
This article shall not take effect unless it is approved by the voters as a
public question at the next general election.159
159. Editor's Note: This article was approved by the voters at the general election held
November 5, 2002.
§ 80-8 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 80-10
1:708
ARTICLE II
Volunteer Fee Exemptions
[Adopted 6-23-2004 by Ord. No. 890]
§ 80-11. Intent. [Amended 2-26-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-20]
In recognition of the time and effort donated to the Borough and its citizens,
it is the intent of this article to exempt certain volunteers defined in § 80-12
from certain fees imposed by the Borough.
§ 80-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACTIVE MEMBER — A resident of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus who is an
active member in good standing in the Ho-Ho-Kus Volunteer Fire
Department, the Ho-Ho-Kus Volunteer Ambulance Corps, the Office of
Emergency Management, the Recreation Commission, the Shade Tree
Commission, the Zoning Board of Adjustment, the Planning Board, the
Library Board or the Board of Health. "Good standing" shall also include
current compliance with all municipal, federal and safety mandated
programs as may be applicable.[Amended 2-26-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-20]
FAMILY — An active volunteer member, his or her spouse and all natural or
adopted children under 21 years of age who are unmarried and permanently
occupying the same residence as an active volunteer member in the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
FEES — Those charges established by the governing body of Ho-Ho-Kus,
County of Bergen.
VOLUNTEERS — Includes all active members of the Ho-Ho-Kus Fire
Department, the Ho-Ho-Kus Volunteer Ambulance Corps, the Office of
Emergency Management, the Recreation Commission, the Shade Tree
Commission, the Zoning Board of Adjustment, the Planning Board, the
Library Board and the Board of Health who have satisfactorily completed
their probationary period, if applicable, and are in good standing either
within their respective organizations or their board or commission
memberships and whose property taxes or any receivables due to the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus are not in arrears.[Amended 2-26-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-20]
§ 80-13. Establishment of fee exemptions.
All qualified volunteers as described herein and their families shall be
entitled to the following benefits:
A. Exemption from the municipal portion of dog, cat and marriage
licenses.
§ 80-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-13
1:709
§ 80-14. Administration.
§ 80-15. Exclusions.
No exemptions shall be allowed for the following:
§ 80-16. Interpretation.
In the event any question or dispute arises under this article, the Mayor and
Council shall decide such matters, and their decision shall be final.
B. Exemption from the municipal portion of the fee for building permit
applications, fence permits and certificates of compliance/approval for
the volunteer's primary residence.
C. Exemption from the Borough Planning Board and Board of Adjustment
application fees.
A. Not later than January 10 of each calendar year, the Fire Chief of the
Ho-Ho-Kus Volunteer Fire Department, the Captain of the Ho-Ho-Kus
Volunteer Ambulance Corps, the Emergency Management Director, the
Chairpersons of the Zoning and Planning Boards, the Chairpersons of
the Recreation and Shade Tree Commissions, the Chairpersons of the
Library Board and Board of Health shall submit to the Borough Clerk a
list of all residents who meet the definition of an active member in good
standing and whose property taxes or any receivables due to the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus are not in arrears. Such list shall be updated on
a periodic basis by the volunteer organization or boards to add those
individuals who have completed their probationary status, as
applicable, or to delete individuals who have been removed from
membership or who no longer meet the criteria for active member
status. [Amended 2-26-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-20]
B. On a form provided by the Borough Clerk, each active member shall
provide information related to family status to assist municipal officials
to determine eligibility for the waiving of fees.
C. All active members and their families must comply with all registration
procedures and complete all application forms established by the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
A. Fees, licenses and permits associated with any for-profit activity.
B. Inclusion in programs when registration for a program is received after
the maximum registration has been reached.
C. Late fees or delinquent charges.
§ 80-13 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 80-16
1:710
Chapter 81
WATER AND WATER RATES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Illicit connections — See Ch. 31A.
Plumbing Code — See Ch. 44.
Sewers — See Ch. 56.
Stormwater control — See Ch. 66A.
§ 80-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-16
1:711

ARTICLE I
Distribution and Use Regulations; Payment of Water Rates160
[Adopted 10-24-1967 by Ord. No. 437]
§ 81-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CUSTOMER — The party contracting for service to a property as
hereinafter classified:
LICENSED OPERATOR — The licensee approved by the Department of
Environmental Protection, holding any local title, designation or job
description, who is on site at a system a significant amount of time, although
not necessarily full time, and who has active involvement in and is
responsible for the operation, maintenance and effectiveness of the system
and who holds a license equal or superior to that required for the
system.[Added 1-23-1990 by Ord. No. 651]
SERVICE LINE — A line used to supply a single customer only, and no
customer shall be supplied by more than one service line unless agreed
upon between the customer and the Department.
WATER COMMITTEE — Consists of the Councilman in charge of the Water
Department or the Councilman appointed as his deputy, the licensed water
operator and the Administrator. The Mayor is an ex officio member of the
Committee.[Amended 1-23-1990 by Ord. No. 651]
WATER DEPARTMENT or DEPARTMENT — The Department of Water
Supply of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, New Jersey.
§ 81-2. Applicability; administration.
A. A building under one roof and occupied as one business or residence.
A combination of buildings in one common enclosure, occupied by one
family or business.
B.
C. The one side of a double house, having a solid, vertical partition wall.
A building having more than one apartment, and using in common one
hall and one entrance.
D.
A building having a number of apartments or offices and using in
common one hall and one or more means of entrance. Where two or
more customers are supplied through a single service line, any violation
of the rules of the Department with reference to either or any of said
customers shall be deemed a violation as to all, and the Department
may take such action as could be taken if it were used by a single
customer.
E.
160. Editor's Note: For enumeration of fees and charges, see Article II of this chapter.
§ 81-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-2
1:713
§ 81-3. Users subject to rules and regulations.
Any customer receiving a supply of water for any purpose from the Water
Department shall be subject to rules and regulations as set forth herein or
subsequently adopted.
§ 81-4. Water Registrar.
A. The provisions of this article shall apply to water service furnished by
the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus through its Water Department, which
Department shall be under the direction and supervision of a Water
Committee.
B. The management and the affairs of the Water Department shall be
handled by the Water Committee, and said Water Committee shall make
such rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this article, as such
Committee shall from time to time adopt, subject to the approval of the
Borough Council.
C. Employees of the Water Department shall be appointed from time to
time as the Borough Council shall deem necessary for the proper
administration of said Water Department; and their salaries shall be in
such amount as shall be fixed by the Borough Council from time to time.
A. There shall be appointed by the Mayor, each year, subject to
confirmation by the Borough Council, a Water Registrar, who shall hold
office for a term of one year or until a successor shall have been
appointed and qualified.
B. The Water Registrar shall hold office until the first day of January and
shall thereafter be appointed for the term of one year. In case of
vacancy in said office, appointment shall be made for the unexpired
term.
C. The compensation of such Water Registrar shall be determined by the
Borough Council.
D. The Water Registrar shall be required to give a surety bond, for the safe
delivery of moneys collected by him, the amount of which shall be
established from time to time by the Borough Council.
E. The duties of the Water Registrar shall be to:
(1) Keep a record of all applications for water.
(2) Collect all moneys for tapping the water mains.
(3) Send out bills and collect all moneys due for water rent or that may
become due for or on account of the supply and distribution of
water.
§ 81-2 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 81-4
1:714
§ 81-5. Application for water and service connections.
(4) Render a statement monthly to the Borough Council of the finances
of the Department, with such additional information pertaining to
the operation of the Department, as the Council shall require.
(5) Deposit all moneys collected to the accounts of the Water
Department in a designated bank.
(6) Do and perform such further and other duties in connection with
the Water Department as the Water Committee or Borough Council
may from time to time direct.
A. Application for water supply or connections to existing mains shall be
made to the Water Registrar by the customer or his duly authorized
agent on blanks provided for the purpose, accompanied by remittance
in the amount estimated to cover all costs incident to said connections,
including the cost of the Borough street opening permit. The minimum
charges shall be: three-fourths-inch service line: $1,000; and the oneinch
service line: $2,500. If, however, the cost exceeds the estimated
amount, the customer shall be liable for the additional amount. If the
cost is less than the estimated amount, a refund shall be made for the
difference up to the minimum charge. [Amended 1-23-1990 by Ord.
No. 651; 12-21-1993 by Ord. No. 726; 3-25-2003 by Ord. No. 865]
B. Application for water to be used for building construction or other
special purpose, except on a lot or premises already supplied with
water by meter, shall be made by the customer or his authorized agent
on blanks furnished for that purpose. A fee shall be charged in
accordance with § 81-27A and B of the Code. [Amended 3-25-2003 by
Ord. No. 865]
C. Application for water for property outside the Borough limits shall be
made in accordance with this section and also will be evidenced by a
duly executed agreement. [Amended 1-23-1990 by Ord. No. 651]
D. Customers and their agents applying for water, whether it is for the
introduction of water or for the alteration and extension of the
arrangements for supplying the same, shall state fully and truly the
purpose for which water is required.
E. Upon receipt of such application, except as hereinbelow provided for,
the tapping of the main will be done and the service line from main to
curb, curb stopcock and curb box will be furnished and placed by the
Department or its agent at the customer's expense. The remainder of
the service connection from the curb to the dwelling will be placed at
the customer's/developer's expense upon written application to the
Water Registrar by the customer; such additional service connection
may be placed by the customer or his agent at his own expense;
provided, however, that if placed by the customer or his agent, it shall
conform to the specifications prescribed by the Water Department and
§ 81-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-5
1:715
the work shall be left uncovered until inspected by the Department,
which inspection will be made by the Department after it receives
a request to do so (twenty-four-hour notice minimum). Under no
condition will the water be turned on until this inspection is made and
approved. [Amended 1-23-1990 by Ord. No. 651]
F. The Department will not accept applications for service installations
between December 1 and March 15 unless the property owner agrees
to pay any additional cost that may be incurred due to weather
conditions during that period. [Amended 1-23-1990 by Ord. No.
651]
G. Water will be furnished for construction purposes, at the option of the
Water Department, by meter at regular rates or at flat rates established
by the Borough Council by resolution. Charges for construction,
installations, repairs, connections and other services performed by the
Water Department for applicants for water service shall be at cost as
determined by the Borough Council.
H. The Department will provide the location of the curb box and house
service line on request.
I. The Department will not permit cross-connections between private
water supplies and the Ho-Ho-Kus water system except in a manner
approved by the respective regulations of the State of New Jersey.
[Amended 1-23-1990 by Ord. No. 651]
J. At least two shutoff valves must be provided by the customer, one
immediately after the service line enters the buildings and the other on
the house side of the meter.
K. No connection of the service line shall be made with said distribution
system, nor shall any alteration, addition or extension be made in or to
any service line nor any device for drawing water be attached thereto,
except in a manner approved by the Department. All service lines
introducing water to a private property leading from a street pipe or
main must have a covering of at least four feet to protect the same from
frost.
L. The service line from the curb stopcock to and into the building sought
to be supplied with water shall be laid in a manner approved by the
Department, and no service line shall be covered until the duly
authorized agent of the Department has approved the laying of such
line and all connection therein by a written certificate, in addition to
any plumbing subcode inspections which may be required. All
excavations made in sidewalks for the laying of said service line shall
comply with Chapter 58, Article II, Street Openings and Excavations;
Pavement Cuts. [Amended 1-23-1990 by Ord. No. 651]
M. When the customer has his service line and plumbing completed and
ready for the installation of the water meter, he shall notify the
§ 81-5 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 81-5
1:716
§ 81-6. Property on customer's premises. [Amended 1-23-1990 by
Ord. No. 651]
§ 81-7. Interference with Department property.
Department before a certificate of occupancy can be issued. [Amended
1-23-1990 by Ord. No. 651]
N. Every customer shall determine, at his own risk, the check valves
necessary for him to install in his plumbing and connections. Neither
the Department nor the Borough will be responsible for injury to person
or property because of excessive pressure.
O. No explosives of any nature whatsoever shall be stored or used for any
purpose within 50 feet of any of the mains or appurtenances of the
water supply or distribution system of the Borough without first
obtaining written permission from the Department.
A. The customer's piping system must comply with the rules and
regulations of the Borough and the State of New Jersey in regards to
water and plumbing.
B. The Department shall have the right of access to the customer's
premises and to all property furnished by it, at reasonable times, for the
purpose of reading meters or inspection or replacing appliances used in
connection with the supply or service or for the removal of its property
at the time service is to be terminated. The customer shall obtain or
cause to be obtained all necessary permits needed by the Department
in giving access to the appliances referred to. Customers shall not
permit access to the meter and other appliances of the Department
except by authorized employees of the Department or properly qualified
state or local inspectors.
C. When a customer requires the service of the Department's employee
after regularly scheduled working hours and the service required was
not deemed to have been the Department's responsibility, the customer
shall be charged a minimum rate of $100. [Amended 12-21-1993 by
Ord. No. 726; 3-25-2003 by Ord. No. 865]
A. Stopcocks at the curbline and in branch service are for exclusive use of
the Department and attention is directed to N.J.S.A. 2A:170-63.161
B. Water shall be turned on and admitted into the premises of customers
only by the Water Superintendent or by someone under his direction.
When the supply of water shall have been cut off for any purpose
(except for repairs not chargeable to the consumers), it shall not be
turned on again until all arrears for rentals and such other charges,
including the fee for turning the water on, as determined by the
Borough Council, shall have been paid.
161. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 2A:170-63 was repealed by P.L. 1978, c. 95.
§ 81-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-8
1:717
§ 81-8. Meters.
§ 81-9. Meter charges. [Amended 1-23-1990 by Ord. No. 651]
§ 81-10. Location of meters.
§ 81-11. Meter tests and adjustments.
A. All premises supplied with water shall be equipped with a meter, and,
thereafter, all charges for the use of water through such services shall
be based upon the meter rates as established herein.
B. No meter shall be required for fire service.
C. All new construction shall have installed remote meters. Any customer
who currently has a meter may have a remote installed on his premises
at the customer's expense. [Added 1-23-1990 by Ord. No. 651;
amended 12-21-1993 by Ord. No. 726]
(1) Five-eighths-inch and three-fourths-inch meter: $65.
(2) One-inch meter: $120.
(3) In the case of installation of meters greater than one inch, the
customer or builder is required to purchase the meter for the
dwelling at the prevailing cost of a new meter with radio read.
[Amended 3-25-2003 by Ord. No. 865162]
A. The Department will, without charge, furnish each customer supplied
with water on a measured basis with a five-eighths-inch meter and
three-fourths-inch couplings and will keep the same in repair, except in
case of misuse or damage by frost, hot water or external causes, in
which case the expenses of repair must be borne by the customer.
B. If larger than five-eighths-inch meter is required, special arrangements
must be made with the Department. The Department will install said
meter at the expense of the customer, the charge for which shall be
fixed by the Borough Council.
A. All meters hereafter placed in buildings shall be located in the cellar or
first floor, as near as possible to the point of entrance of the service, in a
clean, dry, safe place, not subject to great variation in temperature, so
located as to be easily accessible for installation or disconnection and
for reading.
B. Meters must not be placed in an improper position, difficult to access.
The proposed location of each meter must be inspected and approved
by the Department before the meter will be set.
162. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection C(4) and (5), concerning
fees for meters over one inch, which immediately followed this subsection.
§ 81-8 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 81-11
1:718
§ 81-12. Bills; metered service.
A. The Department will make a test of the accuracy of a meter upon
request of a customer, once within a calendar year. If additional tests
are requested, they will be at the expense of the customer at the rate of
$50 per test. A report giving the result of such tests will be made to the
customer, and a record of such tests will be kept. [Amended
1-23-1990 by Ord. No. 651; 3-25-2003 by Ord. No. 865]
B. (Reserved)163
C. No water meter shall be placed in service if on test it registers more
than 103% of the water passed or less than 97% of full capacity.
D. In case of a disputed account involving a question as to the accuracy of
a meter, such meter will be tested upon the request of the customer,
unless there has been an obvious waste of water by accident or neglect
of plumbing. In the event that the meter so tested is found to have an
error in the registration in excess of 3%, the bills will be corrected
accordingly.
E. When water is furnished by meter, the quantity recorded by it shall be
taken to be the amount passing the meter, except where the meter has
been found to be registering inaccurately or has ceased to register. In
such cases, the quantity may be determined by the average registration
of the meter when in order or by such fair and reasonable method as
shall be based upon the best information obtainable. Where excessive
leakage involving loss of water over $10 has been found, adjustment
may be made. [Amended 1-23-1990 by Ord. No. 651]
A. Bills for service and water shall be rendered quarterly and shall show
the readings of the meter at the beginning and end of the period for
which the bill is rendered. [Amended 1-23-1990 by Ord. No. 651]
B. When a bill is rendered a second time covering a period for which a bill
has been rendered, the period shall be clearly stated on the bill.
C. Where access to meters cannot be had, the Registrar may bill the
amount charged for the corresponding quarter of the preceding year or
for the period corresponding to that for which access is impossible, and,
in such cases, the amount paid will be treated as credit, the amount due
being determined by the next meter reading. Estimated bills rendered
under this clause shall indicate the fact that the same are estimated.
The Registrar may also use this procedure of billing on alternative
quarters as may be determined by the Water Committee. At no time
may a customer be estimated more than two quarters in a row. Where a
reading cannot be obtained for the third quarter, water will be
discontinued until such reading is provided. [Amended 1-23-1990 by
Ord. No. 651]
163. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, regarding periodical tests, was repealed 1-23-1990 by
Ord. No. 651.
§ 81-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-13
1:719
§ 81-13. Penalties for delayed payments. [Amended 12-21-1993 by
Ord. No. 726]
Customers failing to pay charges for water furnished, for installation of
service lines, for repair to services, or meters or other charges as set forth
herein within 30 days after the bill is rendered will be required to pay,
in addition thereto, a penalty of 10%. In case any water rent or rents
or other charges shall remain unpaid and in arrears for six months, the
Water Registrar shall file with the Tax Collector a statement showing such
arrearages, and they shall be collected and enforced by the Tax Collector in
the same manner as liens for taxes are enforced and collected.
§ 81-14. Responsibility for payment.
A. Customers will be held responsible for all charges accruing for water
service until written notice has been given to the Water Registrar to
discontinue the service.
B. If a bill remains unpaid for a period of over 60 days after mailing or
presentation, notice will be served on or mailed to the customer that,
unless the bill is paid within seven days from the date of such notice,
the water supply will be discontinued. When the water is turned off
under such conditions, it will remain off until the amount owing is paid
in full with interest and turnoff charges or until arrangements for
payment satisfactory to the Registrar have been made. If necessary to
call at the premises after such seven-day notice, a charge will be made
to cover the cost of the call, the amount of which shall be fixed by the
Borough Council. [Amended 1-23-1990 by Ord. No. 651]
C. The owner or owners of any store, house, building, buildings or
premises shall be and are liable for the payment of the water supply,
service charge and interest charges. The failure to pay for such water
supply, service charge and interest charges shall constitute and become
a lien upon such store, house, building, buildings or premises until such
charges shall have been paid and satisfied, and the Borough Council
may direct said premises to be sold to satisfy such lien, in the manner as
provided for by law.
D. Customers desiring the discontinuance of water supply shall give
written notice thereof, of at least five days, to the Water Registrar,
which notice must state whether the discontinuance is to be temporary,
or more or less permanent Until such notice is received by the Water
Registrar, water shall be charged for at the prescribed rate. For a
temporarily discontinued water supply where the meter remains on the
customer's premises or for a more or less permanent discontinuance
where the meter is removed from the customer's premises, a charge
shall be made against and be paid for by the customer, the amount of
which shall be fixed by the Borough Council.
§ 81-13 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 81-15
1:720
§ 81-15. Complaints. [Amended 1-23-1990 by Ord. No. 651]
Complaints with regard to the service furnished or the reading of meters
or the bills rendered shall be made to the Registrar in writing, and the
Registrar shall keep a record of the same.
§ 81-16. Plumbing rules and regulations.
§ 81-17. General rules.
A. No person except the licensed operator or his duly authorized agent of
the Department shall be allowed, under any circumstances, to tap the
mains or service lines or insert stopcocks therein. [Amended
1-23-1990 by Ord. No. 651]
B. Service lines from the curb cock to the meter are the property of the
customer and must be maintained by him.
C. House boilers should be provided with valves in new work, and when
old boilers are taken out and replaced by others, a stopcock to shut off
the supply must be installed. [Amended 1-23-1990 by Ord. No. 651]
D. Whenever repairs or renewals arising from any cause whatsoever are
necessary to a service line:
(1) From main to and including curb box, such repairs or renewals
shall be made by and at the expense of the Department, unless due
to the action of the customer or his agent, servant or employee,
including the tampering with a curb shutoff cock, in which case, it
will be made at the expense of the customer. [Amended
1-23-1990 by Ord. No. 651]
(2) From curb box to meter or other appliances or equipment, such
repairs or renewals shall be made at the expense of the property
owner.
E. It shall be the duty of every customer having notice or knowledge of
leaks in service lines to and on his premises or those occupied by him or
under his control forthwith to notify the Department. Such additional
metered usage will be the sole responsibility of the customer until
reported to the Registrar for inspections. [Amended 1-23-1990 by
Ord. No. 651]
A. All pipes, meters and fixtures shall be subject at all reasonable hours to
inspection by employees of the Department, identified by proper
badges or written permits. No water fixture will be considered cut off
until it is disconnected so that it cannot be used again or until sealed in
a manner satisfactory to the Department. No plumber, customer or
other unauthorized person shall turn the water on or off at any curb or
stopcock or disconnect or remove the meter without the consent of the
Department.
§ 81-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-17
1:721
B. No agent or employee of the Department shall have authority to bind it
by any promises, agreement or representation not provided for in these
rules.
C. All use of water other than by the customer or for any purpose or upon
any premises not stated or described in the application must be
prevented by him. The customer will be liable for the amount of water
used in conformity with the schedule of rates or tariffs of the
Department.
D. Customer's service may be discontinued for any of the following
reasons:
(1) For the use of water for any other property or purposes than that
described in the application.
(2) Under the flat-rate service, for addition to such property or fixtures
or increase in the use to be made of water supply without notice to
the Department.
(3) For willful waste of water through improper or imperfect pipes,
fixtures or otherwise.
(4) For failure to maintain in good order connections, service lines or
fixtures owned by the customer.
(5) For tampering with any service line, meter, curb, stopcock or seal
or any other appliances of the Department.
(6) In case of vacancy of premises.
(7) For neglecting to make or renew advance payments or for
nonpayments of water service or any other charges accruing under
the application.
(8) For refusal of access at reasonable hours to property for purposes
of inspecting or for reading, caring for or removing meters.
E. Water will be turned off from any premises upon the written order of
the customer without in any way affecting the existing agreement for
service.
F. Service will be renewed under a proper application when the conditions
under which service was discontinued are corrected and upon the
payment of all proper charges provided in the schedule of rates or
tariffs of the Department due from the customer.
G. As necessity may arise, in case of breakdown, emergency or for any
other unavoidable causes, the Department may temporarily discontinue
the water supply to make necessary repairs, connections, etc., using all
reasonable and practicable measures to notify the customers of such
discontinuance. In such case, the Department will not be liable for any
damage or inconvenience suffered. All persons having boilers within
§ 81-17 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 81-17
1:722
§ 81-18. Fire hydrants.
their premises not supplied by a tank or cistern are hereby cautioned
against collapse.
H. The Department undertakes only to use reasonable care and diligence
to provide a constant supply of water through its pipes but does not
undertake to render any special service or to maintain any fixed or
definite quantity or pressure, and, in the event of the occurrence of any
break, failure or accident, the Department shall not be liable for any
damage resulting therefrom.
I. The Department reserves the right to decrease or limit the quantity of
water used whenever in the judgment of the Department it is necessary
or expedient to do so.
J. The Borough Council may, by resolution, whenever in its judgment the
necessity shall exist, restrict the use of water to certain hours, days or
areas of the Borough and, upon the passing of such resolution and
notice thereof, it shall be unlawful to use any water in such areas for the
restricted purposes except during such periods. In the event that the
Borough Council is not in session, the power to restrict the use of water
shall be exercised by the Mayor or his duly authorized agent.
[Amended 1-23-1990 by Ord. No. 651]
K. Any person wishing to install an underground water sprinkling system
for lawns, shrubs or other vegetation on any property shall, prior to
installation, apply for a permit therefor to the Ho-Ho-Kus plumbing
subcode office and pay a fee of $20. If such installation, partially or
otherwise, shall be made in the public easement (right-of-way
easement, sewer, water or other types of municipal easements), the
application shall so note. All such installations in public easements are
subject to removal by the Borough in the event that the public easement
area shall be required for other authorized public purposes and
installations or to maintain existing public installations, such as, but not
by way of limitation, water service lines, sewer lines, drainage pipes
and like installations. In the event of such removal by the Borough, the
cost of removal shall be charged against the property owner. The
restoration of surface conditions shall be optional with the Borough,
and, if completed by the Borough, the cost of such restoration shall also
be charged against the property owner, unless otherwise provided by
law or prior separate easement agreement. [Added 10-24-1989 by
Ord. No. 647]
A. No person, unless authorized by the Department, shall take water from
any public fire hydrant or hose plug except for fire purposes or for the
use of the Fire Department, and no public fire hydrant shall be used for
sprinkling the streets, flushing sewers or gutters or for any other than
fire purposes without a permit from the Department.
§ 81-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-18
1:723
§ 81-19. Private fire service.
§ 81-20. Extension of water mains.
B. No person, firm or corporation shall fill in around any fire hydrant,
allow any accumulation around the same or in any other manner
interfere with proper and immediate access to the same for fire
protection purposes.
C. No customer or other person shall suffer, permit or allow any such
interference with access to any such hydrant.
A. Applications for water connections and supply for fire protection
service shall be made in writing to the Water Registrar, which shall
include the appropriate drawings and description of work. Said
application must be approved by the licensed water operator before the
permit may be issued. [Amended 1-23-1990 by Ord. No. 651]
B. Connections for private fire service will be installed by the customer
under the supervision of the Department. The size of the connection
shall, in every case, be at least two inches smaller in diameter than the
supplying main, but in no case shall exceed six inches. [Amended
1-23-1990 by Ord. No. 651]
C. Connections may be used jointly for fire service and domestic purposes,
provided that the piping for the two services is separated immediately
inside the building. Where an independent supply is owned or
maintained for fire protection, there shall be no connection between it
and the public water supply. Where an independent supply is used, the
fire service from the mains shall discharge into either a cistern, an
elevated tank at or above the flow line or a sprinkler system. The
domestic supply will be metered. No meter will be required for the fire
service supply unless it is found that unauthorized use is being made of
the supply in which case the Department reserves the right to install a
meter in a housing provided by the customer.
D. No water shall be used through the fire service supply except for
testing purposes and in case of fires. When seals are broken for any
other purpose, a charge will be made for resealing. [Amended
1-23-1990 by Ord. No. 651]
E. A yearly charge will be made for each fire service connection as
determined by the Borough Council.
A. Applications for extensions of water mains must be made to the
Borough Council, in writing, by interested property owners and be
accompanied by a deposit of $300. [Amended 1-23-1990 by Ord. No.
651; 3-25-2003 by Ord. No. 865]
B. The cost of extensions of water mains on public streets of the Borough
may be assessed as street improvements.
§ 81-18 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 81-20
1:724
§ 81-21. Rates and charges. [Amended 10-27-1970 by Ord. No. 457;
11-25-1975 by Ord. No. 491; 11-28-1978 by Ord. No. 528; 5-26-1981
by Ord. No. 555; 2-25-1986 by Ord. No. 594; 3-28-1989 by Ord. No.
640; 1-23-1990 by Ord. No. 651; 2-20-1990 by Ord. No. 653;
10-22-1991 by Ord. No. 687]
§ 81-22. Repealer; when effective.164 [Amended 1-23-1990 by Ord.
No. 651]
C. The cost for the extension of any mains for the purpose of a new
dwelling, subdivision, etc., shall be the responsibility of the owner or
developer, as is the construction of the same as described in the
approved plats or drawings, under the approval of the Mayor and
Council or their duly authorized agents. [Added 1-23-1990 by Ord.
No. 651]
A. Effective January 1, 2019, all water taken or consumed shall be charged
to consumers at the following rates: [Amended 12-21-1993 by Ord.
No. 726; 3-25-2003 by Ord. No. 865; 12-19-2006 by Ord. No. 921;
3-24-2009 by Ord. No. 951; 5-25-2010 by Ord. No. 963; 2-28-2012
by Ord. No. 1005; 2-26-2013 by Ord. No. 1016; 11-27-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-11]
(1) $6.25 per 1,000 gallons, with a minimum charge of $50 per quarter,
or any part thereof.
(2) For water usage over the minimum, the following chart will apply:
Gallons
Rate Per
1,000 Gallons Amount
Minimum 8,000 $6.25 $50
Next 12,000 $6.25
Next 20,000 $6.868
Next 40,000 $7.898
Over 80,000 $9.478
B. All other charges or fees of the Water Department shall be established
by the Mayor and Council, by resolution, as deemed necessary from
time to time.
A. Any inconsistency between the provisions herein or the provisions of
any other ordinance or ordinances is hereby repealed to the extent of
the inconsistency.
B. This article shall become effective upon passage, adoption and
publication as required by law.
164. Editor's Note: Former § 81-22, Violations and penalties, was removed as having been
superseded by § 1-16 of the Code.
§ 81-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-23
1:725
§ 81-23. through § 81-24. (Reserved)165
165. Editor's Note: Former § 81-23, Severability, was removed as having been superseded by
§ 1-12 of the Code. Former § 81-24, Repealer; when effective, was renumbered as § 81-22
1-23-1990 by Ord. No. 651.
§ 81-23 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 81-23
1:726
ARTICLE II
Fees and Charges
[Adopted 10-24-1967]
§ 81-25. Rates established.
Be it resolved by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus that,
pursuant to Article I of this chapter, the following charges and fees are
hereby established for the Department of Water Supply of the Borough of
Ho-Ho-Kus, to take effect immediately and to remain in effect until further
action of the Mayor and Council.
§ 81-26. Hydrant service.
§ 81-27. Building construction. [Amended 1-23-1990 by Ord. No.
651; 12-21-1993 by Ord. No. 726; 3-25-2003 by Ord. No. 865]
§ 81-28. General construction and contracting. [Amended
12-21-1993 by Ord. No. 726; 3-25-2003 by Ord. No. 865]
Unmetered service shall be charged at the rate of $100 per month or
portion thereof.
§ 81-29. Charges not involving use of water.
A. Other than to the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, each hydrant: $50 quarterly.
[Amended 1-23-1990 by Ord. No. 651; 3-25-2003 by Ord. No.
865]
B. Fire service connection (sprinkler line). Each fire service connection:
$125 annually. [Amended 1-23-1990 by Ord. No. 651; 3-25-2003 by
Ord. No. 865]
C. No water shall be used except for tests and in case of fire. The charges
for resealing will be at cost.
A. Permits from the Water Department for use of water during
construction shall be issued for a period not to exceed 90 days for a fee
of $100 per premises. Extensions of such permits may be secured on
like terms upon payment of an additional fee of $75 for each ninety-day
extension period or fraction thereof.
B. Where such use of water is metered, it will be charged at rates
established by Article I of this chapter, with a minimum fee of $100.
A. Resumption of service after discontinuance due to nonpayment of bills
or violation of Article I of this chapter or for calls to premises served as
provided under § 81-7B of Article I of this chapter: $25. [Amended
1-23-1990 by Ord. No. 651; 3-25-2003 by Ord. No. 865]
§ 81-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-29
1:727
B. Removing and replacing meters within a period of one year at the
request of the customer: $50. [Amended 1-23-1990 by Ord. No. 651;
3-25-2003 by Ord. No. 865]
C. Discontinuance of water service. [Amended 1-23-1990 by Ord. No.
651]
(1) Temporary, where the meter remains on the customer's premises:
$20 quarterly. [Amended 3-25-2003 by Ord. No. 865]
(2) Permanent, where the meter is removed: $35.
D. Meter charges. The cost of installing a five-eighths-inch meter shall be
made at cost (as set forth under Subsection E, Labor, materials and
equipment, below), except that the five-eighths-inch meter and three
four-inch couplings will be furnished without charge. Meters in excess
of 5/8 of an inch will be charged for the cost in excess of that of a fiveeighths-
inch meter.
E. Labor, materials and equipment. Where Article I of this chapter
provides, the customer shall be charged the current cost, inclusive of all
factors, of construction, installations, repairs, connections and other
services performed by the Water Department.
F. Where any water service line or main is installed by the customer or a
private contractor, a fee equal to that of the Borough's Plumbing
Inspector will be charged to cover time spent for a Water Department
Supervisor to supervise and make inspections as required. [Added
3-25-2003 by Ord. No. 865]
G. Missed appointments. Where a customer or his duly authorized agent
makes an appointment for reading the water meter and fails to keep the
appointment, a fee of $10 shall be charged. [Added 3-25-2003 by
Ord. No. 865]
§ 81-29 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 81-29
1:728
ARTICLE III
Water Emergency
[Adopted 12-19-1989 by Ord. No. 649]
§ 81-30. Declaration of water emergency.
§ 81-31. Water use restrictions.
Upon adoption by the governing body of a resolution declaring that a water
emergency exists in the municipality in accordance with § 81-30 of this
article, all citizens shall be urged to observe voluntary indoor conservation
measures, and any of the following water use restrictions shall be imposed
and shall be applicable to all residents and tenants, except where a bona
fide health emergency exists and to exempt businesses, as specified herein,
during the water emergency.
A. Whenever the governing body shall be satisfied and finds that a water
emergency exists in the municipality, it may adopt a resolution
declaring that a water emergency exists in the municipality. Such
resolution shall be adopted by the governing body at any regular,
special, adjourned or emergency public meeting of the governing body.
Such resolution shall identify that portion of the municipality affected
by the water emergency, which may include the entire municipality and
shall specify which of the water use regulations contained in § 81-31 of
this article is being imposed as well as any exemptions as may be
authorized. Such resolution shall be effective immediately upon
publication according to law and shall continue in effect for 90 days,
unless extended or repealed as set forth in § 81-32 of this article.
B. For the purpose of this section, a water emergency shall exist if, for any
of the following reasons:
(1) The Water Department providing water service to all or a portion of
the municipality has notified the municipality, the New Jersey
Board of Public Utilities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, as well as any other state, county of
local agency entitled to notice that an emergency exists, and has
recommended such restrictions for handling the emergency; or
(2) The governing authority is otherwise satisfied that a water
emergency exists in the municipality.
A. The complete ban and prohibition of outside water usage, including the
watering of lawns and plants, the filling of pools and the washing of
cars;
B. Outside water usage on alternate days, allowing outside water usage by
persons or businesses having even house or box numbers on even days
and those having odd house or box numbers on odd days, with outside
water usage being completely banned and prohibited on the 31st day of
any month during the water emergency; or
§ 81-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-31
1:729
§ 81-32. Duration of water use restrictions.
The resolution of the governing body required by § 81-30 of this article
shall, in addition to complying with § 81-30, provide a period of time during
which the water use restrictions imposed shall be applicable and which
shall be no longer than reasonably necessary to abate the water emergency
under the circumstances considering the nature and extent of the water
emergency. At the expiration of the time period specified in the resolution,
the water use restriction shall lapse and be inapplicable and unenforceable.
If the governing body shall be satisfied that the water emergency has been
abated prior to the expiration of the time period specified in the resolution,
it shall adopt a resolution declaring the water emergency ended and the
water use restrictions inapplicable. If, at the expiration of the time period
specified in the resolution, the governing body shall be satisfied that the
water emergency continues to exist, it may adopt a resolution in accordance
with the requirements of this article continuing the water use restrictions.
§ 81-33. Enforcement of water use restrictions. [Amended
10-25-2011 by Ord. No. 998]
The water use restrictions imposed pursuant to this article shall be enforced
during a water emergency by the local authorized official. Whenever a local
authorized official shall find a violation of the water use restrictions, such
authorized official shall give the violator a written warning for the first
violation and explain the penalties in writing for a second, third and fourth
offense, as provided herein and by § 81-34 of this article. In the case of
the first written warning, there shall be no fee. In the case of a second
written warning, there will be a fee of $100 imposed on the violator. The
written warning shall be served upon the violator either personally or by
certified mail, return receipt requested. The local authorized official shall
keep on file a proof of service for each such written warning, as well
as other records as may be reasonable and necessary for the purpose of
determining the persons and businesses who have been warned upon a first
and second offense. The local authorized official is hereby empowered to
write summonses for the violation of the water use restrictions imposed
pursuant to this article.
C. Any other water use restriction specified by the governing body in the
resolution required by § 81-30 of this article which is reasonable under
the circumstances considering the nature and extent of the water
emergency. Any water restriction imposed pursuant to this section shall
be limited in application to that portion of the municipality, which may
include the entire municipality, identified as being affected by the water
emergency in the resolution of the governing body adopted in
accordance with § 81-30 of this article.
§ 81-31 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 81-34
1:730
§ 81-34. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-25-2003 by Ord. No.
865; 8-23-2011 by Ord. No. 994; 10-25-2011 by Ord. No. 998]
After a first and second violation in accordance with § 81-33 of this article,
any person or business who thereafter violates the water use restrictions
imposed pursuant to this article shall be subject to the penalties set forth
in this section. For a third offense, the violator shall have his/its water
supply service discontinued, and such water supply shall not be turned on
unless and until such person or business pays a fee of $250. For a fourth
and subsequent offense, the violator shall have his/its water supply service
discontinued, and the water supply shall not be turned on unless and until
such person or business pays a fee of $250. In addition, for a fourth and
subsequent offense, there shall be a fine of up to $1,000 or imprisonment
for 30 days, or both. The Water Superintendent, any police officer or any
employee of the Department of Public Works is hereby designated as an
authorized official to enforce this article. If necessary, the fees and/or
penalties herein may be collected pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement Law
of 1999, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq.
§ 81-35. Severability.
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision of this article
shall be adjudged invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to the section,
paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision invalidated, and the remainder
of this article shall be valid and enforceable.
§ 81-36. Repealer.
All ordinances and resolutions or parts thereof inconsistent with this article
are hereby repealed.
§ 81-37. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon passage and publication as provided by
law.
§ 81-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-37
1:731
Chapter 82
WILDLIFE FEEDING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Prohibited animals — See Ch. 5.
§ 82-1. Purpose.
This chapter prohibits the feeding of unconfined wildlife in any public park
or on any other property owned or operated by the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus
so as to protect public health, safety and welfare and prescribes penalties
for failure to comply.
§ 82-2. Definitions; word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein, unless their use
in the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
"Feeding" does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated.
§ 82-3. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned
or operated by the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, any wildlife, excluding confined
wildlife (for example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or rehabilitation
centers) or unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers, or
create any condition which results in a congregation of wildlife on public
property which:
A. Results in an accumulation of waterfowl, feces or droppings;
B. Results in damage to flora, fauna or public property or safety or
welfare;
C. Results in a threat or nuisance to the public health, safety or welfare;
or
§ 81-37 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 82-3
1:732
§ 82-4. Enforcement; dispersal and removal of wildlife.
§ 82-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000.
§ 82-6. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this chapter is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this chapter to be
unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause or reason shall not affect
any other portion of this chapter.
§ 82-7. Repealer.
Former Chapter 82, entitled "Waterfowl," to the extent inconsistent with the
terms hereof, is hereby repealed. All other ordinances of this Borough, or
parts thereof, which are in conflict with this chapter are hereby repealed to
the extent of such conflict.
§ 82-8. When effective.
This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption and
any publication as may be required by law.
D. Results in a threat to the health, safety or welfare of said wildlife.
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department and/or Health
Officer of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
B. Whenever the Health Officer becomes aware that a congregation or
congestion of wildlife exists on public property, he may disperse or
remove them by any lawful means. However, before such dispersal or
removal takes place, the Health Officer shall meet and confer with the
Board of Health and, with its advice and consent, determine the
appropriate method, considering first the health, safety and welfare of
the citizens of Ho-Ho-Kus and second the health, safety and welfare of
the wildlife.
C. Whenever the Health Officer, in his sound discretion, determines that
wildlife shall be dispersed by scare tactics or noise tactics, he may
request assistance for the implementation of the plan from the Police
Department and/or Public Works Department or from any responsible
citizen or citizens. This subsection shall not be construed to authorize
any private citizen to discharge any firearm or use any device which
launches a projectile of any type. It shall be used in a reasonable way
respecting the rights of surrounding houses from excessive noise levels.
D. The Health Officer shall apply for and secure all permits necessary by
law before dispersing or removing the wildlife.
§ 82-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-8
1:733
Chapter 83
(RESERVED)
Chapter 85
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Development fees — See Ch. 17.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 27.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 32A.
Land subdivision and site plan review — See
Ch. 32B.
Official Map — See Ch. 39.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 47.
Uniform Construction Code
Department — See Ch. 77.
§ 82-8 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 82-8
1:734
ARTICLE I
Title and Purpose
§ 85-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus."
§ 85-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a pattern for the use of land
based upon the Comprehensive Master Plan for the Borough of Ho-Ho-
Kus. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the
public health, safety, morals and general welfare. Among other purposes,
such provisions are intended to secure safety from fire, flood, panic and
other natural and man-made disasters; to provide adequate light, air and
open space; to ensure that development does not conflict with the
development and general welfare of neighboring municipalities; to avoid
undue concentrations of population by regulation and limiting of use of
land and the height and bulk of buildings wherever erected; to promote
a desirable visual environment through reasonable civic design and
arrangements; to promote the conservation of open space and valuable
natural resources and to prevent urban sprawl and degradation of the
environment through improper or unreasonable use of land; to regulate and
restrict the location, construction and use of buildings, structures and the
use of land; to regulate and determine the area and dimensions of yards
and other open spaces for buildings hereafter erected; and to divide the
Borough into districts, with a view to conserving the value of property and
encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the Borough of
Ho-Ho-Kus. This chapter establishes a Comprehensive Zoning Plan and Map
for the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus and implements the Land Use Element of the
Ho-Ho-Kus Master Plan, repealing Chapter 86, Zoning, of the Code of the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, as amended and supplemented.
§ 85-3. Scope.
It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way
impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances.
Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings
or premises or upon the height of buildings or premises or lot coverage or
requires greater lot area or larger yards, courts or other open spaces than
are imposed or required by such existing provisions of law or ordinance or
by such rules, regulations or permits or by such private restrictions, the
provisions of this chapter shall control.
§ 85-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-3
1:735

ARTICLE II
Establishment of Districts; Map
§ 85-4. Designation of districts. [Amended 12-11-1985 by Ord. No.
589]
The Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus is hereby divided into the following types of
zoning districts:
R-1 Single-Family Residential District
R-2 Single-Family Residential District
R-2A Single-Family Residential District [Added 4-25-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-04]
R-3 Single-Family Residential District
R-4 Two-Family Residential District
R-5 Planned Residential Townhouse District
MF-AH Multifamily Affordable Housing District [Added 9-26-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-11]
GB General Business District
GB-IR General Business/Inclusionary Residential District [Added
9-26-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-13]
IP-1 Industrial Park District I
IP-2 Industrial Park District II
§ 85-5. Zoning Map; Schedule of Requirements.
The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on the
map entitled "Zoning Map of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus,"166 dated October
1980, as may be subsequently revised, and the "Schedule of
Requirements"167 summarizing the required conditions for each district
above is hereby made part of this chapter.
§ 85-6. Interpretation of boundaries.
In determining the boundaries of districts shown on the Zoning Map, the
following rules shall apply:
A. Unless otherwise shown, the district boundaries shall be construed to
coincide with the center lines of streets, highways, waterways, railroad
rights-of-way, or such lines extended.
B. Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following lot or
property lines as they exist at the time of enactment of this chapter or
any district change, such lines shall be construed to be the boundaries.
166. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Borough offices.
167. Editor's Note: Said Schedule of Requirements is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 85-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-6
1:737
C. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the full and complete
powers to hear and decide requests for interpretation of this chapter or
any term, clause, sentence or word hereof and the Zoning Map.
§ 85-6 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-6
1:738
ARTICLE III
Terminology
§ 85-7. Word usage; definitions.
A. Word usage. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms
shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings herein
indicated. Words used in the present tense include the future; the
singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular; the
word "person" includes a corporation as well as an individual; the word
"lot" includes the word "plot"; the word "dwelling" includes the word
"residence." The term "occupied" or "used" as applied to any building
shall be construed as though followed by the words "or intended,
arranged, constructed, altered, converted, rented, leased or designed
to be occupied or used." The word "shall" is mandatory and not
discretionary.
B. Terms defined. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A subordinate building, whether temporary
or permanent, on the same lot with a principal building, occupied or
devoted exclusively for an accessory use and under the same ownership
and control as the principal building. No portion of an accessory
building shall be used as a bedroom. Where an accessory building
is attached to a principal building, such accessory building shall be
considered part of the principal building.[Amended 3-22-2005 by
Ord. No. 897]
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A subordinate structure, whether
temporary or permanent, on the same lot with a principal structure,
occupied or devoted exclusively for an accessory use and under the
same ownership and control as the principal structure. No portion of
an accessory structure shall be used as a bedroom. Where an accessory
structure is attached to a principal structure, such accessory structure
shall be considered part of the principal structure.[Amended
3-22-2005 by Ord. No. 897]
ACCESSORY USE — A use customarily incidental and subordinate to
the principal use of a building or lot.
ALTERATION — As applied to a building, a structure or use, any change
in supporting or nonsupporting members of a building or structure, any
addition to or diminution of a building or structure, or change in use
from that of one district classification to another, or any removal of a
building or structure, or part thereof, from one location to another.
ATTIC — The open, nonhabitable space between the ceiling beams of a
top habitable story and the roof rafters in any building.
AWNING — Any structure of any material with an extendable or
retractable frame attached to a building or structure and projecting
over a public or quasi-public right-of-way or sidewalk which is so
§ 85-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-7
1:739
constructed as to rest against the building when not in use.[Added
7-25-1995 by Ord. No. 749]
BASEMENT — A story partly underground but having at least 1/2 of
its height above the average level of the adjoining ground. A basement
shall be counted as a story for the purposes of height measurement
if the vertical distance between the ceiling and the average level of
the adjoining ground is more than five feet and if used for business or
dwelling purposes.
BEDROOM — An area reserved primarily for sleeping, wherein is
located beds or sleeping sofa apparatus with a door, screen or partition
separating the sleeping area from other areas of the house.[Added
7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 819]
BUFFER AREA — A continuous planting area or strip of trees and/or
shrubs densely planted so as to restrict a clear view beyond said area.
The area shall be maintained and protected by the owner on whose
property it is located.
BUILDING — A structure enclosed within exterior walls or fire walls,
built, erected and framed of component structural parts and designed
for the housing, shelter, enclosure and support of persons, animals or
property of any kind.
BUILDING AREA — The total area within outside dimensions or on
horizontal plane at average grade level of the principal building and all
accessory buildings exclusive of platforms, terraces or steps.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the
average elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front of the
building to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line
of mansard roofs; and to the mean height between eaves and ridge for
gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
BUILDING HEIGHT, ACCESSORY — The vertical distance measured
from the average elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front
of the building to the highest point of the roof.[Added 3-22-2005 by
Ord. No. 897]
BUILDING HEIGHT, PRINCIPAL — The vertical distance measured
from the average elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front
of the building to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs; to the deck
line of mansard roofs; and to the mean height between eaves and ridge
for gable, hip and gambrel roofs.[Added 3-22-2005 by Ord. No. 897]
BUILDING LINE — The line of the face of the building nearest the
front line of the lot. This face includes cantilevered sections of buildings
and covered porches, whether enclosed or unenclosed, and steps and
landings. All yard requirements shall be measured to the building
line.[Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 881]
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building within which is conducted the
main or principal use of the lot on which said building is situated.
§ 85-7 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-7
1:740
BUSINESS — Any mercantile or service activity, pursuit, occupation or
employment conducted for compensation, either wholesale or retail.
CANOPY or MARQUEE — Any structure of any material of a permanent
or fixed construction which is attached to a building or structure and
which permanently extends over a public or quasi-public right-of-way
or sidewalk.[Added 7-25-1995 by Ord. No. 749]
CELLAR — A story partly or completely underground having more than
1/2 of its clear height below the average level of the finished grade
at the perimeter of the building. A cellar shall not be considered in
determining the permissible number of stories.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A certificate issued upon completion
of construction, alteration or change in occupancy of a building. The
certificate shall acknowledge compliance with all requirements of this
chapter and/or all other applicable requirements.
CLUB — A voluntary organization of persons on an annual membership
basis for social, religious, benevolent, recreational, literary, scientific,
athletic or political purposes, which are not conducted primarily for
gain, provided that there are not any vending stands, merchandising or
commercial activities except as required generally for the membership
and purposes of such club.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR PERSONS WITH HEAD INJURIES —
A community residential facility licensed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:11B-1
et seq., providing food, shelter and personal guidance, under such
supervision as required, to not more than 15 persons with head injuries,
who require assistance, temporarily or permanently, in order to live in
the community, and shall include, but not be limited to, group homes,
halfway houses, supervised apartment living arrangements and hostels.
Such a residence shall not be considered a health care facility within
the meaning of the Health Care Facilities Planning Act, N.J.S.A. 26:2H-1
et seq.[Added 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 819]
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR THE DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED
— Any community residential facility licensed pursuant to N.J.S.A.
30:11B-1 et seq., providing food, shelter and personal guidance, under
such supervision as required, to not more than 15 developmentally
disabled or mentally ill persons, who require assistance, temporarily
or permanently, in order to live in the community, and shall include,
but not be limited to, group homes, halfway houses, intermediate care
facilities, supervised apartment living arrangements and hostels. Such
a residence shall not be considered a health care facility within the
meaning of the Health Care Facilities Planning Act, N.J.S.A. 26:2H-1
et seq. In the case of such a community residence housing mentally
ill persons, such residence shall have been approved for a purchase
of service contract or an affiliation agreement pursuant to such
procedures as shall be established by regulation of the Division of
Mental Health and Hospitals of the Department of Human
Services.[Added 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 819]
§ 85-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-7
1:741
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR THE TERMINALLY ILL — Any
community residential facility operated as a hospice program providing
food, shelter, personal guidance and health care services, under such
supervision as required, to not more than 15 terminally ill
persons.[Added 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 819]
COMMUNITY SHELTER FOR VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE —
Any shelter approved for a purchase of service contract and certified
pursuant to the standards and procedures established by regulation
of the Department of Human Services pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:14-1 et
seq., providing food, shelter, medical care, legal assistance, personal
guidance and other services to not more than 15 persons who have
been victims of domestic violence, including any children of such
victims, who temporarily require shelter and assistance in order to
protect their physical or psychological welfare.[Added 7-27-1999 by
Ord. No. 819]
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
only upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply
with the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such
use as contained in this chapter and upon the issuance of a special
permit therefor by the Planning Board.
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT — Authorization of the Planning Board
issued in accordance with Article VIII which is required as a condition
precedent to the commencement of a use for the erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, conversion or installation of a structure or
building for the conditional use as so designated in this chapter.
COVERAGE, LOT — That percentage of the plot or lot area covered
by the principal building and all accessory buildings, and exclusive of
accessory structures.
DELICATESSEN — A retail use in a fixed facility for the selling of
delicacies, including various types of meats, fish, cheeses and salads,
cut or packaged to order and may provide an accessory use to sell
sandwiches prepared from these primary items, usually sold for off-site
consumption.[Added 3-23-2010 by Ord. No. 960]
DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED PERSON — A person who is
developmentally disabled as defined in N.J.S.A. 30:11B-2.[Added
7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 819]
DISTRICT — Any part of the territory of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus
defined on the Zoning Map168 within which certain uniform regulations
and requirements of this chapter apply.
DRIVEWAY — An open area of land constructed in accordance with this
chapter, used as a means to provide vehicular ingress and egress to a
property or lot to and from a street.[Added 12-16-2003 by Ord. No.
882]
168. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 85-7 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-7
1:742
DWELLING — A building designed or used exclusively as the living
quarters for one or more families, but not including campers, mobile
homes or trailers.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A detached building designed for or
occupied exclusively by not more than one family.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A detached building designed for or
occupied by two families living independently of each other.
DWELLING UNIT — A building or entirely self-contained portion
thereof having cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities providing
complete housekeeping facilities for only one family.
ELECTRONIC PET CONTAINMENT SYSTEM — A device which emits
electric signals and operates as a barrier to control and contain pets
and domestic animals on a residential lot.[Added 12-20-2005 by Ord.
No. 902]
FAMILY — One or more persons occupying the premises and living as
a single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a
boardinghouse, lodging house, club, fraternity or hotel.
FAST-FOOD RESTAURANT — An establishment whose principal
business is the sale of rapidly prepared food directly to the customer,
such as food cooked or prepared in bulk, in advance for quick assembly
and ready to purchase, in a ready-to-consume state for consumption
within the restaurant building, in cars on the premises or off
premises.[Added 3-23-2010 by Ord. No. 960]
FENCE — An artificially constructed barrier of wood, masonry, stone,
wire, metal or other manufactured or natural material or combination
of materials. A fence shall not be considered a structure as defined in
this section unless it requires a footing or foundation to be erected or
constructed. Fences requiring a footing or foundation are considered
to be a combination of materials which form a construction for use or
ornamentation and, therefore, are determined to be a structure. Fence
posts which are below 18 inches from normal ground level or more than
eight inches in width or diameter are also considered to be structures
for the purposes of adherence to this chapter.[Added 12-16-2003 by
Ord. No. 881]
FENCE HEIGHT — The distance measured from the normal ground
level to the highest point of the fence at any point along the fence,
with the measurement being taken directly from the grade below to the
point of measurement. Any decorative feature must be included in the
overall height measurement.[Added 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 882]
FLOOD HAZARD AREA — The area composed of the channel, floodway
and flood hazard area as defined by the United States Department Of
Housing And Urban Development Flood Insurance Study and shown on
the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Boundary-Floodway Maps, as
amended and supplemented, adopted by the Borough and set forth in
Chapter 27, Floodplain Management, of this Code.
§ 85-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-7
1:743
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of the area of all floors of a building
within a lot measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls
or from the center line of walls separating two buildings, including
basement or any other floor area below grade when used for
residential, office, business, storage, industrial or other purposes but
not including basements or other floor area below grade when used
for the housing of heating or other mechanical equipment.[Amended
8-27-1985 by Ord. No. 586]
FLOOR AREA, LIVABLE — The floor area within a residential structure
to be used for habitation, excluding cellars, attics, utility (heating and
cooling) rooms, garages and open porches, and, in two-family housing,
excluding common hallways.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The total gross floor area divided by the total
lot area.[Added 8-27-1985 by Ord. No. 586]
FRONT YARD — The area extending the full width of the lot, situated
between a street line and the front line of the building and projected to
the side lines of the lot.[Added 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 881]
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A building, or part thereof, used as an accessory
building to the main building which provides for the storage of motor
vehicles. A private garage that is accessory to a single-family or twofamily
dwelling may contain a workshop area for the exclusive private,
noncommercial use of the dwelling’s occupant.[Amended 3-22-2005
by Ord. No. 897]
GOURMET/SPECIALTY FOOD STORE — Any fixed retail facility where
gourmet/specialty cuisine is prepared on the premises, not by quick
production as is defined as a "fast-food restaurant," and sold in a form
ready for consumption or cooked off premises.[Added 3-23-2010 by
Ord. No. 960]
HEALTH CLUB — Any premises, either open to the general public or to
members only, for the purpose of providing exercise programs, exercise
equipment, swimming pools, saunas, martial arts training, etc., for the
purpose of promoting physical fitness.[Added 6-27-2000 by Ord. No.
829]
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation or activity, excepting
manufacturing, warehousing and/or industrial activities, carried out for
gain by a resident which is conducted as an accessory use entirely
within a dwelling unit in one- or two-family dwellings, provided that no
article is sold or offered for sale except as may be produced by only a
member of the immediate family residing on the premises and which
use is clearly incidental to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes
and does not change the character thereof, and which shall in no way
adversely affect the safe, comfortable enjoyment of property rights of
the zone in which it is located.[Added 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 818]
IMPROVED LOT COVERAGE — The percentage of lot area which is
improved with principal and accessory buildings, structures and uses,
including, but not limited to, patios, decks, sheds, parking lots,
§ 85-7 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-7
1:744
driveways, sidewalks and garages and other man-made
improvements.[Added 2-28-1989 by Ord. No. 625; amended
7-16-2013 by Ord. No. 1024]
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space or berth on the same lot with
a building or group of buildings for the temporary parking of a
commercial vehicle while loading or unloading material.
LOT AREA — An area of land which is determined by the limits of the
lot lines bounding that area.
LOT, CORNER — A plot or parcel of land at the junction of and fronting
on two or more intersecting streets or a lot bounded on two or more
sides by the same street.
LOT, DEPTH — The average horizontal distance between the front and
rear lot lines, measured from the midpoint of the front lot line, at right
angles or radially to the street line, to the rear lot line.
LOT FRONTAGE — A lot line, or portion thereof, which is coexistent
with a street line. In the case of a street of undefined width, the lot
line shall be assumed to be parallel to the center line of the street at a
distance of 25 feet therefrom. In the case of a corner lot, either street
frontage which meets the minimum frontage required for that zone
may be considered the lot frontage.[Amended 1-27-1987 by Ord. No.
601]
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE — Any line forming a portion of the exterior boundary of a
lot according to maps and plots of record filed with the Office of the
County Clerk, in the County of Bergen, State of New Jersey.
LOT WIDTH — The shortest straight line distance between the two side
lines of any lot. If a lot shall not have parallel side lines, the average of
such widths taken at ten-foot intervals and parallel to the front street
line throughout the depth of the lot shall constitute the width of the lot.
MENTALLY ILL PERSON — A person who is afflicted with a mental
illness as defined in N.J.S.A. 30:4-23,169 but shall not include a person
who has been committed after having been found not guilty of a
criminal offense by reason of insanity or having been found unfit to be
tried on a criminal charge.[Added 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 819]
NONCONFORMING BUILDING — A building or structure, the size,
dimension or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption,
revision or amendment of this chapter, but which fails to conform to the
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reason of
such adoption, revision or amendment.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot which was lawful prior to the
adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter, but which fails to
169. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 30:4-23 was repealed by P.L. 1987, c. 116. See now N.J.S.A.
30:4-27.2.
§ 85-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-7
1:745
conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located
by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity which was lawful prior to
the adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter, but which fails to
conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located
by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment.
NONSOLID FENCE — Any fence which has more than 50% of its
vertical composition open to the air.[Added 12-16-2003 by Ord. No.
881]
NORMAL GROUND LEVEL — The newly established grade after
construction, exclusive of any fill, berm, mound, excavation or curbing,
which alters the grade at the base of the fence from the grade in the
general vicinity of the fence.[Added 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 881]
OFFICE — A room or group of rooms used for conducting the affairs of
a business, profession, service, industry or government and generally
furnished with desks, tables, files and communications
equipment.[Added 10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 1041]
OUTDOOR CAFE — Any eating establishment where food and other
refreshments are served upon the public right-of-way, namely the
sidewalks immediately in front of any restaurant, cafe, cafeteria or
place of business where food and/or other refreshments are served. 170
[Added 3-24-1998 by Ord. No. 796]
PARKING AREA — An open area, other than a street or other public
road or way, used for the parking of motor vehicles, including access
drives or aisles for ingress and egress thereto and therefrom. Access
drives or aisles shall not be included when calculating required offstreet
parking.[Amended 7-26-2011 by Ord. No. 993]
PARKING SPACE — An off-street rectangular space available for the
parking of a motor vehicle, either within a structure or in the open,
exclusive of driveways or access drives. Private driveways for oneand
two-family dwellings may be considered off-street parking areas,
provided that no portion of such private driveway is within the street
right-of-way line. Each space shall have direct access to a street,
driveway or aisle.
PERMITTED USES — Any use of land or buildings as permitted by this
chapter.
PERSON — Includes any individual, firm, corporation, association or
partnership, business entity or organization of any kind or nature.
PERSON WITH HEAD INJURY — A person who has sustained an injury,
illness or traumatic changes to the skull, the brain contents or its
coverings which results in a temporary or permanent physiobiological
decrease of mental, cognitive, behavioral, social or physical functioning
170. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 39A, Outdoor Cafes.
§ 85-7 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-7
1:746
which causes partial or total disability.[Added 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
819]
PORCH — A covered entrance to a building, either enclosed or open.
Such structure shall be considered part of the building.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A portable structure or wheel-based
structure built on a chassis, which is either self-propelled or designed to
be transported by traction, which is intended by its manufacturer to be
used as a temporary dwelling for travel, camping or vacation purposes.
Recreational vehicle shall include camping trailers, motorized homes,
travel trailers and boat and snowmobile trailers, which are defined as
follows:
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN — An establishment where prepared food,
soft drinks, ice cream and/or similar confections are sold to patrons
for consumption outside the confines of the principal building or in an
automobile parked upon the premises, regardless of whether or not, in
addition thereto, seats or other accommodations are provided within
the principal building for the patrons.
RESTAURANT, QUICK-SERVICE — An establishment which is engaged
in the sale of a limited line of foods and beverages which are prepared
and packaged in paper or other types of disposable containers and
which sale therefor contemplates the consumption of food while
standing or sitting on the premises, in cars on the parking lot of
said premises or at some location entirely off the premises.[Amended
7-26-2011 by Ord. No. 993]
RESTAURANTS — Eating places consisting of enclosed, permanent
buildings with seating and service capacity for not less than 25 persons
and having a floor area for seating patrons of not less than 600 square
feet.
SATELLITE ANTENNA OR DISH — Any apparatus which is designed
for the purpose of receiving telephone, radio, microwave, satellite or
similar signals, but not including the conventional television
antennas.[Added 8-27-1985 by Ord. No. 586]
CAMPING TRAILER — A type of trailer that is designed and
constructed with collapsible walls. The walls are collapsed while
the recreational vehicle is being towed and are raised or unfolded
when the vehicle becomes temporary living quarters and is not
being moved.
(1)
MOTORIZED HOME — A portable dwelling designed and
constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle.
(2)
TRAVEL TRAILER — A wheel-based vehicle built on a chassis
designed to be hauled by traction.
(3)
BOAT AND SNOWMOBILE TRAILER — A wheel-based vehicle on
a chassis designed to be hauled by traction, which is specifically
designed for transporting boats or snowmobiles.
(4)
§ 85-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-7
1:747
SERVICE STATION — Any area of land, including structures thereon,
that is used or designed to be used for the supply of gasoline, oil
or other fuel for the propulsion of motor vehicles, and which may
include facilities used or designed to be used for greasing, washing
or otherwise cleaning or servicing such motor vehicles or supplying
accessory parts thereto.
SETBACK LINE — A line drawn parallel to a street line or lot line and
drawn through the point of a building nearest to the street or lot line.
The term "required setback" means a line that is established a minimum
distance from a street line or lot line and within which a building or part
of a building is not permitted to extend toward the street or lot line in
order to provide the required yard.
SIGN — Includes every wall sign, ground sign, card, poster or painted
bulletin, sale sign, sign printed or painted on the outside of a building
or structure, illuminated sign, temporary sign, banner sign, commercial
banner sign, public interest sign, awning banner and canopy with
writing or figures thereon, and shall include any announcement,
declaration, demonstration, illustration or insignia, whether used to
advertise or promote the interests of any person, product or event
or otherwise when the same is placed in view of the general
public.[Amended 9-27-2011 by Ord. No. 997; 3-20-2012 by Ord.
No. 1006]
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is
shown the existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but not
necessarily limited to topography, vegetation, drainage, flood hazard
areas, marshes and waterways; the location of all existing and proposed
buildings, drives, parking spaces, walkways, means of ingress and
egress, drainage facilities, utility services, landscaping, structures and
signs, lighting and screening devices; and any other information that
may be reasonably required in order to make an informed
determination pursuant to the site plan review requirements set forth
in this Code.
SOLAR PANEL — A solar photovoltaic panel or solar hot air or water
panel collector device or system which relies upon solar radiation as
an energy source for the generation of electricity or transfer of stored
heat.[Added 6-27-2006 by Ord. No. 914]
SOLID FENCE — Any fence which has more than 50% of composition
of solid material.[Added 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 881]
STABLE — An accessory building in which horses are kept for private
use and not for hire, remuneration or sale.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of
any floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there is no floor
above it, then the space between any floor and the ceiling next above it.
STORY, HALF — That portion of a building situated above a full story
and having at least two opposite walls meeting a sloping roof at a level
§ 85-7 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-7
1:748
not higher above the floor than a distance equal to 1/2 the floor to
ceiling height of the story below.
STREET — Any avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive or
other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway; or
which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law; or
which is approved by official action as provided by the Municipal Land
Use Law;171 or which is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in
the office of the county recording officer prior of the appointment of
a Planning Board and the grant to such Board of the power to review
plats; and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved
or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas within the street lines. For the purpose of this
chapter, streets shall be classified as follows:[Amended 12-16-2003
by Ord. No. 882]
STREET LINE — The dividing line as shown on the Official Tax Map of
the Borough between the street and the lot.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, whether portable,
prefabricated, sectional or otherwise, which is permanent or temporary,
located on, above and/or under the ground or attached to something so
located, including but not limited to private tennis courts, paddle ball
courts, platform tennis courts, swimming pools and similar recreational
facilities designed to serve the residence on the premises.
SWIMMING POOL, PARTLY ARTIFICIAL POOL — A pool formed from
a natural body of water which has either so limited a flow or such
an inadequate size that the quantity or quality of water must be
maintained by artificial means. The term "artificial pool" shall mean a
pool composed entirely of artificial construction.
ARTERIAL — Those streets which are used primarily for fast or
heavy traffic.
(1)
COLLECTOR — Those streets which carry traffic from minor
streets to the major system of arterial streets, including the
principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets
for circulation within such development.
(2)
MINOR — Those streets which are used primarily for access to the
abutting properties.
(3)
MARGINAL ACCESS — Those streets which are parallel to and
adjacent to arterial streets and highways, and which provide access
to abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
(4)
ALLEYS — Minor roads which are used primarily for vehicular
service access to the back or side of the properties otherwise
abutting on a street.
(5)
171. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 85-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-7
1:749
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE — Any pool designed, used and
maintained for swimming purposes by an individual for use by his
household and guests and located on a lot as an accessory use to
a residence. Unless otherwise qualified, the term "private swimming
pool" shall be construed as including both artificial and partly artificial
pools.
SWIMMING POOL, WADING — Any artificially constructed wading
pool, not designed or used for swimming, with a maximum area of 120
square feet and a maximum water depth of 24 inches.
TOWNHOUSE — A building or structure designed for or occupied
by no more than one family and attached to other similar buildings
or structures by not more than two party walls extending from the
foundation to the roof and providing two direct means of access from
the outside; provided, further, that said townhouse unit shall be
designed so that no portion of any unit is oriented horizontally over
any other unit, and each such unit shall be serviced and equipped
with independent cooking, sleeping, heating and sanitary facilities. In
addition, for the purposes of this chapter, a townhouse may be part of a
townhouse development where in individual unit owners own a portion
of the building and land or it may be held in condominium ownership or
cooperative ownership.[Added 12-11-1985 by Ord. No. 589]
TURNING AREA — The area necessary in a parking lot for maneuvering
vehicles into and out of parking spaces, and in other areas the space
provided for vehicles to turn around.
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed,
arranged, intended or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
YARD, FRONT — The space on the same lot with a main building,
extending the full width of the lot and situated between the street
line and the front or street side line of the building projected to the
side lines of the lot. The depth of the front yard shall be measured
horizontally at right angles from the street line or radially on a curved
street to the building line.
YARD, REAR — The space on the same lot with a main building,
extending the full width of the lot and situated between the rear line of
the building projected to the side lines of the lot. The depth of the rear
yard shall be measured horizontally at right angles from the nearest
point on the rear lot line toward the nearest part of the principal
building.
YARD, SIDE — The space on the same lot with a main building, situated
between the side line of the building and the adjacent side line of the
lot and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line
of the rear yard. The width of the required side yard shall be measured
horizontally at right angles from the nearest point on the side lot line
toward the nearest part of the principal building.
ZONES — The zones designated and described in this chapter.[Added
12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 882]
§ 85-7 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-7
1:750
ZONING PERMIT — A document signed by the Zoning Administrator
which is required by this chapter as a condition precedent to the
commencement of a use or the erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, conveyance or installation of a structure or building and
which acknowledges that such use, structure or building complies with
the provisions of this chapter or variance therefrom duly authorized as
provided herein.
§ 85-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-7
1:751

ARTICLE IV
District Regulations
§ 85-8. Applicability.
§ 85-9. R-1 Single-Family Residential District.
The following regulations shall apply in all R-1 Districts:
A. No building or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building
or part thereof shall be erected, moved or altered, unless in conformity
with the regulations herein specified for the zoning district in which it is
located.
B. No building shall hereafter be erected or altered other than specified
herein for the district in which such building is located:
(1) To exceed the height.
(2) To accommodate or house a greater number of families.
(3) To occupy a greater percentage of lot area.
(4) To have narrower or smaller rear, front or side yards.
C. No part of a yard or other open space required about any building for
the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be
included as a part of a yard or other open space similarly required for
another building.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings and the accessory buildings and
uses normally auxiliary thereto.
(2) Private garages as an accessory building and as regulated by
§ 85-29 of this chapter.
(3) Private swimming pools as an accessory structure and as regulated
by Chapter 67, Swimming Pools.
(4) Municipally owned or operated facilities or uses.
(5) Accessory structures.
(6) Private horse stables as an accessory building and as regulated by
§ 85-38 of this chapter.
(7) Home occupations as an accessory use and as regulated by
§ 85-32.1 of this chapter. [Added 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 818]
(8) Community residences for the developmentally disabled. [Added
7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 819]
§ 85-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-9
1:753
(9) Community shelters for victims of domestic violence. [Added
7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 819]
(10) Community residences for the terminally ill. [Added 7-27-1999 by
Ord. No. 819]
(11) Community residences for persons with head injuries. [Added
7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 819]
B. Conditional uses requiring a special permit as provided in Article VIII.
(1) (Reserved)172
(2) Public utility facilities or uses.
(3) County, state or federal facilities or uses.
C. Prohibited uses. Any uses other than those uses permitted by
Subsection A or B are prohibited.
D. Minimum lot requirements.
(1) The lot area shall not be less than one acre (43,560 square feet) and
shall be computed within 270 feet of the front street line.
(2) The lot frontage shall not be less than 200 feet.
(3) The lot width shall not be less than 140 feet.
(4) The lot depth shall not be less than 160 feet.
E. Minimum yard requirements, interior lots.
(1) Front yard depth: 50 feet, except that where the existing buildings
on the same side of the street and within 600 feet of either side line
of the subject property form an existing setback line, new buildings
shall conform to the existing setback line, provided that no building
need have a front yard greater than 80 feet.
(2) Side yard width. There shall be two side yards, and no side yard
shall be less than 50 feet.
(3) Rear yard depth: 50 feet.
F. Minimum yard requirements, corner lots.
(1) Front street yard depth: 50 feet, except that where the existing
buildings on the same side of the street and within 600 feet of
either side line of the subject property form an existing setback
line, new buildings shall conform to the existing setback line,
provided that no building need have a front yard greater than 80
feet.
172. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(1), Churches, parish houses and Sunday schools, was
repealed 3-24-1998 by Ord. No. 800.
§ 85-9 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-9
1:754
(2) Side street yard width: 50 feet.
(3) Interior side yard width: 50 feet.
(4) Rear yard depth: 50 feet.
G. Minimum open space requirements.
(1) Lot coverage shall not exceed 20% of lot area. [Amended
7-16-2013 by Ord. No. 1024; 11-25-2014 by Ord. No. 1035]
(2) Livable floor area for one-story dwellings shall not be less than
1,750 square feet, with 2,250 square feet for multistory dwellings,
exclusive of garages, basements, open porches, livable attics and
accessory buildings.
(3) Improved lot coverage shall not exceed 25% of the land area of the
lot. [Added 2-28-1989 by Ord. No. 625; amended 7-16-2013
by Ord. No. 1024]
(4) There shall be a minimum of 2,000 square feet of lot area for each
bedroom provided in a dwelling. [Added 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
819]
(5) Lot coverage by accessory buildings and structures shall not
exceed 6% of lot area. [Added 12-21-1999 by Ord. No. 821;
amended 11-25-2014 by Ord. No. 1035]
(6) First-floor gross floor area of accessory buildings shall not exceed
800 square feet per building. [Added 12-21-1999 by Ord. No.
821]
(7) Swimming pool improved lot coverage exception. A swimming pool
up to 700 square feet is exempted from the maximum improved lot
coverage calculation, subject to the installation of a seepage tank
sized for draining the pool in accordance with the requirements of
the Borough Engineer. [Added 4-28-2009 by Ord. No. 953]
H. Maximum building heights. No principal building shall exceed a height
of 35 feet containing no more than 2 1/2 stories. No accessory building
shall exceed a height of 15 feet containing no more than 1 1/2 stories.
[Amended 12-21-1999 by Ord. No. 821; 3-22-2005 by Ord. No.
897]
I. Detached accessory building and structure setbacks. Minimum
required distances to the following: [Amended 12-21-1999 by Ord.
No. 821]
(1) Principal building and each other: 10 feet.
(2) Front street: 60 feet.
(3) Side street: 50 feet.
§ 85-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-9
1:755
§ 85-10. R-2 Single-Family Residential District.
The following regulations shall apply in all R-2 Districts:
(4) Interior lot side lines: 35 feet.
(5) Interior lot rear line: 20 feet.
(6) Corner lot rear line: 30 feet.
J. Projections into front yard for interior and corner lots. Roofed and
unroofed entry platforms and/or associated stoops and steps not
exceeding 35 square feet in area shall be permitted in the front yard
setback area, provided that, in any single-family zone, such projection
shall not extend into the required front yard setback area by more than
eight feet. [Added 7-16-2013 by Ord. No. 1024]
K. Minimum graduated side yard setback requirements for second floor of
dwellings. The minimum side yard setback for the second floor shall not
be closer to a side lot line than 10 feet on one side where two side yards
exist; the total of both side yard setbacks shall not be less than 40% of
the lot width. In no case shall the combined side yard width total less
than 20 feet. [Added 7-16-2013 by Ord. No. 1024]
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Single-family dwellings and the accessory buildings and uses
normally auxiliary thereto.
(2) Private garages as an accessory building and as regulated by
§ 85-29 of this chapter.
(3) Private swimming pools as an accessory structure and as regulated
by Chapter 67, Swimming Pools.
(4) Municipally owned or operated facilities.
(5) Accessory structures.
(6) Home occupations as an accessory use and as regulated by
§ 85-32.1 of this chapter. [Added 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 818]
(7) Community residences for the developmentally disabled. [Added
7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 819]
(8) Community shelters for victims of domestic violence. [Added
7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 819]
(9) Community residences for the terminally ill. [Added 7-27-1999 by
Ord. No. 819]
(10) Community residences for persons with head injuries. [Added
7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 819]
§ 85-9 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-10
1:756
B. Conditional uses requiring a special use permit as provided in Article
VIII.
(1) (Reserved)173
(2) Public utility facilities or uses.
(3) County, state or federal facilities or uses.
(4) Parochial schools through the high school level.
C. Prohibited uses. Any uses other than those uses permitted by
Subsection A or B are prohibited.
D. Minimum lot area and dimensions.
(1) The lot area shall not be less than 10,000 square feet and shall be
computed within 145 feet of the front street line, except corner
lots, which shall not have less than 12,000 square feet.
(2) The lot frontage shall not be less than 75 feet.
(3) The lot width shall not be less than 60 feet.
(4) The lot depth shall not be less than 100 feet.
E. Minimum yard requirements, interior lots.
(1) Front yard depth: 30 feet, except that where the existing buildings
on the same side of the street and within 200 feet of either side line
of the subject property form an existing setback line, new buildings
shall conform to the existing setback line, provided that no building
need have a front yard greater than 50 feet.
(2) Side yard width. There shall be two side yards, and no side yard
shall be less than 10 feet.
(3) Rear yard depth: 30 feet.
F. Minimum yard requirements, corner lots.
(1) Front street yard depth: 30 feet, except that where the existing
buildings on the same side of the street and within 200 feet of
either side line of the subject property form an existing setback
line, new buildings shall conform to the existing setback line,
provided that no building need have a front yard greater than 50
feet.
(2) Side street yard width: 30 feet.
(3) Interior side yard width: 10 feet.
(4) Rear yard depth: 30 feet.
173. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(1), Churches, parish houses and Sunday schools, was
repealed 3-24-1998 by Ord. No. 800.
§ 85-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-10
1:757
G. Minimum open space requirements.
(1) Lot coverage shall not exceed 20% of lot area.. [Amended
2-28-1989 by Ord. No. 625; 7-16-2013 by Ord. No. 1024;
11-25-2014 by Ord. No. 1035]
(2) Livable floor area for one-story dwellings shall not be less than
1,200 square feet and 1,600 square feet for multistory dwellings,
exclusive of garages, basements, open porches, livable attics and
accessory buildings. No building shall be constructed unless the
second floor thereof shall contain at least 75% of the cubic contents
of the first floor. For the purpose of this article, a split-level home
shall be considered as a two-story house.
(3) Improved lot coverage shall not exceed 35% of the area of the lot.
[Added 2-28-1989 by Ord. No. 625; amended 7-16-2013 by
Ord. No. 1024]
(4) There shall be a minimum of 2,000 square feet of lot area for each
bedroom provided in a dwelling. [Added 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
819]
(5) Lot coverage by accessory buildings and structures shall not
exceed 6% of lot area. [Added 12-21-1999 by Ord. No. 821;
amended 11-25-2014 by Ord. No. 1035]
(6) First-floor gross floor area of accessory buildings shall not exceed
800 square feet per building. [Added 12-21-1999 by Ord. No.
821]
(7) Swimming pool improved lot coverage exception. A swimming pool
up to 700 square feet is exempted from the maximum improved lot
coverage calculation, subject to the installation of a seepage tank
sized for draining the pool in accordance with the requirements of
the Borough Engineer. [Added 4-28-2009 by Ord. No. 953]
H. Maximum building heights. No principal building shall exceed a height
of 35 feet containing no more than 2 1/2 stories. No accessory building
shall exceed a height of 15 feet containing no more than 1 1/2 stories.
[Amended 12-21-1999 by Ord. No. 821; 3-22-2005 by Ord. No.
897]
I. Detached accessory building and structure setbacks. Minimum
distances to the following:
(1) Principal building and each other: 10 feet.
(2) Front street: 40 feet.
(3) Side street: 30 feet.
(4) Interior lot side line: 10 feet.
(5) Interior lot rear line: 10 feet.
§ 85-10 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-10
1:758
§ 85-10.1. R-2A Single-Family Residential District. [Added
4-25-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-04]
The following regulations shall apply in all R-2A Districts:
(6) Corner lot rear line: 15 feet.
J. Projections into front yard for interior and corner lots. Roofed and
unroofed entry platforms and/or associated stoops and steps not
exceeding 35 square feet in area shall be permitted in the front yard
setback area, provided that, in any single-family zone, such projection
shall not extend into the required front yard setback area by more than
eight feet. [Added 7-16-2013 by Ord. No. 1024]
K. Minimum graduated side yard setback requirements for second floor of
dwellings. The minimum side yard setback for the second floor shall not
be closer to a side lot line than 10 feet on one side where two side yards
exist; the total of both side yard setbacks shall not be less than 40% of
the lot width. In no case shall the combined side yard width total less
than 20 feet. [Added 7-16-2013 by Ord. No. 1024]
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Single-family dwellings and the accessory buildings and uses
normally auxiliary thereto.
(2) Private garages as an accessory building and as regulated by
§ 85-29 of this chapter.
(3) Private swimming pools as an accessory structure and as regulated
by Chapter 67, Swimming Pools.
(4) Municipally owned or operated facilities.
(5) Accessory structures including but not limited to detached sheds,
cabanas, gazebos, built-in barbecues, carports and canopies.
(6) Home occupations as an accessory use and as regulated by
§ 85-32.1 of this chapter.
B. Conditional uses requiring a special use permit as provided in Article
VIII.
(1) Public utility facilities or uses.
(2) County, state or federal facilities or uses.
C. Prohibited uses. Any uses other than those uses permitted by
Subsection A or B are prohibited.
D. Minimum lot area and dimensions shall comply with the following
standards.
(1) The lot area shall not be less than 7,500 square feet.
§ 85-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-10.1
1:759
(2) The lot frontage shall not be less than 60 feet, except a minimum lot
frontage or width can be reduced to a minimum of 20 feet if all of
the following are provided:
(a) Said lot is developed to be served by a public street for primary
roadway access.
(b) The lot using this reduced frontage arrangement shall be a
reduced frontage lot as configured in the settlement
agreement identified herein, although the lots with reduced
frontage may be further adjusted subject to the requirements
of this zone. Such a reduced frontage configuration is to foster
this specific settlement agreement noted in this amendment
since the municipality has a long standing prohibition on flag
lot arrangements.
(c) Served by a paved driveway with a minimum width of 11 feet
where serving one lot or a minimum of 16 feet should the
driveway serve more than one lot by a shared driveway
easement.
(d) The depth of the portion of the lot permitted at the reduced lot
frontage measured from the front lot line, wherein the width is
less than the required lot width of 60 feet, shall be no greater
than 145 feet from the front lot line.
(e) No principal or accessory buildings or structures shall be
permitted in this reduced portion (less than 60 feet in width),
referenced herein.
(3) The lot width shall not be less than 48 feet.
(4) The lot depth shall not be less than 80 feet.
(5) The front door location on a principal residential structure on a lot
in this zone shall not prescribe the identification of a front, rear or
side yard.
(6) The area of an easement on a lot shall not reduce the area of the lot
for purposes of calculating the regulatory criteria of this zone.
E. Minimum yard requirements, interior lots.
(1) Front yard depth: 25 feet.
(2) Side yard width: eight feet, except that side yards adjacent to an
existing R-2 lot shall be 10 feet.
(3) Rear yard depth: 25 feet.
F. Minimum yard requirements, corner lots.
(1) Front street yard depth: 25 feet.
§ 85-10.1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-10.1
1:760
(2) Side street yard width: 25 feet.
(3) Interior side yard width: eight feet, except that side yards adjacent
to an existing R-2 lot shall be 10 feet.
(4) Rear yard depth: 25 feet.
G. Minimum open space requirements.
(1) Total lot coverage shall not exceed 30% of the total lot area. The
total lot coverage can be increased an additional 5% only for
conforming accessory buildings.
(2) Lot coverage by accessory buildings and structures shall not
exceed 15% of lot area.
(3) Total improved lot coverage shall not exceed 60% of the area of the
lot, except an additional 10% is permitted but must use pervious
pavement or composition of materials with a rate of permeability
that will not result in an increase in runoff from the existing
pervious surface conditions, subject to the approval of the
designated municipal official. In the case of pavers, the applicant
shall show that the pavement materials or a composition of
materials are specifically designed for enhanced permeability
through the use of wide gaps between pavers or open spaces
created by the paving that are filled with gravel (not sand) or of
sufficient composition to permit and maintain porosity. In the case
of pervious asphalt or concrete, the mix design shall be specifically
designed, prepared and installed for high permeability by a firm or
firms with experience in the same. Additionally, the applicant must
demonstrate there is sufficient soil infiltration below said pervious
pavement for the system to function.
(4) Livable floor area for one-story dwellings shall not be less than
1,000 square feet and 1,500 square feet for multistory dwellings,
exclusive of garages, basements, open porches, livable attics and
accessory buildings.
(5) There shall be a minimum of 1,500 square feet of lot area for each
bedroom provided in a dwelling.
(6) First-floor gross floor area of accessory buildings shall not exceed
1,000 square feet per building.
(7) Swimming pool improved lot coverage exception. A swimming pool
is permitted to exceed the maximum improved lot coverage
calculation up to a total of 700 square feet. The area of the pool that
exceeds the total lot coverage calculation shall be subject to the
installation of a seepage tank sized for draining the pool in
accordance with the requirements of the Borough Engineer.
H. Maximum floor area ratio.
§ 85-10.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-10.1
1:761
(1) The maximum floor area ratio (FAR) for a principal structure on a
lot or lots that make a single tract for development shall not be
more than 40% for the first 10,000 square feet of lot area. The
portions of a lot greater than 10,000 square feet, the following
additional floor area shall be permitted:
(a) For the area of a lot greater than 10,000 square feet and up to
20,000 square feet, a maximum twenty-percent FAR
calculation is permitted for such area. This additional floor
area shall be added to the total permitted floor area calculated
by the FAR for the first 10,000 square feet of lot area.
(b) For the area of a lot greater than 20,000 square feet, a
maximum ten-percent FAR calculation is permitted for such
area. This additional floor area shall be added to the total
permitted floor area calculated by the FAR for the first 20,000
square feet of lot area as noted herein.
(2) The FAR calculations of this section shall exclude the area of a
typical two-car garage (limited to a maximum of 600 square feet),
basements, open porches, attics and accessory buildings. If more
than a two-car garage is proposed, the area above the two-car
garage limit shall be added to the FAR calculation.
I. Maximum building height. No principal building shall exceed a height
of 35 feet containing no more than 2 1/2 stories. No accessory building
shall exceed a height of 25 feet containing no more than two stories.
The accessory building second-story interior floor area where the floor
to ceiling height is five feet or greater shall not exceed more than 75%
of the total floor area of the first story of the accessory structure.
J. Detached accessory building and structure setbacks. Minimum
distances to the following:
(1) Principal building and each other: eight feet.
(2) Front street: 25 feet.
(3) Side street: 25 feet.
(4) Interior lot side line: five feet, except that setback adjacent to an
existing R-2 lot shall be 10 feet.
(5) Interior lot rear line: five feet, except that setback adjacent to an
existing R-2 lot shall be 10 feet.
(6) Corner lot side line: five feet, except that side setback adjacent to
an existing R-2 lot shall be 10 feet.
(7) Corner lot rear line: five feet.
K. Projections into front yard for interior and corner lots. Roofed and
unroofed entry platforms and/or associated stoops and steps not
§ 85-10.1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-10.1
1:762
§ 85-11. R-3 Single-Family Residential District.
The following regulations shall apply in all R-3 Districts:
exceeding 35 square feet in area shall be permitted in the front yard
setback area, provided that in any single-family zone, such projection
shall not extend into the required front yard setback area by more than
eight feet.
L. Retaining walls requirements. The maximum height of a retaining wall
is six feet. Shall a series of terraced retaining walls be proposed within
10 feet or less, then a landscaped terrace of a minimum width of four
feet shall be provided. Where a retaining wall is adjacent to a lot line
contiguous with the R-2 Zone, retaining walls four feet or less in height
shall have a one-foot offset from a contiguous lot line. Should a
retaining wall exceed four feet in height or if terraced where the
adjacent wall is within 10 feet or less from the face of each wall, the
closest wall to an adjacent lot line shall be set back a minimum of two
feet plus one foot of setback for every one-foot vertical wall height of
the closest wall, and the setback shall be landscaped for screening.
M. The right angle or radial lot line requirements contained in
§ 32B-10A(5)(b) shall not be applicable to the subdivision of lots in the
R-2A Zone District.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Single-family dwelling and the accessory buildings and uses
normally auxiliary thereto.
(2) Private garages as an accessory building and as regulated by
§ 85-29 of this chapter.
(3) Private swimming pools as an accessory structure and as regulated
by Chapter 67, Swimming Pools.
(4) Municipally owned or operated facilities or uses.
(5) Accessory structures.
(6) Home occupations as an accessory use and as regulated by
§ 85-32.1 of this chapter. [Added 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 818]
(7) Community residences for the developmentally disabled. [Added
7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 819]
(8) Community shelters for victims of domestic violence. [Added
7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 819]
(9) Community residences for the terminally ill. [Added 7-27-1999 by
Ord. No. 819]
(10) Community residences for persons with head injuries. [Added
7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 819]
§ 85-10.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-11
1:763
B. Conditional uses requiring a special permit as provided in Article VIII.
(1) (Reserved)174
(2) Public utility facilities or uses.
(3) County, state or federal buildings or uses.
C. Prohibited uses. Any uses other than those uses permitted by
Subsection A or B are prohibited.
D. Minimum lot area and dimensions.
(1) The lot area shall not be less than 6,500 square feet and shall be
computed within 120 feet of the front street lot line, except corner
lots, which shall not be less than 7,800 square feet.
(2) The lot frontage shall not be less than 60 feet.
(3) The lot width shall not be less than 48 feet.
(4) The lot depth shall not be less than 80 feet.
E. Minimum yard requirements, interior lots.
(1) Front yard depth: 30 feet, except that where the existing buildings
on the same side of the street and within 200 feet of either side line
of the subject property form an existing setback line, new buildings
shall conform to the existing setback line, provided that no building
need have a front yard greater than 50 feet.
(2) Side yard width. There shall be two side yards, and no side yard
shall be less than 10 feet. [Amended 2-28-1989 by Ord. No. 625]
(3) Rear yard depth: 30 feet.
F. Minimum yard requirements, corner lots.
(1) Front street yard depth: 30 feet, except that where the existing
buildings on the same side of the street and within 200 feet of
either side line of the subject property form an existing setback
line, new buildings shall conform to the existing setback line,
provided that no building need have a front yard greater than 50
feet.
(2) Side street yard width: 30 feet.
(3) Interior side yard width: 10 feet. [Amended 2-28-1989 by Ord.
No. 625]
(4) Rear yard depth: 30 feet.
G. Minimum open space requirements.
174. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(1), Churches, parish houses and Sunday schools, was
repealed 3-24-1998 by Ord. No. 800.
§ 85-11 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-11
1:764
(1) Lot coverage shall not exceed 25% of lot area. [Amended
2-28-1989 by Ord. No. 625; 7-16-2013 by Ord. No. 1024;
11-25-2014 by Ord. No. 1035]
(2) Livable floor area for one-story dwellings shall not be less than
1,000 square feet and 1,500 square feet for multilevel dwellings,
exclusive of garages, basements, open porches, livable attics and
accessory buildings.
(3) Improved lot coverage shall not exceed 45% of the area of the lot.
[Added 2-28-1989 by Ord. No. 625; amended 7-16-2013 by
Ord. No. 1024]
(4) There shall be a minimum of 2,000 square feet of lot area for each
bedroom provided in a dwelling. [Added 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
819]
(5) Lot coverage by accessory buildings and structures shall not
exceed 7.5% of lot area. [Added 12-21-1999 by Ord. No. 821;
amended 11-25-2014 by Ord. No. 1035]
(6) First-floor gross floor area of accessory buildings shall not exceed
800 square feet per building. [Added 12-21-1999 by Ord. No.
821]
(7) Swimming pool improved lot coverage exception. A swimming pool
up to 450 square feet is exempted from the maximum improved lot
coverage calculation, subject to the installation of a seepage tank
sized for draining the pool in accordance with the requirements of
the Borough Engineer. [Added 4-28-2009 by Ord. No. 953]
H. Maximum building heights. No principal building shall exceed a height
of 35 feet containing no more than 2 1/2 stories. No accessory building
shall exceed a height of 15 feet containing no more than 1 1/2 stories.
[Amended 12-21-1999 by Ord. No. 821; 3-22-2005 by Ord. No.
897]
I. Detached accessory buildings and structures. Minimum distances to
the following:
(1) Principal building and each other: 10 feet.
(2) Front street: 40 feet.
(3) Side street: 30 feet.
(4) Interior lot side lines: 10 feet.
(5) Interior lot rear line: 10 feet.
(6) Corner lot rear line: 10 feet.
J. Projections into front yard for interior and corner lots. Roofed and
unroofed entry platforms and/or associated stoops and steps not
§ 85-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-11
1:765
§ 85-12. R-4 Two-Family Residential District.
The following regulations shall apply in all R-4 Districts:
exceeding 35 square feet in area shall be permitted in the front yard
setback area, provided that, in any single-family zone, such projection
shall not extend into the required front yard setback area by more than
eight feet. [Added 7-16-2013 by Ord. No. 1024]
K. Minimum graduated side yard setback requirements for second floor of
dwellings. The minimum side yard setback for the second floor shall not
be closer to a side lot line than 10 feet on one side where two side yards
exist; the total of both side yard setbacks shall not be less than 40% of
the lot width. In no case shall the combined side yard width total less
than 20 feet. [Added 7-16-2013 by Ord. No. 1024]
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Two-family dwellings and the accessory buildings and uses
normally auxiliary thereto.
(2) Single-family dwellings which shall meet the requirements of R-3
Districts.
(3) Private garages as an accessory building and as regulated by
§ 85-29 of this chapter.
(4) Private swimming pools as an accessory structure and as regulated
by Chapter 67, Swimming Pools.
(5) Municipally owned or operated facilities or uses.
(6) Accessory structures.
(7) Home occupations as an accessory use and as regulated by
§ 85-32.1 of this chapter. [Added 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 818]
(8) Community residences for the developmentally disabled. [Added
7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 819]
(9) Community shelters for victims of domestic violence. [Added
7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 819]
(10) Community residences for the terminally ill. [Added 7-27-1999 by
Ord. No. 819]
(11) Community residences for persons with head injuries. [Added
7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 819]
B. Conditional uses requiring a special permit as provided in Article VIII.
(1) Public utility facilities or uses.
(2) County, state or federal building or uses.
§ 85-11 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-12
1:766
C. Prohibited uses. Any uses other than those uses permitted by
Subsection A or B are prohibited.
D. Minimum lot area and dimensions.
(1) The lot area shall not be less than 10,000 square feet and computed
within 145 feet of the front street lot line.
(2) The lot frontage shall not be less than 75 feet.
(3) The lot width shall not measure less than 60 feet.
(4) The lot depth shall not be less than 100 feet.
E. Minimum yard requirements, interior lots.
(1) Front yard depth: 30 feet, except that where the existing buildings
on the same side of the street and within 200 feet of either side line
of the subject property form an existing setback line, new buildings
shall conform to the existing setback line, provided that no building
need have a front yard greater than 50 feet.
(2) Side yard width. There shall be two side yards, and no side yard
shall be less than 10 feet.
(3) Rear yard depth: 30 feet.
F. Minimum yard requirements, corner lots.
(1) Front street yard depth: 30 feet, except that where the existing
buildings on the same side of the street and within 200 feet of
either side line of the subject property form an existing setback
line, new buildings shall conform to the existing setback line,
provided that no building need have a front yard greater than 50
feet.
(2) Side street yard width: 30 feet.
(3) Interior side yard width: 10 feet.
(4) Rear yard depth: 30 feet.
G. Minimum open space requirements.
(1) Lot coverage by principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed
30% of the land area of any lot.
(2) Livable floor area shall not be less than 1,000 square feet per
dwelling unit, exclusive of garages, basements, open porches,
livable attics and accessory buildings.
(3) There shall be a minimum of 2,000 square feet of lot area for each
bedroom provided in a dwelling. [Added 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
819]
§ 85-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-12
1:767
§ 85-12.1. R-5 Planned Residential Townhouse District. [Added
12-11-1985 by Ord. No. 589]
The following regulations shall apply in all R-5 Districts:
(4) Lot coverage by accessory buildings and structures shall not
exceed 30% of permitted improved lot coverage. [Added
12-21-1999 by Ord. No. 821]
(5) First-floor gross floor area of accessory buildings shall not exceed
800 square feet per building. [Added 12-21-1999 by Ord. No.
821]
H. Maximum building heights. No principal building shall exceed a height
of 35 feet containing no more than 2 1/2 stories. No accessory building
shall exceed a height of 15 feet containing no more than 1 1/2 stories.
[Amended 12-21-1999 by Ord. No. 821; 3-22-2005 by Ord. No.
897]
I. Detached accessory buildings and structures. Minimum distances to
the following:
(1) Principal building and each other: 10 feet.
(2) Front street: 40 feet.
(3) Side street: 30 feet.
(4) Interior lot side line: 10 feet.
(5) Interior lot rear line: 10 feet.
(6) Corner lot rear line: 15 feet.
A. Permitted uses shall be as follows:
(1) Single-family dwellings which shall meet the requirements of R-1
Districts.
(2) Townhouses, in a planned arrangement, including driveways,
walkways, parking areas, recreational facilities or areas and open
spaces, either landscaped or remaining in a natural state, and
buffer areas, established under common ownership and
maintenance. There may be private patios or yard areas, but all
exterior spaces as well as building exteriors shall be subject to a
common maintenance agreement.
(3) Private garages as an accessory building and as regulated by
§ 85-29 of this chapter.
(4) Private swimming pools as an accessory structure and as regulated
by Chapter 67, Swimming Pools.
(5) Municipally owned or operated facilities or uses.
§ 85-12 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-12.1
1:768
(6) Accessory structures, including recreational facilities for the
townhouse residents such as tennis courts and community
buildings.
(7) Home occupations as an accessory use and as regulated by
§ 85-32.1 of this chapter. [Added 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 818]
(8) Community residences for the developmentally disabled. [Added
7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 819]
(9) Community shelters for victims of domestic violence. [Added
7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 819]
(10) Community residences for the terminally ill. [Added 7-27-1999 by
Ord. No. 819]
(11) Community residences for persons with head injuries. [Added
7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 819]
B. Conditional uses, requiring a special permit as provided in Article VIII,
shall be as follows:
(1) Public utility facilities or uses.
(2) County, state or federal building or uses.
C. Prohibited uses. Any uses other than those uses permitted by
Subsection A or B are prohibited.
D. Minimum lot area and dimensions.
(1) The lot area shall not be less than nine acres.
(2) The lot frontage shall not be less than 50 feet.
(3) The lot width shall not measure less than 500 feet.
(4) The lot depth shall not be less than 500 feet.
E. Density. Maximum density shall be four dwelling units per acre,
calculated on the basis of total site area. For Block 54B, Lot 1-B,
comprising 9.6 acres more or less, no more than 38 units shall be
developed. For Lot 1-A, comprising 1.0 acre more or less, no additional
units shall be permitted, but this lot may be used for supporting
facilities and to contribute to open space and other requirements for a
development on Lot 1-B.
F. Minimum yard requirements, interior lots.
(1) The front yard depth shall be 50 feet.
(2) Side yard width. There shall be two side yards, and no side yard
shall be less than 50 feet.
(3) The rear year depth shall be 50 feet.
§ 85-12.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-12.1
1:769
G. Minimum yard requirements, corner lots.
(1) The front street yard depth shall be 50 feet.
(2) The side street yard width shall be 50 feet.
(3) The interior side yard width shall be 50 feet.
(4) The rear yard depth shall be 50 feet.
H. Minimum open space requirements.
(1) Lot coverage by principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed
20% of the land area of the tract.
(2) Wetlands shall be preserved in their natural state and sufficient
open space shall be provided for floodwater detention so that there
will be zero increase in the rate of runoff from the site before and
after development. No soil disturbance or land filling shall take
place below elevation 112 feet unless approved by the United
States Army Corps of Engineers and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, so that existing wetlands will be
preserved and no additional flood hazard caused to adjoining areas.
(3) There shall be a minimum of 2,000 square feet of lot area for each
bedroom provided in a dwelling. [Added 7-27-1999 by Ord. No.
819]
I. Buffer areas. Buffer areas at least 10 feet in width shall be provided, or
existing vegetation preserved in its natural state if this forms a visual
screen, on all lot lines adjoining residential zones, excluding public
streets or roads.
J. Noise barriers. Noise barriers shall be erected, along frontage on Route
17 and, if Block 54B, Lot 1-B is developed for townhouses but the site is
not consolidated with Lot 1-A, along the westerly lot line of Lot 1-B. The
developer shall be allowed a time period of up to 24 months to pursue a
request to the New Jersey Department of Transportation to erect such
barrier, but if this is not done, the developer shall provide the barrier, in
the form of a berm at least 12 feet in height, with evergreen trees
placed on top of the berm, at least six feet in height and 10 feet on
center, in a staggered pattern. A planting strip right-of-way of at least
40 feet in width shall be dedicated to the Borough along Route 17,
which strip may include the required noise barrier.
K. Maximum height of buildings. No principal building shall exceed a
height of 35 feet or exceed three stories. No detached accessory
building shall exceed 3/4 the height of the principal buildings.
L. Design limitations.
§ 85-12.1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-12.1
1:770
(1) Individual planned residential townhouse development units may
be combined into one building, provided that said overall structure
shall not contain more than six units.
(2) No such group of units shall exceed a length of 180 feet.
(3) No more than four adjacent units shall be constructed without
providing a staggered front building wall offset of not less than four
feet.
(4) Each unit shall not have less than two means of ingress and egress
into each dwelling unit.
(5) Each unit shall have no less than two walls with window exposure.
(6) Each unit shall be separated by masonry party walls extending to
the roof rafters, with a soundproofing equivalent to eight-inch-thick
concrete block.
(7) A minimum of two smoke detectors are to be provided in each
dwelling unit.
M. Minimum separation between buildings. The minimum separation
distance between dwelling units shall be as follows:
(1) Front-to-front: 25 feet.
(2) Rear-to-rear: 35 feet.
(3) Front-to-side: 25 feet.
(4) Rear-to-side: 25 feet.
(5) Side-to-side: none, except, where provided, a minimum of 25 feet.
N. Detached accessory buildings and structures, minimum distances to the
following:
(1) Principal building and each other: 20 feet.
(2) Front street: 50 feet.
(3) Side street: 50 feet.
(4) Interior lot side line: 30 feet.
(5) Interior lot rear line: 30 feet.
O. Driveways. The right-of-way and pavement widths of all internal
driveways shall be adequate in size and location to accommodate the
maximum anticipated traffic and access of fire-fighting and police
vehicles. Minimum paved width shall be 12 feet for a one-way driveway
and 20 feet for a two-way driveway.
P. Interior streets or driveways are to be owned and maintained by the
developer or any owner's association, but with the Borough police
§ 85-12.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-12.1
1:771
§ 85-12.2. Multifamily Affordable Housing District. [Added
9-26-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-11]
having written approval to patrol and prohibit parking on interior
streets or driveways.
Q. Access drives and parking areas shall be developed according to
Borough specifications for paving and curbs, as related to driveways
and parking areas.
R. No access drives or parking spaces shall be closer than 10 feet to a
building, except where parking is under or within a building.
S. Lighting. All exterior lighting shall be arranged so as to reflect the light
away from all adjoining premises.
T. All electric, telephone and cable television lines are to be underground.
U. Landscaping. Attractive landscape plantings shall be provided and
maintained, and existing trees shall be retained wherever possible.
A. Purpose. To address its affordable housing obligation in compliance
with settlement agreements entered into with Fair Share Housing
Center, Chamberlain Developers, Inc., and Jonathan L. Mechanic (d.b.a.
Ho-Ho-Kus Crossings) on December 21, 2016, and January 5, 2017, the
Borough shall rezone the property at Block 1014, Lots 1 and 2, also
known as the Borough-owned commuter parking lot, to permit a
multifamily, one-hundred-percent affordable residential development
with at least 13 units affordable to very-low-, low-, and moderateincome
households. Such development permitted by this section must
be compliant with the settlement agreements, the rules at N.J.A.C.
5:93-1 et seq. ("COAH's Second Round rules"),175 the Borough's
Affordable Housing Ordinance at Chapter 2 of the Borough Code, the
Uniform Housing Affordability Controls (UHAC) at N.J.A.C. 5:80-1 et
seq., and the statutory requirement for the provision of very-lowincome
housing at N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.1 et seq.
B. Permitted uses in the MF-AH Zone District shall be limited to the
following:
(1) One-hundred-percent affordable multifamily residential
development, provided the following:
(a) The multifamily affordable development permitted by this
district must contain no fewer than 13 dwelling units, all of
which must be affordable to very-low-, low-, and moderateincome
households; and
175. Editor's Note: The regulations in N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired October 16, 2016.
§ 85-12.1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-12.2
1:772
(b) The affordable unit(s) must be created and administered in
accordance with the regulating documents identified in
§ 85-12.2A, Purpose, of this district; and
(c) Not more than three of the 13 units may be restricted to
persons with special needs; and
(d) Of the remaining 10 units, not more than three units may be
one-bedroom units, at least four units must be two-bedroom
units, and at least three units must be three-bedroom units;
and
(e) No units may be age-restricted.
C. Accessory uses.
(1) Private residential garage and off-street parking, in accordance
with § 85-36, Off-street parking and loading, of the Zoning chapter,
except where it is superseded by the provisions in this district.
(2) Decks, balconies and porches.
(3) Sheds for tools and equipment for the maintenance of the grounds.
(4) Indoor and outdoor recreation and activity uses for residents and
their guests.
(5) Fences and hedges subject to the requirements of § 85-37.3,
Fences.
(6) Signs subject to the requirements of § 85-37, Signs.
(7) Satellite antenna less than one meter in diameter.
(8) Other customary accessory uses and structures which are clearly
incidental to the principal structures and uses.
D. Off-street parking.
(1) There shall be a minimum of 1.15 spaces per unit.
(2) At least one barrier-free parking space must be provided.
(3) Private resident parking must be accessed by a driveway separate
from commuter parking. There shall be parking spaces reserved for
residents.
E. Minimum lot area and dimensions.
(1) Minimum lot area: one acre.
(2) Minimum frontage: 300 feet.
(3) Minimum depth: 100 feet.
F. Minimum buffers.
§ 85-12.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-12.2
1:773
§ 85-13. GB General Business District.
The following regulations shall apply in all GB Districts:
(1) Rear yard: five feet.
(2) Front yard: five feet.
(3) Side yard: three feet.
G. Minimum yard depths.
(1) Front yard depth: 10 feet.
(2) Rear yard depth: 15 feet.
(3) Side yard setback to Block 1014, Lot 3: zero feet.
H. Maximum building height: four stories.
A. Permitted uses. The GB Zone District shall be limited to include the
following:
(1) Single-family and two-family residences, except apartments located
over, under or in business establishments. Single-family dwellings
shall meet all requirements of R-3 Districts. Two-family residences
shall meet all requirements of R-4 Districts.
(2) Wholesale trade, including automotive equipment, dry goods and
apparel and electrical goods stores.
(3) Retail trade, including paint, glass and wallpaper stores; hardware
stores; limited price variety stores; general stores, grocery stores
and delicatessens; meat and fish markets; fruit stores and
vegetable stores; confectionery stores; dairy products stores; retail
bakeries; clothing stores; women's accessory and specialty stores;
shoe stores; custom tailors; furriers and fur shops; furniture, home
furnishings and equipment stores; household appliance stores;
radio, television and music stores; drugstores; liquor stores;
antique stores; sporting goods stores; bicycle shops; florists;
camera stores; gift shops; beauty parlors; travel agents; floor
covering stores; medical supplies stores; drapery, curtain and
upholstery stores; insurance agents; and printing and copying
stores. [Amended 3-24-1998 by Ord. No. 796; 12-16-2003 by
Ord. No. 882; 3-23-2010 by Ord. No. 960; 5-24-2011 by Ord.
No. 987; 7-26-2011 by Ord. No. 993]
(4) Finance, insurance and real estate services, including savings and
loan associations, insurance agents and carriers, real estate agents
and banks.
(5) Personal services, including dry-cleaning establishments,
photographic studios, beauty shops, barbershops, shoe repair
§ 85-12.2 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-13
1:774
shops, spa/nail salon establishments and pet grooming
establishments. [Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 882]
(6) Medical, health and legal services, including professional offices of
physicians, dentists, lawyers and veterinarians.
(7) Other professional services, including engineering, architectural
and planning services; nonprofit educational and scientific
research agencies and accounting services.
(8) Post offices, libraries, churches, parking lots and civic associations.
(9) Accessory buildings and accessory uses normally auxiliary thereto.
(10) Clubs.
(11) Community residences for the developmentally disabled. [Added
7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 819]
(12) Community shelters for victims of domestic violence. [Added
7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 819]
(13) Community residences for the terminally ill. [Added 7-27-1999 by
Ord. No. 819]
(14) Community residences for persons with head injuries. [Added
7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 819]
(15) Health clubs. [Added 6-27-2000 by Ord. No. 829]
(16) Business offices. [Added 10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 1041]
B. Conditional uses requiring a special permit as provided in Article VIII:
(1) Public utility facilities or uses.
(2) Automotive service stations.
(3) County, state or federal facilities or uses.
(4) (Reserved)176
(5) Churches.
(6) Wireless communications towers and antennas and associated
facilities. [Added 4-23-2002 by Ord. No. 846]
(7) Restaurants, except lunch wagons, diners, road stands or any
eating place seating less than 25 people or rendering service other
than inside the premises where the business is conducted, unless
operating as a licensed outdoor cafe. A restaurant shall not be
located on a lot that is contiguous or adjacent to a single-family
176. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(4), Quick-service restaurants, was repealed 3-23-2010
by Ord. No. 960.
§ 85-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-13
1:775
residential zone. [Added 5-24-2011 by Ord. No. 987; amended
7-26-2011 by Ord. No. 993]
C. Prohibited uses. Any uses other than those uses permitted by
Subsection A or B are prohibited. Without in any way limiting the
generality and prohibition of this section, nothing contained in this
chapter shall be construed to permit the following uses in any GB
District:
(1) New or used car lots.
(2) Places of amusement such as penny arcades, shooting galleries or
buildings or structures containing games of chance or other types
of carnival enterprises such as palmistry, phrenology, astrology and
the like.
(3) Lots used for sale, rental or storage of cars, machinery,
motorcycles, boats, camping vehicles and trailers of any
description shall not be permitted.
(4) Drive-in restaurants, fast-food restaurants, quick-service
restaurants or other eating places, such as lunch wagons, diners or
road stands, or any eating places rendering service other than
inside the premises where the business is conducted, unless
operating as a licensed outdoor cafe. [Amended 3-24-1998 by
Ord. No. 796; 3-23-2010 by Ord. No. 960]
(5) Unenclosed storage yards, junkyards, auction establishments,
hotels, motels, pool halls, storage buildings, funeral parlors and
warehouses.
(6) Industrial and manufacturing uses or activities.
(7) Apartments located over, under or in business establishments.
D. Minimum lot area and dimensions.
(1) The lot area shall not be less than 5,000 square feet and shall be
computed within 110 feet of the front street line.
(2) The lot frontage shall not be less than 50 feet.
(3) The lot width shall not be less than 40 feet.
(4) The lot depth shall not be less than 80 feet.
E. Minimum yard requirements, interior lots.
(1) Front yard depth. All permitted business uses and buildings shall
be set back from the front street line at least 10 feet or shall
conform to the existing setback line in the same zone and block
front. No required front yard shall be used for the display, rental or
sale of merchandise.
§ 85-13 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-13
1:776
(2) Side yard width. None required, but if provided, a side yard shall be
at least 10 feet wide.
(3) Rear yard depth: 30 feet.
F. Minimum yard requirements, corner lots.
(1) Front yard depth. All permitted business uses and buildings shall
be set back from both street lines at least 10 feet or shall conform
to the existing setback line in the same zone and block front. No
required front street or side street yard shall be used for the
display, rental or sale of merchandise.
(2) Side street yard width: 10 feet.
(3) Interior side yard width. None required, but if provided, a side yard
shall be at least 10 feet wide.
(4) Rear yard depth: 30 feet.
G. Minimum open space requirements.
(1) The percentage of lot coverage shall not exceed 50% of the land
area of the lot.
(2) Minimum building size. No principal building shall have a ground
floor area of less than 1,800 square feet.
(3) There shall be a minimum of 2,000 square feet of lot area for each
bedroom provided in single-family and two-family dwellings.
[Added 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 819]
H. Maximum height of buildings. No building shall be erected to a height
in excess of 40 feet.
I. Detached accessory buildings and structures. Minimum distance to the
following:
(1) Principal building and each other: 10 feet.
(2) Front street: 20 feet.
(3) Side street: 10 feet.
(4) Interior lot side line: 10 feet.
(5) Interior lot rear line: 10 feet.
(6) Corner lot rear line: 10 feet.
J. Site plan review and approval. Prior to the issuance of any building
permit, zoning permit or certificate of occupancy, as the case may be,
the Planning Board shall have submitted to it for review and approval a
site plan as required in Chapter 32B, Land Subdivision and Site Plan
§ 85-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-13
1:777
§ 85-13.1. Downtown Inclusionary Overlay Residential/Mixed-Use
Zones 1 Through 4. [Added 7-25-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-10]
Review. Such site plan shall be required for all new construction,
conversions and changes in type or use.
A. Purpose. To address its affordable housing unmet need obligation, the
Borough shall implement an Inclusionary Overlay Zone Ordinance that
creates a realistic opportunity for housing in the Borough's downtown
that is affordable to low- and moderate-income households. This
chapter establishes the Downtown Inclusionary Overlay Zone and
permits the creation of multifamily housing within the downtown area
(as outlined in the appended maps),177 provided that such housing
complies with a required twenty-percent inclusionary set-aside
requirement and with the requirements of this chapter.
B. Area affected. The Downtown Inclusionary Overlay Zone is comprised
of four subzones shown on the maps in the appendix to this code.178
Overlays 1 and 2 (OL-1 and OL-2) comprise the blocks and lots
surrounding North Maple Avenue and Sheridan Avenue. Overlay 3
(OL-3) includes commercial lots fronting on Franklin Turnpike,
Sycamore Avenue, and Warren Avenue, and Overlay 4 (OL-4) includes
the first three lots north of Warren Avenue, between Sycamore Avenue
and Sheridan Avenue.
C. Special rules. Inclusionary multifamily development is permitted in
each OL overlay zone, conditioned on compliance with this chapter and
the following limitations:
(1) Where a property in the OL-1, OL-2, or OL-3 Zone is to be
developed with a multifamily inclusionary residential use and the
underlying zone is GB General Business, residential uses are
restricted to the upper stories of a building and the ground-story
use shall be a nonresidential use.
(2) Where multifamily inclusionary development is to occur on a
property in the OL-1 or OL-3 Zone, and the underlying zone is an
R-2 or R-4 Residential Zone, nonresidential uses are prohibited
from occurring on the same property.
(3) Where multifamily inclusionary development is to occur on a
property in the OL-4 Zone, such property may be developed for and
contain a mix of multifamily residential use and public use.
(4) In any multifamily inclusionary development permitted by this
section, at least 20% of the residential units must be affordable to
low- and moderate-income households. In the event that 20% of the
total number of residential units does not result in a full integer, the
177. Editor's Note: Said maps are on file in the Borough offices.
178. Editor's Note: Said maps are on file in the Borough offices.
§ 85-13 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-13.1
1:778
developer/property owner shall refer to § 2-3C with regard to
addressing the fractional unit. [Amended 3-27-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-03]
(a) The developer/property owner may round the fractional
number of units upward to provide one additional whole unit;
or
(b) The developer/property owner provides the whole number of
units resulting from the twenty-percent set-aside on the full
unit count of the development and pays a six-percent
affordable housing development fee on the number of the
balance of the total units at the site that do not generate a
whole affordable housing unit from a twenty-percent set-aside.
The number of market rate units subject to the six-percent
development fee will be calculated as follows: Total no. of units
- (Affordable units to be constructed x 5) = No. of market rate
units subject to dev. fee.
(c) Examples:
[1] If there are four total units at a site, at least one must be
affordable or the developer must provide a development of
6% on each of the four market rate units, because four
total units do not generate one full affordable housing unit
based on the 20% set-aside requirement. Units subject to
six-percent development fee: 4 units - (0 affordable units x
5) = 4 market rate units subject to dev. fee.
[2] If there are 18 total units, the developer must create four
affordable units or create three affordable units and pay a
fee of 6% on three units that do not generate one whole
affordable housing unit based on the twenty-percent setaside
requirement. Units subject to 6% development fee:
18 units - (3 affordable units x 5) =
= 18 units - 15 units
= 3 market-rate units subject to development fee
(d) The amount of the development fee shall be determined by the
Borough prior to the issuance of a building permit and shall be
imposed as a condition of development approval.
(e) In any multifamily development having five or more residential
units, at least one unit must be established as affordable to
low- and moderate-income households.
(5) All affordable units produced in an overlay district must comply
with the Borough's Affordable Housing Ordinance at Chapter 2 of
the Borough Code.
§ 85-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-13.1
1:779
(6) The effects and requirements of this chapter shall supersede the
requirements of the Borough-wide mandatory set-aside at § 2-3.
D. Permitted principal uses in the Downtown Overlay District shall be
limited to the following:
(1) All uses permitted by the underlying zoning, except that:
(a) Where the GB District is the underlying zoning, only those uses
permitted in the GB District by § 85-13A(2) through (10), (15)
and (16) are permitted as the ground-story uses in any mixeduse,
multifamily inclusionary development.
(b) Uses permitted by § 85-13A(11) through (14) are permitted as
stand-alone uses and are not subject to any other conditions of
the overlay zone ordinance. However, if a use permitted by
§ 85-13A(11) qualifies as an eligible affordable housing credit,
then such use may be permitted as an upper-story use.
(2) A multifamily inclusionary residential use is permitted, conditioned
on compliance with § 85-13.1C, Special rules, in this chapter.
(3) In the OL-4 Overlay Zone, the following uses are permitted
individually or as mixed-use, provided that compliance with the
density and building height requirements for the OL-4 Zone are
observed and each use has separate building entrances and
parking areas.
(a) Municipal government uses; and
(b) Inclusionary, multifamily residential uses.
E. Accessory buildings, structures and uses shall be permitted when used
in conjunction with a principal permitted use and in compliance with
§ 85-15.1, Accessory buildings and structures.
(1) Private residential garage and off-street parking, in accordance
with § 85-36, Off-street parking and loading, of the Zoning chapter,
except where it is superseded by the rules in § 85-13.1H, Parking,
below.
(2) Decks, balconies and porches.
(3) Sheds for tools and equipment for the maintenance of the grounds.
(4) Outdoor recreational uses for residents and their guests.
(5) Fences and hedges subject to the requirements of § 85-37.3,
Fences, except where superseded by this chapter.
(6) Signs subject to the requirements of § 85-37, Signs, except where
superseded by this chapter.
(7) Satellite antenna less than one meter in diameter.
§ 85-13.1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-13.1
1:780
(8) Outdoor seating for residents, employees, and customers
(§ 85-15.1C of the Accessory buildings and structures section shall
not prohibit these structures from being located in the front yard).
(9) Outdoor dining/cafe, as regulated by § 85-13.1I(10), Outdoor
dining/cafes, in this chapter.
(10) Other customary accessory uses and structures which are clearly
incidental to the principal structures and uses.
F. Prohibited uses.
(1) Where inclusionary multifamily uses are permitted by this chapter,
nonresidential uses are prohibited on a second or third story.
However, where a mixed-use development is permitted by this
chapter with a ground-floor nonresidential use, an office, utility
room, or storage room associated with a ground-story
nonresidential use in a three-story building may occupy not more
than one-fifth (20%) of the gross floor area of the second story,
provided that it is not accessed by any hall or stairway shared with
residential uses in the same building.
(2) Where the underlying zoning is GB, residential uses are prohibited
from occupying the ground story.
(3) Except in the OL-4 Zone, where the underlying zoning is R-2 or R-4,
nonresidential uses are prohibited.
G. Bulk standards.
(1) The bulk standards of the R-2 and R-4 Zones shall be superseded by
the following standards for any new multifamily development,
provided that it conforms to the inclusionary set-aside standards of
this chapter, as follows:
(a) Maximum improved lot coverage: 60%.
(b) Maximum lot coverage: 40%.
(c) Minimum open space requirements of the R-2 and R-4 Zones
do not apply.
(d) Front yard setback: 15 feet.
(2) The bulk standards of the GB Zone shall apply to any property for
which the underlying zoning is the GB Zone, except that:
(a) The required front yard setback for any building complying
with this chapter shall be reduced to three feet from the public
right-of-way line or the existing average setback of
neighboring buildings.
(b) Where two adjacent properties provide contiguous side yards,
the minimum side yard requirement for each property is
§ 85-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-13.1
1:781
reduced from 10 feet to five feet, so that the total space
between the principal buildings is at least 10 feet, provided
that access to the combined ten-foot side yard is shared
between both properties. Otherwise, the existing side yard
standards for the GB Zone apply.
(3) Density. The underlying zoning requirements shall be superseded
by this chapter to permit the following maximum net densities for
each overlay subzone, in dwelling units per acre:
(a) OL-1: 15 du/ac.
(b) OL-2: 12 du/ac.
(c) OL-3: 12 du/ac.
(d) OL-4: 6 du/ac.
(4) Number of stories: The underlying zoning requirements shall be
superseded by this chapter to permit the following maximum
number of stories for new or enlarged buildings in each overlay
subzone:
(a) OL-1: three stories.
(b) OL-2: three stories.
(c) OL-3: two stories.
(d) OL-4: two stories.
(5) There shall be a planted buffer of at least five feet between any
parking area and the boundary of a contiguous residential zone
outside of the downtown overlay area.
(6) There shall be a planted buffer of at least 10 feet between any
principal building and the boundary of a contiguous residential
zone outside of the downtown overlay area.
(7) All other properties and developments are subject to the side yard
setbacks of the underlying zoning, except where otherwise
provided in this section.
H. Parking.
(1) Off-street parking shall be restricted to the rear yard or the side
yard.
(2) The minimum amount of parking required for a site shall be based
on the rates required by § 85-36, Off-street parking and loading,
except that:
(a) Parking for residential units shall be calculated as:
[1] Studio/efficiency and one-bedrooms: 0.8 space.
§ 85-13.1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-13.1
1:782
[2] Two-bedroom: 1.3 spaces.
[3] Three-bedroom: 1.9 spaces.
(b) The minimum parking requirement for mixed-use sites shall be
calculated based on the table below, as follows:
[1] Determine the minimum parking requirements for each
use on the site pursuant to § 85-36, Off-Street Parking and
Loading, except that the following shall supersede those
parking requirements in any mixed-use structure:
[a] Sit-down restaurants and bars: one parking space for
every four seats.
[b] Take-out restaurant: one parking space for every 30
square feet of gross floor area of customer/patron
space.
[c] Office: one parking space for every 300 square feet of
gross floor area.
[d] Retail: one parking space for every 200 feet of gross
floor area.
[2] Multiply each minimum parking requirement by the
corresponding percentages for each of the time periods
set forth in columns B through G of the table below.
[3] Calculate the total for each time period.
[4] The minimum parking requirement shall be the largest
sum of the six columns.
A B C D E F G
Land Use Weekdays Weekends
1:00 a.m. to
7:00 a.m.
7:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
6:00 p.m. to
1:00 a.m.
1:00 a.m. to
7:00 a.m.
7:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
6:00 p.m. to
1:00 a.m.
Office 5% 100% 5% 0% 15% 0%
Retail 0% 100% 80% 0% 100% 60%
Restaurant
(not 24
hours)
20% 70% 100% 30% 75% 100%
Residential 100% 60% 100% 100% 75% 95%
Example. A ground-floor restaurant with 36 seats
(requiring nine parking spaces), with a seven-space
residential parking requirement and a three-space office
requirement:
§ 85-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-13.1
1:783
A B C D E F G
Land Use Weekdays Weekends
1:00 a.m. to
7:00 a.m.
7:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
6:00 p.m. to
1:00 a.m.
1:00 a.m. to
7:00 a.m.
7:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
6:00 p.m. to
1:00 a.m.
Office 5% x 3 100% x 3 5% x 3 0% x 3 15% x 3 0% x 3
Retail 0% x 0 100% x 0 80% x 0 0% x 0 100% x 0 60% x 0
Restaurant
(not 24
hours)
20% x 9 70% x 9 100% x 9 30% x 9 75% x 9 100% x 9
Residential 100% x 7 60% x 7 100% x 7 100% x 7 75% x 7 95% x 7
A B C D E F G
Land Use Weekdays Weekends
1:00 a.m. to
7:00 a.m.
7:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
6:00 p.m. to
1:00 a.m.
1:00 a.m. to
7:00 a.m.
7:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
6:00 p.m. to
1:00 a.m.
Office 0.15 ? 1 3 0.15 ? 1 0 0.45 ? 1 0
Retail 0 0 0 0 0 0
Restaurant
(not 24
hours)
1.8 ? 2 6.3 ? 7 9 3 6.75 ? 7 9
Residential 7 4.2 ? 5 7 7 5.25 ? 6 6.65 ? 7
Total 10 15 17 10 14 16
Example parking requirement =17.
[5] The parking requirement calculated by this method will be
subject to Board review.
[a] At the time of Board review of the parking calculation
for a mixed-use development, the Board may require
the property owner to regulate the hours during which
parking for one or more uses on the site is permitted.
(3) Alternative parking options.
(a) If the parking requirement calculated in § 85-13.1H(2) above
exceeds the number of parking stalls that a site can
realistically accommodate, an applicant may address its
parking balance as follows:
[1] Shared parking. An applicant may participate in a shared
parking agreement, provided the following:
[a] A shared parking site for residents and employees
shall not be farther than 300 feet from the building, as
§ 85-13.1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-13.1
1:784
measured by distance walked along public rights-ofway
and pedestrian walkway areas.
[b] A shared parking site for customers shall not be
farther than 500 feet from the building, as measured
by distance walked along public rights-of-way and
pedestrian walkway areas.
[c] All required barrier-free parking must be located on
site and may not be displaced to a shared parking site.
[2] An applicant requesting use of an off-site shared parking
arrangement must submit a study demonstrating:
[a] That the required parking cannot feasibly be provided
on site without compromising the economic value of
the proposed development.
[b] That the distance between the site and the shared
parking meets the requirements above.
[c] That the proposed shared parking location can
reasonably accommodate peak parking and traffic for
all uses that will be sharing the parking.
(b) An applicant requesting to use shared parking must enter into
an agreement with the owner of the shared parking site.
[1] Shared parking agreement. A shared parking plan will be
enforced through written agreement among all owners of
record. The owner of the shared parking area shall enter
into a written developer's agreement with the Borough
with enforcement running to the Borough providing that
the land comprising the parking area shall never be
disposed of except in conjunction with the sale of the
building which the parking area serves so long as the
facilities are required and that the owner agrees to bear
the expense of recording the agreement and such
agreement shall bind his or her heirs, successors, and
assigns. An attested copy of the agreement between the
owners of record shall be submitted to the administrative
officer for recordation in a form established by the
Borough attorney. Recordation of the agreement must take
place before issuance of a building permit or certificate of
occupancy for any use to be served by the shared parking
area. A shared parking agreement may be revoked only if
all required off-street parking spaces will be provided on
site in accordance with the off-street parking schedules in
this section. The written agreement shall be voided by the
Borough if other off-street facilities are provided in accord
with these zoning regulations.
§ 85-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-13.1
1:785
(c) Parking fund contribution. For an applicant that obtains
variance or waiver relief for fewer parking spaces than
required by § 85-13.1H(1) and (2) above, a payment shall be
made to the Borough in the amount to be determined for each
parking space in which said relief has been granted.
[1] The fee required under this § 85-13.1H(3)(c) shall only
apply to new deficiencies in parking spaces resulting from
a change in use.
[2] An applicant is permitted to pay the fee in lieu of parking
for not more than half of its required parking.
[3] An applicant requesting to pay the fee in lieu of more than
half of its required parking must receive permission from
the Borough, based on a determination that the applicant
cannot provide adequate parking on or off site without
compromising the economic viability of the proposed
residential and nonresidential use and that there are no
available shared parking opportunities meeting the
requirements of this chapter.
[4] The said payment shall be deposited by the Borough into a
dedicated account designated as the "Borough of Ho-Ho-
Kus Parking Fund." The payment shall be due prior to
issuance of a building permit. Any funds deposited into
said account shall be utilized by the Borough for the
express purpose of installing, replacing or repairing
parking spaces or parking lots on sites to be determined by
the Borough Engineer, upon proper authorization from the
governing board.
(4) An applicant may request of the governing body a waiver or
modification of the payment upon showing of good cause.
(5) Per New Jersey Department of Transportation Bicycle Compatible
Roadways and Bikeways design guidelines, all facilities that
provide parking to the public shall provide parking for bicycles at
the rate of one bicycle parking space per 10 automobile parking
spaces for the first 100 parking stalls and one bicycle space for
every 20 automobile parking spaces beyond that.
(6) Circulation.
(a) On-site parking shall be designed to avoid the backing out of
vehicles onto public rights-of-way, except for townhouses
where an individual townhouse unit's garage and associated
parking apron is designed to allow one to back out directly
onto a public right-of-way.
(b) For any new buildings with frontage on Maple Avenue, the
Borough encourages the developer to attempt to connect
§ 85-13.1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-13.1
1:786
driveways to Brookside Avenue or First Street before resorting
to connecting the driveway to Maple Avenue.
(7) Landscaping in parking areas.
(a) At least 15% of the ground area of parking lots (including
driveways) shall be devoted to landscaping along the street
right-of-way.
(b) Parking areas shall be provided with landscaping along
adjoining streets and properties with plant material, fencing or
a wall. Interior parking lot landscaping shall also be required.
Landscaped areas should be located in protected areas such as
along walkways, in center islands, or at the end of parking bays
and shall be distributed throughout the parking area to
mitigate the view of the parked vehicles without interfering
with adequate sight distance for vehicles or pedestrians. The
landscaping shall consist of hardy, low-maintenance varieties
of trees, and shrub plantings no higher than three feet unless
otherwise directed by the Board.
(c) One shade tree, with a minimum caliper size of 2.5 inches to
three inches at time of planting, measured three feet above the
ground, shall be provided for every 10 parking spaces. Trees
shall be staggered and/or spaced so as not to interfere with
driver vision and shall have branches no lower than six feet.
(d) Loading areas shall be screened with landscaping, fencing,
berms, walls or any combination thereof and shall not be less
than six feet in height. The screening shall be sufficient to at
least partially obscure the view of parked vehicles, loading
platforms and loading activities.
(e) Parking located in a side yard must be screened from the
public right-of-way by a fence designed and composed of
materials that complement or enhance the architecture of the
neighborhood.
(8) Floodplain.
(a) Within the flood-fringe area, parking must be compliant with
N.J.A.C. 7:13-11.6.
(b) Parking located outside of the flood hazard area may be below
grade.
I. Design standards. The following are design standards; deviations from
these standards require waiver relief.
(1) Context. Development in overlay zones shall be sensitive to the
established and historic context of its surrounding developed
character, in recognition of the fact that a cohesive built
environment is an essential component of the Borough's character.
§ 85-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-13.1
1:787
In an effort to ensure a visually attractive environment, new
buildings and reconstructions are encouraged to incorporate such
building elements as recessed or extended entrances, enhanced
corner treatments, graphic panels, display windows, and vertical
and horizontal articulations, as detailed below. The following
design and related streetscape standards are to be addressed as
part of all development applications in the Overlay Zones.
(2) Goals of design standards.
(a) To provide designs that complement the historic developed
character of the downtown and its surrounding neighborhoods,
through appropriate massing, scale, use of building materials
and original architectural details, and fenestration.
(b) To provide multistory buildings to be designed with horizontal
and vertical articulation to facilitate an enhanced visual
interest in the neighborhood's architecture and discourage
buildings that are characterized by nondescript blank walls.
(c) To provide the use of such building materials as brick, wood,
native stone and clapboard to ensure complementary visual
interest such as is found in the neighborhood and discourage
use of vinyl, cement block and aluminum.
(d) Provide at-grade retail storefronts to be developed with
facades that are characterized by substantial window areas as
a total proportion of the first-story elevation to maximize
visibility of store interiors and thereby enhance visual interest
for pedestrian experiences.
(3) Building design elements.
(a) Facade design.
[1] Horizontal articulation between floors. Each facade should
be designed to have a delineated floor line between street
level and upper floors. This delineation can be in the form
of a masonry belt course, a concrete lintel or a cornice line
delineated by wood detailing.
[2] Vertical articulation. Each building facade facing a public
right-of-way must have elements of vertical articulation
comprised of columns, piers, recessed windows or entry
designs, overhangs, ornamental projection of the molding,
different exterior materials or wall colors, or recessed
portions of the main surface of the wall itself. The vertical
articulations shall be designed in accordance with the
following:
[a] Each vertical articulation shall be no greater than 30
feet apart.
§ 85-13.1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-13.1
1:788
[b] Each vertical articulation shall be a minimum of one
foot deep.
[c] Each vertical projection noted above may extend into
the required front yard a maximum of 18 inches in
depth.
[3] Buildings with expansive blank walls are prohibited.
(4) Fenestration.
(a) At least 60% of the first floor of retail building frontage shall be
clear window glass. This percentage shall be calculated within
the area of the building facade that is located between three
feet and 10 feet above sidewalk level.
(b) A minimum of 40% of the front entrance of retail development
shall consist of glass in order to maximize the visibility of store
interiors.
(c) Materials. Exterior building materials shall be classified as
either primary, secondary or accent materials. The facade shall
be designed in accordance with the following:
[1] The primary material shall cover at least 60% of the facade
of the building.
[2] Secondary materials shall cover not more than 40% of the
facade.
(5) Rooflines/building height.
(a) The top of all buildings must be capped by a cornice or sloping
roof element.
(b) An additional five feet in height for ornamentation such as
parapets and cornices is permitted.
(c) All roof-mounted equipment, such as HVAC units, shall be
screened from public view by use of parapet walls, as
regulated elsewhere in this chapter, provided that the
maximum height for screening roof-mounted elevator
equipment shall be eight feet, with such screening set back
minimally 10 feet from the edge of the roof.
(6) Awnings and canopies. See § 85-37.2, Awnings, canopies and
marquees.
(7) Multifamily design.
(a) The placement of multifamily buildings, including mixed-use
buildings, within overlay zones shall be harmonious in
architectural style with the other buildings in the immediate
area.
§ 85-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-13.1
1:789
(b) Angled walls, enlarged foyer or atrium areas, and building
articulation are encouraged.
(8) Townhouse design.
(a) For townhouses, a maximum of six dwelling units in a single
row with a minimum offset of two feet between every two
dwelling units is encouraged.
(b) The rooflines of at least 30% of the number of units attached in
a structure are to be staggered in height by not less than 2.5
feet of the height of the rooflines of the other units in such
structures and/or by other features which will provide relief or
articulation to the roofline.
(9) Streetscape design. All properties shall comply with the following
requirements:
(a) Where buildings are set back from the street 10 feet or more, a
landscaped area with a minimum width of five feet shall be
provided.
(b) All sidewalks installed in along the property frontage in
portions of the GB or R-2 Zones within the downtown overlay
shall be decorative paver sidewalks or decoratively scored
concrete, consistent with the existing streetscape.
(c) Streetscape amenities such as benches, decorative artwork,
bike racks, trash receptacles, etc., shall be incorporated as
part of the streetscape, as deemed appropriate.
(d) Street trees shall be provided along all public rights-of-way in
accordance with the following standards:
[1] Street trees should be located at a minimum distance of 40
feet on center. The exact spacing and planting location
shall be evaluated on a site-specific basis and adjusted to
reflect the neighborhood and existing or proposed
buildings to minimize potential obstruction and visibility
impacts on wall business signage.
[2] Trees shall have a minimum caliper size of 2.5 inches to
three inches at time of planting.
(e) Garbage and recycling containers shall be located in the rear
yard where that yard is accessible by collection vehicles. If the
rear yard is not accessible by collection vehicles, the
containers may be located in the side yard or inside the
building. If the containers are stored outdoors, they must be
screened by a fence or other enclosure. Landscaping is
encouraged around the enclosure.
(10) Outdoor dining/cafes:
§ 85-13.1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-13.1
1:790
(a) Outdoor dining/cafes, where proposed, may be located on
sidewalks, plazas, and courtyards immediately adjacent to any
eating and food establishment. Such facilities shall be provided
in a manner that pedestrian circulation or access to store
entrances is not impaired.
(b) The operation of an outdoor cafe shall be located such that
there is at least four feet of clear and unobstructed
passageway between the tables, chairs, and barriers and street
trees, bike racks, lampposts, sign posts, and any other fixtures
or obstructions. The approving authority may require more
than four feet to protect public safety if it deems necessary
because of site-specific conditions.
(c) The area occupied by the outdoor cafe must be located at least
10 feet from any driveway.
(d) A screen visually separating adjacent at-grade residential units
from the proposed outdoor cafe area must be provided. The
screening may include landscaping, screen walls, and/or
fencing materials or any combination thereof.
(e) Umbrellas, awnings, canopies, and heating units are permitted
in outdoor cafe areas.
(f) All outdoor cafe areas shall be designed in compliance with the
Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA) guidelines.
(11) Landscape standards.
(a) A landscape plan prepared by a licensed landscape architect,
licensed by the New Jersey State Board of Architects, or other
qualified individual, shall be submitted with any plan for
development.
(b) All portions of the property not utilized by buildings or paved
surfaces shall be landscaped utilizing combinations such as
landscaped fencing, shrubbery, lawn area, ground cover,
existing vegetation, and the planting of coniferous and/or
deciduous trees native to the area in order to maintain or
reestablish the vegetation in the area and lessen the visual
impact of the structures and paved areas.
(c) Landscaping shall be designed to achieve a thorough
integration of the various elements of site design, including
building and parking placement and natural features.
(d) The use of passive systems, such as rain gardens, to offset offsite
stormwater discharge shall be utilized to the extent
feasible.
§ 85-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-13.1
1:791
§ 85-13.2. General Business/Inclusionary Residential. [Added
9-26-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-12; amended 9-26-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-13]
(e) Water conservation measures, such as drip irrigation and soil
moisture-sensing irrigation systems, shall be used where
practicable.
A. Purpose. To address its affordable housing obligation in compliance
with settlement agreements entered into with Fair Share Housing
Center, Chamberlain Developers, Inc., and Jonathan L. Mechanic (d.b.a.
Ho-Ho-Kus Crossings) on December 21, 2016, and January 5, 2017, Ho-
Ho-Kus Borough shall rezone the property at Block 1015, Lot 9, to
permit the construction or reconstruction of a three-story, mixed-use
development having ground-story commercial use and a total of four
dwelling units on the second and third stories of which at least one unit
will be affordable to low- and moderate-income households in
accordance with the Chamberlain Settlement Agreement cited above,
the rules at N.J.A.C. 5:93-1 et seq. ("COAH's Second Round rules"),179
the Borough's Affordable Housing Ordinance at Chapter 2 of the
Borough's Code, and the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls
(UHAC) at N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.
B. Permitted uses in the GB-IR Zone District shall be limited to the
following:
(1) All uses permitted in the GB District by § 85-13A(2) through (10),
(15) and (16) are permitted as ground-story uses, of a mixed-use
building, provided that:
(a) There must be a total of three stories in the same building, of
which the second and third stories must have not more than
four housing units of which at least one must be affordable to
low- and moderate-income households; and
(b) The affordable unit(s) shall be created and administered in
accordance with the regulating documents and pursuant to the
Chamberlain Agreement identified in § 85-13.2A, Purpose, of
this district.
(2) In no event shall nonresidential uses be permitted on the second or
third stories within the GB-IR District.
C. Conditional uses in the GB-IR Zone District shall be limited to the
following: The following conditional uses in the GB District as permitted
in § 85-13B(1), (3) and (7) are permitted as ground-story uses.
D. Accessory uses in the GB-IR Zone District shall be limited to the
following:
179. Editor's Note: The regulations in N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired October 16, 2016.
§ 85-13.1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-13.2
1:792
(1) Private residential garage and off-street parking in accordance
with § 85-36, Off-street parking and loading, of the Zoning chapter,
except where it is superseded by the provisions in § 85-13.2I, Offstreet
parking, below.
(2) Decks, balconies and porches.
(3) Sheds for tools and equipment for the maintenance of the grounds.
(4) Outdoor recreational uses for residents and their guests.
(5) Fences and hedges subject to the requirements of § 85-37.3,
Fences, except where superseded by this district.
(6) Signs subject to the requirements of § 85-37, Signs.
(7) Satellite antenna less than one meter in diameter.
(8) Outdoor seating for residents, employees, and customers
(§ 85-15.1C of the Accessory buildings and structures section shall
not prohibit these structures from being located in the front yard).
(9) Outdoor dining/cafe in accordance with § 85-13.1I(10), Outdoor
dining/cafes, in the Downtown Inclusionary Overlay District
regulations.
(10) Other customary accessory uses and structures which are clearly
incidental to the principal structures and uses.
(11) Detached accessory buildings and structures must comply with the
accessory building and structures bulk standards of the GB General
Business District in § 85-13I of the Borough's Code.
E. Minimum lot area and dimensions.
(1) Lot area: 5,000 square feet.
(2) Lot frontage: 60 feet.
(3) Lot depth: 90 feet.
(4) Lot width: 50 feet.
F. Minimum principal structure yard depths.
(1) Front yard depth: zero feet.
(2) Side yard depth: five feet.
(3) Combined side yard depth: 10 feet.
(4) Rear yard depth: 25 feet.
G. Maximum building bulk.
(1) Height: 35 feet.
§ 85-13.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-13.2
1:793
§ 85-14. IP Industrial Park District I. [Amended 8-27-1985 by Ord.
No. 586]
(2) Stories: three.
(3) Lot coverage: 40%.
H. Minimum accessory structure yard depths.
(1) Front yard depth: one foot.
(2) Side yard depth: 0.5 foot.
(3) Rear yard depth: 10 feet.
I. Off-street parking.
(1) Parking amount and vehicular access shall be provided in
accordance with the Chamberlain Settlement Agreement and
concept plan attached, as cited above.180
(2) Off-street parking must be provided in the rear yard.
(3) Loading activity shall not occur in the parking area unless it can be
demonstrated that such activity can occur without disrupting
circulation on the subject property or neighboring lots.
(4) A minimum of one barrier-free parking space must be provided on
site.
J. Circulation.
(1) Vehicular access, except for emergency vehicles, shall not occur
from Maple Avenue unless it can be demonstrated that driveway
connections to Brookside Avenue or First Street are not feasible.
K. Design. New or reconstructed buildings shall comply with the design
standards provided in § 85-13.1I of the Downtown Inclusionary Overlay
District.
A. Permitted uses. This district is intended for limited industrial and
manufacturing uses, warehousing, offices for business, professional,
executive or administrative purposes and scientific or research
laboratories, all of which shall be conducted within the confines of a
building.
B. Conditional uses requiring a special permit, as provided in § 85-40,
shall be:
(1) Public utility facilities or uses.
(2) County, state or federal facilities or uses.
180. Editor's Note: Said agreement and plan are on file in the Borough offices.
§ 85-13.2 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-14
1:794
(3) Wireless communications towers and antennas and associated
facilities. [Added 4-23-2002 by Ord. No. 846]
C. Prohibited uses. Any uses other than those uses permitted by
Subsection A or B are prohibited and any process of assembly,
manufacture or treatment which is noxious or injurious by reason of the
production or emission of fire, explosives, radioactivity, dust, smoke,
refuse matter, odor, gas fumes, noise, vibration or similar substance or
condition that would tend to impair or hinder the most appropriate use
of land in the vicinity. Without in any way limiting the generality and
prohibition of this section, nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed to permit the following uses in the IP District:
(1) Wholesale storage and distribution of petroleum, oil, chemicals and
similar products.
(2) Junkyards.
(3) Food processing plants.
(4) Paper manufacturing plants.
(5) Primary metals industries.
(6) Retail sales.
D. Minimum lot area and dimensions.
(1) The lot area shall not be less than three acres and shall be
computed within 600 feet of the lot line adjacent to the railroad
property.
(2) Due to the present lack of lot frontage there is no requirement for
said frontage within the district.
(3) The lot width shall not be less than 200 feet.
(4) The lot depth shall not be less than 300 feet.
E. Minimum yard requirements, interior lots.
(1) The front yard depth shall be 10 feet.
(2) Side yard width. There shall be two side yards, and no side yard
shall be less than 35 feet. Off-street parking, as required, may be
permitted in the side yard, provided that no parking area is closer
than 10 feet to any building or any side property line.
(3) The interior side yard width shall be 35 feet.
(4) The rear yard depth shall be 35 feet. The rear yard may be used for
off-street parking; provided, however, that no parking area shall be
nearer than 10 feet to any building or any rear property line.
F. Minimum yard requirements, corner lots.
§ 85-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-14
1:795
(1) The front yard depth shall be 10 feet.
(2) Side yard width. There shall be two side yards, and no side yard
shall be less than 35 feet. Off-street parking as required may be
permitted in the interior side yard, provided that no parking area is
closer than 10 feet to a building or any side property line but shall
not be permitted in the street side yard.
(3) The rear yard depth shall be 35 feet. The rear yard may be used for
off-street parking; provided, however, that no parking area shall be
nearer than 10 feet to any building or any rear property line.
G. Minimum open space requirements.
(1) Lot coverage by principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed
30% of the land area of the lot.
(2) Minimum building size. No principal building shall have a ground
floor area of less than 10,000 square feet.
H. Maximum height of buildings. No building shall be erected to a height
in excess of 40 feet, except the necessary mechanical appurtenances
usually carried above the roof level, which shall not exceed an
additional 15 feet. No detached accessory building shall exceed 3/4 the
height of the principal building.
I. Detached accessory buildings and structures shall be minimum
distances to the following:
(1) Principal building and each other. The minimum distance between
a principal building except in the case of existing buildings or their
replacement, and an accessory building shall be 25 feet.
(2) Front street: 60 feet.
(3) Side street: 50 feet.
(4) Interior lot side line: 20 feet.
(5) Interior lot rear line: 20 feet.
(6) Corner lot rear line: 30 feet.
J. Certificates of occupancy. The Zoning Administrator shall issue all
renovation and/or alteration building permits, as well as, all certificates
of occupancy in the event of a change of occupancy in any existing
building.
K. Site plan approval. In the event of construction of a new building, prior
to the issuance of any building permit, zoning permit or certificate of
occupancy, as the case may be, the Planning Board shall have submitted
to it for review and approval a site plan as required by Chapter 32B,
Land Subdivision and Site Plan Review, of the Code of the Borough of
Ho-Ho-Kus.
§ 85-14 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-14.1
1:796
§ 85-14.1. IP Industrial Park District II. [Added 8-27-1985 by Ord.
No. 586181]
A. Permitted uses. This district is intended for limited industrial and
manufacturing uses, warehousing, offices for business, professional,
executive or administrative purposes and scientific or research
laboratories, all of which shall be conducted within the confines of a
building.
B. Conditional uses requiring a special permit as provided in § 85-40.
(1) Public utility facilities or uses.
(2) County, state or federal facilities or uses.
(3) Wireless communications towers and antennas and associated
facilities. [Added 4-23-2002 by Ord. No. 846]
C. Prohibited uses. Any uses other than those uses permitted by
Subsection A or B are prohibited and any process of assembly,
manufacture or treatment which is noxious or injurious by reason of the
production or emission of fire, explosives, radioactivity, dust, smoke,
refuse matter, odor, gas fumes, noise, vibration or similar substance or
condition that would tend to impair or hinder the most appropriate use
of land in the vicinity. Without in any way limiting the generality and
prohibition of this section, nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed to permit the following uses in the IP District:
(1) Wholesale storage and distribution of petroleum, oil, chemicals and
similar products.
(2) Junkyards.
(3) Food processing plants.
(4) Paper manufacturing plants.
(5) Primary metals industries.
(6) Retail sales.
D. Minimum lot area and dimensions.
(1) The lot area shall not be less than 2 1/2 acres and shall be
computed within 600 feet of the lot line adjacent to the railroad
property.
(2) The lot frontage shall not be less than 200 feet.
(3) The lot width shall not be less than 200 feet.
(4) The lot depth shall not be less than 250 feet.
181. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former § 85-14.1,
Applicability, as § 85-15.
§ 85-14.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-14.1
1:797
E. Minimum yard requirements, interior lots.
(1) The front yard depth shall be 60 feet.
(2) Side yard width. There shall be two side yards, and no side yard
shall be less than 50 feet. Off-street parking, as required, may be
permitted in the side yard, provided that no parking area is closer
than 10 feet to any building or any side property line.
(3) The interior side yard width shall be 35 feet.
(4) The rear yard depth shall be 35 feet. The rear yard may be used for
off-street parking; provided, however, that no parking area shall be
nearer than 10 feet to any building or any rear property line.
F. Minimum yard requirements, corner lots.
(1) The front yard depth shall be 10 feet.
(2) Side yard width. There shall be two side yards, and no side yard
shall be less than 35 feet. Off-street parking as required may be
permitted in the interior side yard, provided that no parking area is
closer than 10 feet to a building or any side property line but shall
not be permitted in the street side yard.
(3) The rear yard depth shall be 35 feet. The rear yard may be used for
off-street parking; provided, however, that no parking area shall be
nearer than 10 feet to any building or any rear property line.
G. Minimum open space requirements.
(1) Lot coverage by principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed
30% of the land area of the lot.
(2) Minimum building size. No principal building shall have a ground
floor area of less than 10,000 square feet.
H. Maximum height of buildings. No building shall be erected to a height
in excess of 40 feet, except the necessary mechanical appurtenances
usually carried above the roof level, which shall nut exceed an
additional 15 feet. No detached accessory building shall exceed 3% the
height of the principal building.
I. Detached accessory buildings and structures shall be minimum
distances to the following:
(1) Principal building and each other. The minimum distance between
a principal building except in the case of existing buildings or their
replacement, and an accessory building shall be 25 feet.
(2) Front line: 60 feet.
(3) Side street: 50 feet.
(4) Interior lot side line: 20 feet.
§ 85-14.1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-14.1
1:798
§ 85-14.2. IP Industrial Park District III. [Added 4-23-2002 by Ord.
No. 846]
(5) Interior lot rear line: 20 feet.
(6) Corner lot rear line: 30 feet.
J. Certificates of occupancy. The Zoning Administrator shall issue all
renovation and/or alteration building permits, as well as, all certificates
of occupancy in the event of a change of occupancy in any existing
building.
K. Site plan approval. In the event of construction of a new building, prior
to the issuance of any building permit, zoning permit or certificate of
occupancy, as the case may be, the Planning Board shall have submitted
to it for review and approval a site plan as required by Chapter 32B,
Land Subdivision and Site Plan Review, of the Code of the Borough of
Ho-Ho-Kus.
A. Permitted uses; conditional uses; applicability.
(1) There is hereby established a new Industrial Park (IP) District III
Zone.
(2) This District shall comprise properties shown as follows on the
Borough Tax Map and as further defined by the map prepared by
the Borough Engineer and incorporated herein by reference: Block
602, Lot 1, and Block 603, Lots 3 and 4.
(3) This Zone is intended for municipal buildings, offices and facilities,
including a Department of Public Works site and Recycling Center.
(4) Conditional uses as applicable requiring a special permit are
permitted as provided in § 85-40 et seq., as well as wireless
communication towers and antennas and associated facilities as
otherwise regulated pursuant to this chapter.
B. Prohibited uses. Any uses other than those permitted by Subsection A
are hereby prohibited.
C. Minimum lot area and dimensions.
(1) Lot area: one acre.
(2) Lot frontage: 200 feet.
(3) Lot width: 200 feet.
(4) Lot depth: 100 feet.
(5) Lot coverage: 50%.
(6) Improved lot coverage: not required.
(7) Front depth: 10 feet.
§ 85-14.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-14.2
1:799
(8) Side width: 10 feet.
(9) Rear depth: 10 feet.
D. The Borough Engineer is hereby authorized and directed to amend the
Official Land Use/Zoning Map182 of the Borough to reflect this rezoning.
182. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 85-14.2 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-14.2
1:800
ARTICLE V
General Provisions
§ 85-15. Applicability.183
Each of the provisions of this article shall apply to all zone districts, unless
otherwise stated.
§ 85-15.1. Accessory buildings and structures.
§ 85-16. Buildings per lot.
In the R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Zones, only one building shall be used as a
dwelling per lot.
§ 85-17. Validity of permits previously issued.
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in plans, construction
or designated use for which a building permit has been heretofore issued
and the construction of which shall have been diligently pursued within
three months of the date of such permit, and the ground story framework of
which, including the second tier of beams, shall have been completed within
six months of the date of the permit.
§ 85-18. Front yards.
If a building is located diagonally on a lot facing two streets, the yards
adjoining both streets shall comply with the front yard requirement.
A. Accessory buildings and structures as part of principal buildings. Any
structure, building and/or part of a building and/or structure attached
to a principal building shall adhere to the yard requirements for the
principal building.
B. Constructed after principal building. No accessory building or structure
may be built on any lot on which there is no principal building.
C. Distance from property lines. No accessory building or structure shall
be located within the front yard. Accessory buildings and/or structures
shall comply with the minimum distance from the side and rear
property lines as contained herein.
D. Area of accessory buildings. The total ground floor area of all accessory
buildings on a lot shall not exceed the ground floor area of the principal
building and may not occupy more than 25% of the required rear yard,
whichever is smaller.
E. Dwellings prohibited. No accessory building or structure shall be used
as a dwelling.
183. Editor's Note: Former § 85-15, Accessory buildings and structures, was renumbered to
become § 85-15.1, pursuant to Ord. No. 586, adopted 8-27-1985.
§ 85-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-19
1:801
§ 85-19. Conversion of dwellings.
The conversion of any existing dwelling to a business use shall comply with
the district regulations of this chapter and shall be subject to the review and
approval of a site plan prior to the issuance of the building permit.
§ 85-20. Construction involving subsequent risk.
No permit shall be granted for a building or use if the design or construction
of same is likely to involve exceptional risk of traffic congestion, public
safety or hazard.
§ 85-21. Groundwater supplies.
No permit shall be granted for a building or use until the applicant has
complied with all federal and state statutes, rules and regulations with
respect to permitted distances from existing wells, infiltration gallery,
spring or similar source of groundwater now or hereafter developed for a
public water supply system.
§ 85-22. Land fill.
All lots being filled shall be filled with topsoil and/or clean fill to allow
complete surface draining of the lot into local storm sewer systems. No
construction shall be permitted which creates or aggravates water
stagnation or a drainage problem.
§ 85-23. Landscaping.
All properties shall be suitably landscaped, except for areas covered by
buildings or surfaced as parking or service areas. All landscaping shall be
properly maintained throughout the life of any use on any lot.
§ 85-24. Lighting and sound systems.
The provisions of this section shall apply to all principal and accessory uses
or activities permitted within a residential district or within 200 feet of a
residential district boundary line. Any outdoor lighting shall be adequately
shielded and directed away from the adjoining properties. Any public
address system or loudspeaker device which can be heard beyond the
property line is specifically prohibited.
§ 85-25. Natural features to be preserved.
No structure shall be built within 50 feet of the bed of a stream. No building
shall be constructed on land subject to periodic overflow or on land which
has an average water table within two feet of the ground surface. No
person shall strip, excavate or otherwise remove topsoil for sale or other use
other than on the premises hereinafter specified. Existing natural features,
such as trees, brooks, drainage channels, rock outcrops and views, shall be
retained. Whenever such features interfere with the proposed use of such
§ 85-19 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-25
1:802
property, a retention of the maximum amount of such features consistent
with the use of the property shall be required wherever possible at the
discretion of the Planning Board. Natural waterways are not to be altered.
§ 85-26. Outdoor storage.
§ 85-27. Refuse storage.
The storage of refuse outside a structure shall be in tightly closed
containers located no closer than 10 feet to the property line or the setback
prescribed for accessory buildings in that district, whichever is greater. All
areas provided for the outside storage of refuse shall be screened so that it
is not visible from the public street or adjoining property.
§ 85-28. Visibility at intersections. [Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord.
No. 881]
On a corner lot in any residential district, no fence, wall, hedge or other
structure or planting more than 30 inches in height from the normal ground
level shall be erected, placed or maintained within the triangular area
formed within 15 feet of the point of intersection of the front and corner
side lot lines unless otherwise specified in accordance with the New Jersey
Residential Site Improvement Standards.
§ 85-29. Private garages.
A. All unusable objects or discarded materials stored out of doors must be
removed within five days after written notice shall have been given by
the Construction Code Official.
B. Boats, trailers, airborne vehicles, campers or other recreation vehicles
are not permitted to be stored or displayed out of doors in any district.
C. Motor vehicles or other mechanical equipment which are not operative
or are unregistered shall not be permitted to be stored out of doors in
any residential district for a time longer than that normally required for
proper disposition, but in any event not to exceed 30 days.
D. In all nonresidential zones, outdoor storage is only permitted in the side
and rear yards, as herein regulated. No article, equipment, vehicle,
supplies or materials shall be kept, stored or displayed outside the
confines of any building unless and until the same is screened by special
planting or fencing, as pursuant to Chapter 22, Fences,184 and as
approved by the Planning Board, and maintained in good condition so
that it shall not be visible from any adjacent property or public street.
Any fence required to screen the outdoor storage of flammable material
otherwise permitted by this chapter shall not be closer than 20 feet to
any property line on the lot upon which it is erected.
184. Editor's Note: Former Chapter 22, Fences, as amended, was repealed 12-17-2002 by Ord.
No. 863. See now § 85-37.3, Fences.
§ 85-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-29
1:803
§ 85-30. Auction and garage sales. [Amended 6-26-2001 by Ord. No.
841; 5-25-2010 by Ord. No. 962]
No auction sales of personal property shall be conducted in any residential
district. Auction sales in other districts shall receive the approval of the
Mayor and Council. Upon payment of $25 to the Borough Clerk, a permit
may be issued for a period of 48 hours. No auction sales shall be permitted
to be held out of doors. All items must be stored within a building. Nonprofit
or charitable organizations are excluded from the payment of fees. Private
garage, yard, driveway or similar sales may be conducted in any district
on any day and shall be permitted to be held out of doors between the
daylight hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. A permit shall be obtained from
the Borough Clerk upon payment of a fee of $10. Private garage sales shall
be restricted to the sale of personal property. There shall be no more than
two garage sales per year, one between January 1 and June 30 and one
between July 1 and December 31; provided, however, that there shall be
at least 30 days between sales, and no sale shall exceed 48 hours unless
special permission is granted by the Mayor and Council.
§ 85-31. Vending machines.
No vending or coin-operated machines of any description or for whatever
purpose shall be permitted in any district unless they are installed within
a building, except for public communication systems (telephones). Public
A. In all R-1 Residential Districts, there shall be at least one enclosed twocar
garage for each dwelling unit hereafter erected or altered to be
located on the same lot, which shall not thereafter be altered or
converted without the erection of an equivalent enclosed garage. Not
more than one commercial vehicle with a maximum capacity of 1 1/2
tons owned or used by a resident on the premises shall be permitted,
and it shall be kept in a garage at all times when not in use.
B. In all other residential districts, there shall be at least one enclosed
single-car garage for each dwelling unit hereafter erected or altered,
which shall not thereafter be altered or converted without the erection
of an equivalent enclosed garage. Not more than one commercial
vehicle with a maximum capacity of 1 1/2 tons owned or used by a
resident on the premises shall be permitted, and it shall be kept in a
garage at all times when not in use in accordance with the above
requirements.
C. In all residential districts where there is more than one garage space
per dwelling unit, no more than two garage spaces may be rented to
other than occupants of the premises, and not more than one
commercial vehicle shall be stored therein. Any commercial vehicle,
boat, airborne vehicle, camping vehicle or trailer shall be garaged in a
building of permanent construction.
D. No garage space may be used by an occupant or owner of the premises
or rented or leased for commercial purposes of any kind.
§ 85-29 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-31
1:804
communication systems may be permitted out of doors in any district upon
written application to the Mayor and Council for location and approval.
§ 85-32. Self-service establishments.
No coin-operated dry-cleaning stores, laundromats or other similar selfservice
establishments will be permitted unless a full-time attendant is on
the premises at all times when open for business.
§ 85-32.1. Home occupations. [Added 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 818]
Home occupations shall be permitted as accessory uses in all residential
districts in a manner that will not impact upon adjacent properties. Home
occupations shall conform to the following standards:
A. The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the principal
building.
B. The home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to the
use of the dwelling for residential purposes and shall be limited to not
more than 25% of the gross floor area of the first floor or 400 square
feet, whichever is smaller.
C. The home occupation must be conducted by a person who occupies the
premises as his or her principal residence.
D. No employees are permitted other than members of the immediate
family who reside on the premises.
E. There shall be no outdoor storage of materials or equipment.
Merchandise shall not be displayed or offered for sale either within or
outside of the residence.
F. No persons shall be permitted on the property regarding the office area
other than people making deliveries or service calls as otherwise might
occur on the property regarding the dwelling unit. There shall be two
exceptions permitted under this subsection:
(1) Two or fewer persons receiving tutorial lessons on the subject
property.
(2) Five or fewer children attending a child-care session on the subject
premises, including the subject premises yard area.
G. A home occupation shall be carried on wholly within the principal
building. No home occupation or storage in connection with the home
occupation shall be allowed in accessory buildings or detached garages,
driveways, walkways or yards, except as permitted by Subsection E
above.
H. There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the dwelling or
premises or any visible evidence of the conduct of a home occupation.
No advertising displays or signs shall be permitted.
§ 85-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-32.1
1:805
§ 85-32.2. Certificate of registration; fee. [Added 7-27-1999 by Ord.
No. 818]
§ 85-32.3. Driveways. [Added 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 882]
In all residential zones, all driveways accessory to residential dwellings
shall comply with the following requirements:
I. No equipment or process shall be used in a home occupation which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes or odor detectable to the normal
senses off the property. No equipment or process shall be used which
creates visual or audible electrical interference in any radio, television
receiver or telecommunication device off the premises. No hazardous or
toxic materials, as defined by state or local codes, shall be stored on the
premises.
J. There shall be no delivery vehicles other than associated with the
residential use on site.
K. All parking of motor vehicles for the persons engaged in the home
occupation and for business visitors shall be provided on the premises.
On-street parking for business visitors is prohibited.
L. The occupant who conducts the home occupation must apply for and
obtain a zoning permit prior to commencement of the home occupation.
A. No person, association of persons or corporation shall hereafter
conduct or operate any home occupation in the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus,
as permitted under this chapter, without first having obtained a
certificate of registration from the Building Department, indicating that
all requirements pertaining to building, zoning, fire and health codes of
the Borough have been complied with.
B. The fee for a certificate of registration issued pursuant to this chapter
shall be $25.
A. Driveways shall be permanent in nature and constructed of crushed
stone, asphalt, concrete or similar material.
B. The width of the driveway shall be at least eight feet, and shall not
exceed 20 feet within 16 feet of the curb line, including any adjacent
parking areas or turning areas. The driveway may be widened to no
more than 35 feet thereafter. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the width
of circular or curved driveways shall not exceed 12 feet. The driveway
shall be measured perpendicular to the normal direction of travel. If a
residence has a three-car garage, a driveway width of not more than 32
feet shall be permitted from the entrance of the garage to 20 feet past
the garage entrance, then transition to 25 feet wide (or 20 feet wide
within 16 feet of the curb line) over the next five feet of length.
[Amended 3-26-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-22]
C. The width of curb cuts for driveways shall not exceed 20 feet.
§ 85-32.1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-32.3
1:806
D. No more than two driveways shall be permitted on any property
developed, or intended to be developed, as a residential dwelling. A
circular or curved driveway is permitted if connected to the one
permitted driveway.
E. If a driveway or driveways require(s) more than one curb cut, the
distance between such cuts shall be at least 50 feet.
F. No driveway may be located between a dwelling unit and any street
upon which the subject property has frontage, except in the following
situations:
(1) A driveway may be located between the street and a garage
attached to the principal building by a common wall.
(2) A circular or curved driveway may be located between a dwelling
and a street.
G. No driveway shall be closer to any side property line than 10 feet in the
R-1 and R-2 Zones. In the R-3, R-4 and R-5 Zones, no driveway shall be
closer than five feet to any side property line.
H. If curbs are installed along any driveway, a stormwater management
collection system must be constructed in accordance with Chapter 66,
Stormwater Management, and shall be approved by the Borough
Engineer.
I. When driveways are repaired, rebuilt, renovated or constructed and
where they intersect with the street, the curb cut shall match the
existing street curbing in order to support the integrity of the existing
street and shall be approved by the Borough Engineer.
J. No driveway shall provide for access to or from a public street through
the rear yard of any property. [Added 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 1012]
K. A parking space or parking area which is separate from the driveway
shall not be permitted in front, side or rear yard required setbacks.
[Added 3-26-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-22]
§ 85-32.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-32.3
1:807

ARTICLE VI
Exceptions; Modifications
§ 85-33. Area requirements.
A. Contiguous lots. Whenever title to two or more contiguous lots is held
by the same owner, regardless of whether or not each of said lots may
have been approved as portions of a major subdivision, or acquired by
separate conveyance or by other operation of law, and one or more of
said individual lots should, by reason of exceptional narrowness,
shallowness, topographical conditions, substandard area or yard space,
not conform to the minimum lot area and dimensional requirements of
the zone in which it is located, the contiguous lots of said owner, for the
purpose of this chapter, shall be considered as a single lot.
B. Terraces (patios). A paved terrace shall not be considered in the
determination of yard sizes or lot coverage; provided, however, that
such terrace is unroofed and without walls, parapets or the form of
enclosure. Such terrace, however, may have an open guard railing not
to exceed three feet in height and shall not project into any yard to a
point closer than four feet from any lot line. All such terraces shall be
considered in the calculation and determination of improved lot
coverage. [Amended 7-16-2013 by Ord. No. 1024]
C. Porches/decks. Any porches/decks connected to the main dwelling shall
be considered a part of the building in the determination of the size of
yard or lot coverage.
D. Projecting architectural features. The space in any required yard shall
be open and unobstructed, except for the ordinary projections of
window sills, belt courses, cornices, eaves and other architectural
features; provided, however, that such features shall not project more
than two feet into any required yard.
E. Bay windows. Bay windows, including their cornices and eaves, may
project into any required yard not more than two feet; provided,
however, that the sum of such projects on any wall does not exceed 1/3
the length of said wall.
F. Fire escapes. Open fire escapes may extend into any required yard not
more than 4 1/2 feet.
G. Canopies or marquees. No movable or retractable canopy, marquee or
awning, whether fixed or movable, shall overhang any sidewalk more
than six feet from the face of a building and shall not be less than seven
feet from the ground, except for a temporary canopy to be erected at
churches. Permanent-type stationary awnings, canopies or marquees
are forbidden. In addition, any type of awning, canopy or marquee that
utilizes supports which impede pedestrian traffic on a sidewalk is
forbidden.
§ 85-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-34
1:809
§ 85-34. Height limitations; exceptions.
The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to church spires,
belfries, cupolas and domes not used for human occupancy; nor to
chimneys, ventilators or skylights. Such features, however, shall be erected
only to such height as is necessary to accomplish the purpose they are to
serve. Radio or television antennas or towers shall not exceed 50 feet in
height above the ground level at the location of the structure involved, but
in no case shall be located closer to any adjacent property line than the
distance equal to the height of said structure measured from the ground
level.
§ 85-35. Yard requirements. [Amended 7-23-2002 by Ord. No. 855]
Air-conditioning equipment necessary to the operation of residential air
conditioning may be installed in side or rear yards in residential districts,
provided that it is mounted on an approved secure pad and does not
block the electric disconnect and does not infringe on required setbacks
more than five feet at any point. Air-conditioning equipment installed inside
dwellings shall require the filing of plans showing adequate structural
support, venting and other requirements as may be determined by the
Construction Code Official. All applicable permits shall be required for all
air-conditioning installations, except window air conditioners. A property
survey is required to review zoning setbacks for pad placement.
§ 85-34 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-35
1:810
ARTICLE VII
Special Regulations
§ 85-36. Off-street parking and loading.
All off-street parking and loading areas shall be subject to the approval
of the Planning Board to ensure their adequacy, relation to traffic safety
and protection of adjacent properties. As a requisite for the granting of a
construction permit for a structure in the business, industrial or residential
zones, the applicant for said permit shall have first provided off-street
parking areas, together with driveways and turning space necessary for the
conduct of a parking lot as follows:
A. Residential off-street parking.
(1) Quantity. Provision shall be made for at least three off-street
parking spaces for each dwelling unit hereinafter erected.
Nonresidential uses permitted in residential zones shall provide the
number of parking spaces required by the specific use prescribed
in the parking schedule in Subsection B. Carports shall be
prohibited.
(2) Townhouses. At least two off-street parking spaces shall be
provided per dwelling unit, plus 1/4 parking space per unit to
provide for visitors. At least one parking space shall be enclosed
within the townhouse structure or in an accessory garage. [Added
12-11-1985 by Ord. No. 589]
B. Nonresidential off-street parking.
(1) For all new buildings or uses in the nonresidential zones, there
shall also be provided the number of off-street parking spaces
required by the specific use in accordance with the following
schedule:
Off-Street Parking Schedule
Uses Required Parking Area/Spaces
All commercial
establishments and office
buildings, except
restaurants and service
stations
3 square feet of parking area for every
4 square feet of gross floor area of the
structure, including basement space
Restaurants, except quickservice
restaurants
1 square foot of parking area for every
1 square foot of gross floor area of the
structure
§ 85-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-36
1:811
Off-Street Parking Schedule
Uses Required Parking Area/Spaces
Industrial 1 space for each 1 1/2 intended to be
employed in such structure, together
with necessary visitor parking space,
receiving, loading and driveway space
as may be required by the Planning
Board
Churches, community
buildings and other places
for public assembly
1 space for each 4 persons designed
to occupy such structure
Service stations 3 spaces for each bay
Health clubs [Added
6-27-2000 by Ord. No.
829]
2 square feet of parking area for every
4 square feet of gross floor area of the
structure
(2) In using the above table for calculating required parking spaces, if
the number derived comes out to be a fraction of a parking space,
the required number shall be rounded off to the next higher whole
number.
(3) Any building containing more than one use shall meet the
combined parking space requirements for all uses in buildings.
(4) In the event that any structure does not fall within any of the above
categories, then off-street parking areas shall be provided in size
equivalent to one square foot of usable parking area for one square
foot of usable net floor area of the structure.
C. General requirements for nonresidential off-street parking. Unless
otherwise provided in this chapter, all nonresidential off-street parking
and loading areas shall meet the requirements of Chapter 32B, Land
Subdivision and Site Plan Review.
D. Common parking. Any owner or group of owners of a business building
or buildings in a commercial district may jointly sponsor off-street
parking facilities, provided that the area of the parking facility equals
the total area required for each owner participating therein, that such
jointly sponsored facilities comply with all other requirements of this
chapter, and further provided that any participating use is no further
from the parking area than 300 feet.
E. Off-street loading space (industrial park districts only).
(1) Number of loading spaces: one off-street loading space for each
establishment or one space for each 25,000 square feet of gross
floor area.
(2) Location. Off-street loading spaces shall be located in the side or
rear yard only, but in no case in a side yard adjoining a street.
§ 85-36 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-36
1:812
§ 85-37. Signs. [Amended 3-28-1989 by Ord. No. 638; 9-25-1990 by
Ord. No. 665]
(3) Loading space as required under this section shall be provided in
an area in addition to off-street parking spaces and shall not be
considered as supplying off-street parking space.
A. No sign shall be constructed, erected, displayed, altered, relocated or
reconstructed unless a permit shall have first been obtained from the
Construction Code Official.
B. No person shall make application for the issuance of a sign permit
without first obtaining the written consent of the owner of the subject
premises. Said consent shall be submitted to the reviewing authority at
the same time as the filing of the sign application.
C. No sign causing radio, microwave or television interference shall be
permitted.
D. No internally illuminated or neon signs or similar signs using an inert
gaseous element to emit illumination shall be permitted. [Amended
10-25-1994 by Ord. No. 739; 11-24-1998 by Ord. No. 810]
E. Where a nonconforming sign exists on property, no permit shall be
issued to erect an additional sign on property containing a
nonconforming sign until such time as the nonconforming sign has been
removed.
F. When the owner or lessee of a sign vacates the premises upon which
the sign is located, said sign(s) must be removed unless the new owner
or lessee intends on using the existing sign(s) without alteration.
G. Illuminated signs within the interior of a structure designed to be seen
from the exterior shall meet all the requirements of exterior signs,
including but not limited to maximum size area.
H. The area of any sign shall be computed as a product of the largest
horizontal width and the largest vertical heights of the lettering,
illustration, display or background. This shall not be construed to
include the supporting members of any sign. If the letters, illustrating
display or background are attached directly to the face of the building,
the total area of such a sign shall be computed as a product of the
largest horizontal width and the largest vertical heights of each letter,
illustration, display or background. For signs with two display faces, the
maximum area requirement shall be permitted on each side.
I. General regulations. The following regulations shall apply to all signs:
[Amended 10-25-1994 by Ord. No. 739; 12-16-2003 by Ord. No.
882; 4-26-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-04]
§ 85-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-37
1:813
(1) Only those signs identifying the name, business, occupant, service,
address or product offered or sold on the premises shall be
permitted to be erected.
(2) Signs within the interior of a structure designed to be seen and
read from the exterior shall not exceed 10 square feet in area, shall
be considered as part of any maximum sign area and shall comply
with all other applicable provisions of this section.
(3) Signs attached to a principal structure shall not be erected on,
attached to or extend above the roofline or parapet or project above
the highest elevation of the wall to which they are attached.
(4) There shall be no flashing, moving, rotating or apparent motion
signs or lights, as well as streamers, pennants and similar displays.
(5) No sign shall be painted on or affixed to water towers, storage
tanks, smokestacks or similar structures.
(6) No private sign shall be erected within the right-of-way of any
street, nor shall any sign be located so as to constitute a traffic
hazard.
(7) No sign shall be placed so as to interfere with or be mistaken for a
traffic light or similar safety device or interfere with traffic
visibility.
(8) No billboard or billboard signs shall be permitted.
(9) No sign shall be placed, located or displayed upon any sidewalk.
(10)Off-site signs are prohibited in all districts.
(11) Projecting signs are prohibited.
(12) No signs are permitted on trees or utility poles in any district.
(13) Advertising searchlights will not be permitted at any time outside a
building.
(14)No freestanding pole-type signs, except for automotive service
stations, will be allowed.
(15) A sign existing on the effective date of the adoption of this section
which does not conform to any provision thereof, shall be deemed a
nonconforming use and may be continued, maintained and repaired
upon its present premises, provided that such sign was lawful
under any prior ordinance. Any legal nonconforming sign on any
premises involving a change in tenancy of said premises or
involving a change in the physical appearance of the sign shall
revoke the nonconforming rights as soon as the physical
appearance of the sign is changed in any manner whatsoever.
Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the normal
§ 85-37 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-37
1:814
maintenance of a legal nonconforming sign, such as bulb
replacement, painting or replacement of existing lettering.
(16) Any sign unlawful under any prior ordinance shall remain unlawful
unless it complies with the provisions of this chapter and there is
issued by the Construction Code Official a sign permit. Any new
sign hereafter erected, either for a new building or a change in
tenancy of an existing building, shall comply with all the provisions
of this chapter.
(17) A permit shall be required for the erection, alteration or
reconstruction of any sign, except as noted in Subsection L below.
The advertiser shall be responsible for securing the permit. At the
time of filing the sign permit application, a filing fee of $100, by
check made payable to the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus to cover the
administrative costs of the Borough, shall be deposited.
(18) If the Construction Code Official finds that any sign has been
erected in such a manner or has deteriorated to such a degree as to
be unsightly or to constitute a hazard to the general public, it shall
be removed or repaired to the satisfaction of the Construction Code
Official within 48 hours after written notice of such condition has
been served upon the owner, owner's agent, lessee or occupant.
Failure to comply therewith shall be a violation of this chapter and
subject to its penalties. The Construction Code Official may cause
any sign which is an immediate peril to persons or property to be
removed summarily and without notice.
(19) Directional signs shall give vehicular and pedestrian movement
instructions on site. No off-site directional or advertising signs shall
be permitted. Direction signs (entrance-exit, one-way, etc.) shall
not exceed two square feet in area and are exempt from total sign
area limits. Such signs must be at least two feet off of front
property lines and at least five feet off of side property lines.
(20) Any sign supported by one or more uprights or braces upon the
ground and not attached to any building shall be considered a
ground sign. The area surrounding ground signs shall be kept neat,
clean and landscaped. The owner, lessee or occupant of the
property upon which the sign is located shall be responsible for
maintaining the condition of the area.
(21) Signs shall not be erected higher than the following limits at their
highest points:
(a) Wall signs: 20 feet.
(b) Ground signs: six feet.
(22) Any sign placed against the exterior wall of any building or other
structure so that the display surface is parallel to the face of the
wall and signs painted on the exterior of a wall or on a window shall
§ 85-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-37
1:815
be deemed to be wall signs. They shall advertise only the permitted
use, products or services on the premises on which they are
displayed.
(23) All signs painted or pasted permanently or temporarily on
windows, walls or facades shall comply fully with sign area
requirements.
(24) Any sign now or hereafter existing which no longer advertises a
bona fide business conducted or a product sold on said premises
shall be taken down and removed by the lessee, owner, agent or
person having the beneficial use of the building or structure upon
which such sign may be found within 10 days after written
notification from the Construction Code Official, and, upon failure
to comply with such notice within the time specified in such order,
the owner of the premises shall be considered to be in violation of
this chapter and subject to its penalties.
(25) All illuminated signs shall be either indirectly lighted or of the
diffused-lighting type. No sign shall be lighted by means of flashing
or intermittent illumination. No sign shall be back lighted or
constructed of any material which permits the passage of light or
allows light to be seen through the material so as to illuminate the
exterior surface or any portion of the exterior portion of the surface
of the sign. The direct source of all lights used for the illumination
of any use or building or the area surrounding them or for the
illumination or display of merchandise or products of business
establishments shall be completely shielded in such a manner that
they are not visible from the street or adjoining property.
Floodlights used for the illumination of said premises or of any sign
thereon, whether or not such floodlights are attached to or
separate from the building, shall not project light above the height
of the highest elevation of the illuminated wall of the building.
(26) All exterior illuminated signs shall be extinguished by 10:00 p.m. or
at the close of business, whichever is later.
(27)No metal signs shall be permitted. Signs shall be constructed of
wood or composite material as approved by the Planning Board.
J. Each site plan application shall include a sign plan showing the specific
design, location, size, construction, color or colors and material to be
used.
K. The following signs are permitted for uses as specified in the various
zone district regulations:
(1) Residential uses:
(a) Nameplate and identification signs for single-family dwellings
in all districts. A sign indicating the name or address of the
occupant may be permitted, provided that the sign shall be no
§ 85-37 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-37
1:816
larger than one square foot. Only one sign per dwelling unit is
permitted in addition to a mailbox identification sign.
(2) Schools and churches:
(a) Nameplate and identification signs for schools and churches in
residential districts:
[1] One outside sign not more than 16 square feet in area may
be displayed on the same premises, setting forth the name
of a school or place of worship and its coming activities.
[2] Not more than one such sign shall be placed on a property
unless such property fronts upon more than one street in
which event two such signs may be erected, one on each of
the two frontages. If such signs are illuminated, the direct
source of light shall be shielded in such a manner as not to
be visible from the street or any adjoining residential
property. No such signs shall be erected within 15 feet of
any street right-of-way line.
[3] No other signs of any description, other than an address
sign not more than one square foot in area, may be placed
anywhere in the front yard and except as listed under
Subsection L, Exemptions.
(3) Public or semipublic buildings:
(a) Other institutional signs in all districts. Signs of other
institutions of a similar public or semipublic nature may be
erected and maintained, provided that:
[1] The size of any freestanding sign shall not exceed 16
square feet and not more than one such sign is placed on a
property unless such property fronts upon more than one
street, in which instance a sign may be erected on each
frontage.
[2] Signs affixed to the facade of the structure shall be
permitted, provided that the sign shall not exceed 5% of
the building facade.
(4) Sales and contractors' signs:
(a) Temporary signs, customary and necessary in connection with
the erection or sales of buildings, shall be permitted in all
districts, provided that:
[1] The size of any such sign shall not exceed eight square
feet.
[2] Not more than one of each type of sign is placed upon any
property.
§ 85-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-37
1:817
[3] Real estate "for sale" signs shall be removed seven days
after the execution of a contract or the expiration of the
listing agreement.
[4] Contractors' signs shall be removed when work has been
completed on the premises.
[5] The owner of a single-family residential home which is
being offered for sale may erect, in addition to a "for sale"
sign, an "open house" sign. Only one "open house" sign will
be permitted on the property and shall be placed no sooner
than one hour before the beginning of the scheduled open
house and removed immediately upon its conclusion.
"Open house" signs shall not be permitted on county roads,
state highways or other major arteries.
[6] No sign shall be erected within 15 feet of any street rightof-
way.
(b) In residential districts, subdivisions with four or more homes
for sale may be advertised on a sign not to exceed eight square
feet. One such sign shall be permitted on each frontage if the
development fronts on more than one street. Such signs shall
be removed when 75% of the lots have been initially sold.
(5) Business signs (single-tenanted building). Building signs may be
erected and maintained when in compliance with the following
provisions:
(a) The total area of all signs inside or outside each main building
on any one property shall not exceed two square feet per foot
of building frontage or 60 square feet, whichever is the smaller,
and the lesser dimension of any sign shall not exceed two feet,
except as provided in § 85-37K(5)(e) below. [Amended
11-24-1998 by Ord. No. 810]
(b) Only wall signs shall be permitted.
(c) No sign shall project over a property line or over the public
sidewalk.
(d) All signs shall be attached to the main building.
(e) Signs painted or otherwise affixed to the windows of a building
shall be subject to the same limitations in size as outside signs,
except the lesser dimension of any window sign shall not
exceed four feet. [Amended 11-24-1998 by Ord. No. 810]
(f) Frontage, as mentioned above, shall be the actual length of the
street side of the main building.
(g) In the case of a building located so as to expose one side for
sign purposes, a sign no larger than 10 square feet in area may
§ 85-37 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-37
1:818
be mounted on the exposed side, but the area permitted for the
principal sign shall be decreased by the amount of this single
secondary sign.
(h) In the case of buildings located at the intersection of two
streets, the total sign area permitted may be divided into two
signs.
(i) In the cases with frontage on two streets, the frontage shall be
considered to be 1/3 the sum of the frontages on each street in
determining size limitations.
(j) No sign shall be permitted which is not accessory to the
business conducted on the property.
(6) Business signs (multiuse buildings or industrial parks). Industrial
parks, multitenanted buildings or multi-use buildings shall be
governed by the following regulations:
(a) Each such tenant or user shall submit a signing plan to the
Planning Board for approval. Such signing plan shall include
details on the following;
[1] Letter style.
[2] Lighting.
[3] Color.
[4] Construction and materials.
[5] Height of sign.
[6] Dimensions.
[7] Height above grade or below roofline.
[8] Locations.
[9] Text of sign.
(b) The signing plan shall be based on an integrated design theme
to include all of the elements in Subsection K(6)(a). All of the
above elements shall be designed to be in harmony and
consistent with each other, the architecture and materials of
the principal structures and the landscaping plan. The
reviewing board, in its sole discretion, shall determine if a
proposed signing plan meets the goals and objectives of this
subsection.
(c) The total area of all signs inside or outside each main building
on any one property shall not exceed two square feet per foot
of building frontage or 60 square feet, whichever is the smaller,
and the lesser dimension of any sign shall not exceed two feet.
§ 85-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-37
1:819
(7) Service station signs. One stationary freestanding identification
sign not to exceed 25 feet in height and not to have an excess of 5%
of the building face fronting on the street, but in no event greater
than 64 square feet, shall be permitted at a service station,
provided that it does not extend over or beyond the property line or
over the public sidewalk.
(8) Temporary signs. The following regulations shall apply to all
temporary display signs:
(a) Window display signs are permitted as integral components of
the window display of merchandise and advertising sales. No
signs, however, shall be attached in any manner to the outside
of display windows. Window display signs, when attached to
the inside of display windows, shall cover an aggregate
maximum of 20% of such area.
(b) Window display signs erected for the purpose of advertising
sales within the premises shall not remain for more than 14
consecutive days.
(9) Public interest signs: signs, markers or plaques of a noncommercial
nature in all zone districts which are in the public interest and
convey a message that does not propose a commercial transaction
or advance an economic interest and are restricted to signs for
historical, charitable, and cultural interests of a noncommercial
nature only. Such signs shall be erected only upon resolution of the
Mayor and Council of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, after referral to
the Planning Board for review and recommendation. Historic
public interest signs shall be subject to the following regulations:
[Added 9-27-2011 by Ord. No. 997]
(a) No historic marker, sign or plaque (hereinafter "historic sign")
shall be erected in any zone unless it complies with the
regulations of this chapter.
(b) The applicant shall be responsible for signage, support posts,
mounting brackets and installation on approved footings.
(c) Outdoor historic signs shall be permanent and contain
historical facts about Ho-Ho-Kus, including names, dates, and
titles.
(d) Historic signs shall tell a story or explain facts about a
particular area or site. No other message shall be permitted.
(e) Historic signs may be constructed of cast aluminum or brass
and may be imprinted on one or both sides.
(f) Overall dimensions of the historic sign shall not exceed two
feet in height and two feet in width. A bump-out which does not
§ 85-37 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-37
1:820
exceed two inches in width at the top of the historic sign shall
not be subject to these dimension requirements.
(g) The base of the historic sign shall be secured to a platform
footing. Footings shall be at least one foot by one foot and three
feet deep.
(h) Footings shall be five feet from the curbline and in the Borough
right-of-way.
(i) Multiple historic signs are not permitted.
(j) Lighting of outdoor historic signs is not permitted.
(k) Historic signs, whether indoor or outdoor, shall be black in
color with raised satin finished letters.
(l) After proper approved installation, the historic sign shall
become the property of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
(10) Commercial banner signs: signs of a commercial nature consisting
of a piece of cloth or synthetic material attached onto side edges to
a pair of banner arms or posts. The commercial banner signs shall
be installed perpendicular on a commercial building in the business
district only. The signs shall be installed at the front of the structure
on the second floor only. Signs of a commercial nature shall not
extend over a public sidewalk or walkway. The commercial banner
sign shall be subject to the following regulations: [Added
3-20-2012 by Ord. No. 1006]
(a) Banners must be installed on the pole of the approved pair of
installation devices.
(b) Dimensions of the banner shall be 36 inches by 50 inches (12 1/
2 square feet in area). The height of the banner shall be
measured from the center line of the window.
(c) Printing shall be on both sides. A photographic image shall be
permitted on one side only.
(d) Any form of illumination of the banner is prohibited.
(e) No reflective lettering shall be used.
(f) No other attachment to the banner arms is permitted.
(g) Only tenants or property owners with business space on the
second floor at the front of the building may display their
business name on the banner sign.
(h) The banner sign shall be constructed of cloth and/or approved
synthetic material.
(i) A banner sign shall not be constructed of a plastic material.
§ 85-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-37
1:821
(j) All banner signs shall be replaced upon the occurrence of the
following:
[1] The banner sign becomes torn, discolored, a safety hazard
or deteriorated in any form.
[2] The business tenant to which the sign pertains vacates the
business space.
[3] Four years after installation of the banner sign, if the
events described in Subsection K(10)(j)[1] and [2] have not
occurred.
(k) Banner brackets shall be installed at the second floor level at
the center line of the window at an equal distance from the
window.
(l) The banner bracket system must be designed and installed to
withstand the weather elements.
(m) The base of the banner sign must be equipped with an
absorption spring for high wind conditions.
(n) The arm must be constructed of a fiberglass material, and the
bracket base shall be constructed of cast aluminum or a
nonferrous metal material.
(o) The arm must be constructed in a way to ensure that the
banner sign remains taught.
(p) The mounting brackets for the banner sign shall be of a black
or dark brown color. Banner sign brackets shall be inspected
for structural integrity by the Borough's property maintenance
inspector at least once every four years and replaced by the
occupant of the business space due to component defects.
(q) Banner signs shall not be permitted on the front of buildings
which face residential zones.
(r) No more than four banner signs shall be permitted on the front
of a building.
(s) The minimum distance of a commercial banner sign from a
window on either side shall be four feet.
(t) The minimum distance of a commercial banner sign from the
ends of the front of the building on either side shall be 15 feet.
(u) A completed application must be submitted to the Zoning
Official at least 30 days prior to the date of the event. Once
approved, the sign/banners may be installed at the appropriate
locations, but not sooner than 30 days before the date of the
event. [Added 5-26-2015 by Ord. No. 1036]
§ 85-37 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-37
1:822
[1] Temporary signs or banners may be installed only at the
four approved Borough sites, and only one may be
installed at the headquarters location of the applicant if so
desired.
[2] The metal uprights at the four official Borough sites stand
eight feet apart, and the banner tie-downs extending from
them provide a side-to-side spread of from eight feet down
to as small as four feet or even smaller, depending upon
what tie-downs are used. That can be up to four feet high.
The allowable maximum size of any banner is 24 square
feet. In-ground signs on wooden stakes or metal stands are
permitted, rather than banners, at the same four official
Borough sites. The maximum size for such in-ground signs
is nine square feet.
[3] No type of illumination is permitted. No reflective letters
are permitted.
[4] If the applicant desires to install one temporary sign or
banner at the location of its headquarters, such sign is not
permitted within 10 feet of any street right-of-way or
within 15 feet of the curbline. No sign shall be permitted
where by reason of its size, shape or color it interferes
with traffic control signs or in any way adversely affects
traffic safety.
[5] All temporary signs/banners must be removed the day
following the event.
[6] The Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus Zoning Official reserves the
right to deny the application if the applicant cannot or will
not conform to these guidelines. Additionally, once
approved, any violation of these guidelines shall subject
the applicant or parties involved to penalties provided for
in the Borough Zoning Code. No temporary signage of any
type is allowed to be installed on any public property
without the express written consent of the Borough of Ho-
Ho-Kus.
L. Exemptions. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the
following signs; provided, however, that said signs shall remain subject
to other provisions of this chapter: [Amended 9-27-2011 by Ord. No.
997]
(1) A memorial sign or tablet or sign indicating the name of a building
or the date of its erection, when cut into any masonry surface or
when constructed of bronze or other noncombustible material, not
exceeding three square feet.
(2) The following signs customary and necessary to the operation of
filling and service stations:
§ 85-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-37
1:823
(a) Lettering on buildings displayed over individual entrance
doors consisting of the words "washing," "lubrication,"
"repairing" or words of similar import, provided that there
shall not be more than one such sign over each entrance and
that the letters shall not exceed 10 inches in height.
(b) Lettering or other insignia which are a structural part of a
gasoline pump consisting only of a brand name.
(c) Lead-warning sign.
(d) Other signs required by law.
(3) Signs for public convenience and welfare erected by or on behalf of
the United States of America, the State of New Jersey, the County
of Bergen and the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, traffic controls in private
ways and parking lots, legal notices, railroad crossing signs or
other signs as required by law. Signs such as "public telephone,"
"public rest room(s)" or words or directions of similar import shall
not exceed 72 square inches in total area, and only one sign of each
type shall be displayed.
(4) Temporary signs for Borough nonprofit public events and/or
charitable purposes, including exterior lighting for holiday or
patriotic purposes, may be approved for a limited time, not to
exceed 30 days.
(a) Application for temporary sign at nonprofit public events.
[1] The applicant shall submit an application for a temporary
sign at a nonprofit public event to the Borough's
Construction Department for approval by the Zoning
Official.
[2] The application fees may be waived by the Zoning Official
if submitted in a timely manner as follows: ground signs
within five days; banner signs within three weeks.
Otherwise, a fee of $100 shall be required for
administrative costs.
[3] Placement of approved temporary signs for nonprofit
public events shall be as follows:
[a] Temporary signs shall be considered ground signs.
The area surrounding temporary signs shall be kept
neat, clean and landscaped.
[b] Temporary signs shall be installed only on an
approved Borough site.
[c] Not more than one of each organization's signs may be
placed upon the approved site at any given time. Aframe
signs are not permitted.
§ 85-37 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-37
1:824
[d] Any form of illumination of a temporary sign is
prohibited.
[e] No temporary sign shall be, in whole or in part,
moving, mobile or revolving.
[f] Temporary signs shall not be erected at a height in
excess of six feet.
[g] No temporary sign shall be larger than 24 square feet
or smaller than three square feet.
[h] No reflective letters shall be used.
[i] No temporary sign shall be erected within five feet of
any street right-of-way or within 15 feet of the
curbline.
[j] All signs shall be removed, including uprights, braces
and cables, when the event is complete or no later
than 30 days after sign installation, whichever occurs
first. Failure to comply therewith shall be a violation of
this chapter and subject the applicant to penalties.
[k] No sign shall be permitted where, by reason of its size,
shape or color, it interferes with traffic control signs,
signals or adversely affects traffic safety.
[l] The approving authority reserves the right to deny the
application if the applicant cannot or will not conform
to these guidelines.
[m] Violation of these guidelines shall subject the
applicant or parties involved to penalties provided in
this chapter.
(5) Banner signs. Signs placed upon or installed on the Borough's own
streetscape lights in the business district. Banners are considered a
streetlight-mounted temporary sign. Placement of approved
banners shall be as follows:
(a) Streetlight-installed banners are considered temporary signs.
(b) Banners must be installed on the arms of the approved
streetscape lights in the business district.
(c) Not more than one of each organization's banner may be
placed upon the pole at any given time.
(d) Banners shall be 42 inches long and 18 inches wide.
(e) Banners shall be made of cloth or synthetic material (not
plastic).
§ 85-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-37
1:825
§ 85-37.1. Satellite antennas. [Added 8-27-1985 by Ord. No. 586]
(f) Printing may be on one or both sides.
(g) No banner extension arm shall be moved or changed from its
permanent location.
(h) Any form of illumination of any banner is prohibited.
(i) No reflective letters shall be used.
(j) Sponsorship advertisements are not permitted on banners.
(k) All banners shall be removed when the event is complete or no
later than 30 days after banner installation, whichever occurs
first. Failure to comply therewith shall be a violation of this
chapter and subject the applicant to penalties.
(l) No banner shall be permitted where, by reason of its size,
shape or color, it interferes with traffic control signs, signals or
adversely affects traffic safety.
(m) The approving authority reserves the right to deny the
application if the applicant cannot or will not conform to these
guidelines.
(n) Violation of these guidelines shall subject the applicant or
parties involved to penalties provided in this chapter.
A. All satellite antennas shall be in compliance with the following
regulations:
(1) The service area of a satellite antenna reflective dish shall not
exceed 10 feet in diameter.
(2) A satellite antenna reflective dish shall be constructed in
conformance with manufacturer's specifications and shall be
anchored in a solid concrete foundation so that the front face of the
dish shall withstand a static wind load of not less than 75 miles per
hour.
(3) The overall height from the mean ground level to the highest point
of the satellite antenna and any attachments thereto when
extended to their full height shall not exceed 13 feet.
(4) The satellite antenna shall be located in the rear yard and shall
comply with the yard and setback requirements for the principal
structure on the lot.
(5) The satellite antenna shall be located and screened to minimize
motor noise and visibility from the street and adjacent properties.
The ability of the applicant to install the satellite antenna in an
unobtrusive location and to minimize the noise impact on adjacent
§ 85-37 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-37.1
1:826
§ 85-37.2. Awnings, canopies and marquees. [Added 7-25-1995 by
Ord. No. 749]
properties shall be a major factor in determining whether or not a
site plan shall be approved.
(6) A satellite antenna shall only be permitted on a lot that contains a
residence and it shall be designed for use solely by such residents.
(7) No lot shall contain more than one satellite antenna as heretofore
regulated.
B. Site plan approval by the Planning Board will be required for the
installation of a satellite antenna in all zone districts. Each application
shall include an antenna plan showing the specific design, location, size
and construction of the proposed antenna which shall comply in all
respects with the standards enumerated herein.
C. The procedure for application to the Planning Board on site plan
approval shall be identical to the procedure established for approval of
a major site plan in accordance with Chapter 32A of this Code and the
Municipal Land Use Act (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.).
A. Site plan application.
(1) Awnings, canopies and marquees are deemed to be structural
components of any building, and no site plan approval shall be
granted until the applicant has set forth the information required
by Subsection D, Permit procedure, and presented to the Planning
Board plans setting forth how the same shall be located upon the
building or structure to which it is to be attached so that the Board
may determine and ensure compliance with the requirements of
this chapter.
(2) No modification, repair (other than normal maintenance),
reconstruction, relocation or alteration of a structure or structural
component of an existing awning, canopy or marquee shall be
permitted unless a site plan or an amended site plan application
has been filed and presented to the Planning Board for approval,
setting forth the information required by Subsection D, Permit
procedure, and how the same shall be located upon the building or
structure to which it is to be attached so that the Board may
determine and ensure compliance with the requirements of this
chapter.
B. Prohibitions.
(1) No structural support may extend from the building above the top
surface of the awning, canopy or marquee.
§ 85-37.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-37.2
1:827
(2) No awning, canopy or marquee shall be of more than three colors,
inclusive of any color used for the permitted lettering or logo.
White and black shall be deemed to be colors.
(3) No lettering, signs, symbols or logos are permitted on any part of
the awning, canopy or marquee, except that lettering constituting
the name of the business conducted on the premises and/or a logo
symbol shall be permitted, and such name and/or logo symbol shall
be deemed to be a sign. Address number(s) shall be required.
(4) No lettering, logo or symbol identifying the business shall exceed
eight inches in height. The address numbers shall not exceed six
inches in height and shall be located within the bottom 1/3 of the
front of the awning, canopy or marquee on both sides. [Amended
3-26-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-21]
(5) No awning, canopy or marquee shall be permitted which will be in
such a form or presented in such a manner as may confuse or
dangerously distract motorists within view thereof.
(6) No awning, canopy or marquee shall be constructed in such a
manner so as to permit the framework or structure to be viewed
from either end, and, where necessary, the ends shall be enclosed
with the same material used to construct the canopy or awning.
(7) No awning, canopy or marquee shall be backlighted or be
constructed of any material which permits the passage of light or
allows light to be seen through the material so as to illuminate the
exterior of the awning, canopy or marquee.
(8) No awning, canopy or marquee shall be permitted to extend above
the height of the first floor in a two- or more story building, or 15
feet in a one-story building, except that individual awnings,
canopies or marquees may be erected over windows located on
floors above the first floor.
(9) No awning, canopy or marquee shall be supported from the ground
where such support rests upon or interferes with public property or
a public right-of-way.
(10)No awning, canopy or marquee shall be affixed to any commercial
building or structure in any zone district so as to have a minimum
height of less than seven feet from the ground at any point; nor
shall any awning extend more than five feet from the building or
structure to which it is attached or four feet in the case of a canopy
or marquee.
C. Maintenance.
(1) All awnings, canopies or marquees shall be maintained in a clean
and neat-appearing condition, and such maintenance, where
applicable, shall include regular cleaning and removal and
§ 85-37.2 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-37.2
1:828
repainting of any chipped or blistered paint or replacement of
fabric or material which is cracked, torn, ripped or otherwise
disintegrating.
(2) Any awning, canopy or marquee which no longer identifies a bona
fide business shall be taken down and removed or modified by the
owner of the premises within 30 days after such business has
ceased, and any permits or approvals therefor shall be deemed to
have expired at such time.
(3) If the Construction Code Official finds that any awning, canopy or
marquee has been erected in such a manner or has deteriorated to
such a degree as to be unsightly or to constitute a hazard to the
general public the hazard shall be eliminated within 24 hours, and
the awning, canopy or marquee shall be removed or repaired to the
satisfaction of the Construction Code Official within seven days
after written notice of such condition has been served upon the
owner, owner's agent, lessee or occupant. Failure to comply
therewith shall be a violation of this chapter and subject the
offender to its penalties.
D. Permit procedure.
(1) No awning, canopy or marquee (unless otherwise specifically
provided herein) shall be erected without first having obtained an
approval as required herein by the Planning Board. Applications for
said permit shall be made in writing and shall set forth the
following information:
(a) The name, address and telephone number of both the applicant
and the owner of the premises.
(b) The location of the building upon which the awning, canopy or
marquee is to be erected.
(c) The proposed location and position of the awning, canopy or
marquee, including its relationship to adjoining buildings or
structures, height from grade and distance from property line
located on a survey.
(d) A sketch or drawing showing all dimensions, coloration and
lettering.
(e) Materials and details of construction.
(2) Application for a permit for the erection of an awning, canopy or
marquee shall be to the Planning Board.
(3) The normal maintenance, cleaning and repair of an awning, canopy
or marquee shall not require a permit.
§ 85-37.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-37.2
1:829
§ 85-37.3. Fences. [Added 12-17-2002 by Ord. No. 864; amended
12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 881]
(4) Any approvals granted by the Planning Board under the provisions
of this section may, at the option of said Board, be specifically
conditioned upon the approval of the Construction Code Official.
(5) Every application, except that made by a municipal, county or state
authority or agency, shall be accompanied by a fee as prescribed by
Chapter 77, Uniform Construction Code Department.
A. Intent. The intent of this section is to establish requirements governing
the construction, erection or installation of any fence located on or
adjacent to the boundary lines of any lot or parcel of land within the
limits of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus. The requirements set forth herein
are designed to prevent the construction of such fences in such a
manner as to restrict visibility through or across such lands at locations
where such visibility is necessary for the safe operation of vehicles
passing, entering or leaving any lot or parcel of land located on a public
thoroughfare. Such requirements are also intended to provide for
reasonable screening and separation between properties to ensure the
sense of privacy or improve the visual environment between uses.
B. Permit requirements. Before any fence may be erected, altered or
reconstructed, an application must be made to the Zoning Official for a
permit. The application shall include a plot plan showing the location of
the fence, a description of the type of fence including any decorative
features to be erected and the height of the fence, the adjacent street or
streets and include a general indication of the topographic conditions
where the fence is to be constructed. The application must be
accompanied by a fee of $50. The Zoning Official shall determine
whether the application meets the provisions of this section. Prior to
issuing a permit for a front yard fence, said fence location shall be
properly marked, staked and approved by the Zoning Official, Police
Chief and Superintendent of Public Works and Water.
C. Prohibited types of fencing. The following fences and fencing materials
are specifically prohibited in any location: barbed-wire fences, razorwire
fences, sharp-pointed fences or fences topped with sharp edges,
canvass cloth, electrified-charged fences, wire mesh, expandable
fences and collapsible fences, or other fences that may cause a danger
or hazard to the public.
D. Exceptions. All temporary environmental and construction fences,
including but not limited to snow fences and soil and sediment control
fences, are permitted and shall be removed upon determination of the
Zoning Official. Small garden fences and child play fences internal to
residential properties are not intended to be regulated by this chapter.
E. Maintenance of fences. All fences shall be painted, stained, galvanized
or of a natural resistant wood or otherwise treated to prevent rust, rot,
§ 85-37.2 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-37.3
1:830
excessive weathering or other rapid deterioration and should otherwise
be properly maintained.
F. General requirements.
(1) No fence shall be located on any property in any way which violates
the provisions of the Borough ordinance which provides for site
triangles at street corners, at intersections of driveways and
parking area access with streets. No fence shall be located in the
Borough right-of-way.
(2) All fences must comply with current Uniform Construction Code
requirements. Fences that require footings or foundations shall be
considered to be structures and shall be subject to the ordinance
bulk requirements in the appropriate zone.
(3) In determining the height of fences, the following shall apply:
(a) For fences that are not uniform in height along the top of the
fence, the height shall be measured to the highest point of the
fence, including decorative features.
(b) For fences located on sloping ground, the height shall be
measured from the grade directly below the bottom of the
proposed fence.
(c) Fence height shall be measured from the normal ground level
as defined in § 85-7B.
(4) Fences shall be constructed in such a manner that the dressed side
of the fence shall face the adjacent property or the public right-ofway,
excluding railroad property. All supports for the fence shall be
on the interior of the fence, with the exception of decorative posts,
which shall also face their dressed sides to adjacent properties or
public rights-of-way.
(5) All fences shall be entirely on the property of the party installing
the fence and must be maintainable from that property.
(6) Split-rail or post-and-beam fences may be constructed in any yard,
may not exceed four feet in height from the normal ground level
with posts not closer than eight feet on centers.
G. Fences in residential zones. In residential zones, the requirements for
fences shall be as follows:
(1) Fences in residential zones, shall not exceed the following heights:
(a) Front yard: four feet.
(b) Side and rear yards: six feet. [Amended 2-26-2008 by Ord.
No. 932]
§ 85-37.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-37.3
1:831
(c) Portion of side and rear yards bordering on State Highway No.
17 or on business or industrial zones or railroad property: six
feet.
(2) No fence or any portion thereof located in a front yard shall have
more than 50% of its composition of solid material. Front yard
fences shall be no closer to the street than the front property line or
five feet from the curbline, whichever is greater.
(3) On a corner lot, fences may not be erected over 30 inches in height
within 15 feet of the point of intersection of the front and corner
side lot lines in order to maintain clear visibility for traffic at the
intersection.
(4) Fences which enclose swimming pools and hot tubs shall be subject
to the regulations contained in Chapter 67, Swimming Pools, of the
Code of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus and the Uniform Construction
Code of the State of New Jersey. Chapter 67, Swimming Pools, and
the Uniform Construction Code of the State of New Jersey shall
supersede this section.
H. Fences in business zones. In the business zones, the requirements for
fences shall be as follows:
(1) There shall be no solid fences erected in the front yard, unless
required by the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment at the time
of site plan approval. Nonsolid fences up to a height of four feet
may be erected in the front yard, except that on a corner lot no
obstruction including fences may be erected over 30 inches in
height within 15 feet of the point of intersection of the front and
corner side lot lines in order to maintain clear visibility at the
intersection.
(2) A solid or other type fence not to exceed six feet in height may be
erected to enclose the rear yard of a property, including the area at
the sides of the building up to the front yard, except that, on a
corner lot or a lot running through from one street to another, any
yard abutting a street shall be subject to the same regulations as a
front yard.
I. Fences in industrial zones. In the industrial zones, the requirements for
fences shall be as follows:
(1) There shall be no solid fences erected in the front yard, unless
required by the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment at the time
of site plan approval. Nonsolid fences up to a height of four feet
may be erected in the front yard, except that on a corner lot no
obstruction including fences may be erected over 30 inches in
height within 15 feet of the point of intersection of the front and
corner side lot lines in order to maintain clear visibility at the
intersection.
§ 85-37.3 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-37.3
1:832
§ 85-37.4. Electronic pet containment systems. [Added 12-20-2005
by Ord. No. 902]
(2) A solid or other type fence not to exceed six feet in height may be
erected to enclose the rear yard of a property, including the area at
the sides of the building up to the front yard, except that, on a
corner lot or a lot running through from one street to another, any
yard abutting a street shall be subject to the same regulations as a
front yard.
A. Intent. The intent of this section is to establish requirements for an
electronic pet containment system located on, or adjacent to boundary
lines of, any residential lots or parcels of land within the limits of the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus. The requirements set forth herein are designed
to prevent improper or poor installation of such systems which might
cause harm to the pet, domestic animal, owner, and members of the
public. Such requirements are also intended to provide for reasonable
notification to the public that the electronic pet containment system is
in service.
B. Permit requirements. Before any electronic pet containment system
may be installed, altered, or reconfigured, an application for a permit
must be made to the Borough's Animal Control Officer. The application
shall include a simple plot plan showing the location of the electronic
pet containment system, a description of the adjacent street or streets,
and a general indication of the topographic conditions where the
electronic pet containment system is to be installed. The application
must be accompanied by a fee of $40. The Animal Control Officer shall
determine whether the application meets the provisions of this section.
C. General requirements.
(1) Electronic pet containment systems are permitted in residential
zones only.
(2) No electronic pet containment system shall extend across property
lines or be installed on common ground.
(3) The antenna wire in connection with the system must be installed
below ground with underground-rated wire and connectors. A
signal with a minimum range of six feet must be emitted by the
antenna wire.
(4) An antenna wire must be installed no less than 14 feet from the
nearest antenna wire.
(5) The electronic pet containment system must be UL-listed and
approved on all components.
(6) The electronic pet containment system must be installed, operated,
and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's
recommendations.
§ 85-37.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-37.4
1:833
(7) The collar/receiver batteries must be replaced in accordance with
the manufacturer's specifications, or sooner if the receiver battery
is dead.
(8) The electronic pet containment system must be protected from
lightning or power surges. A voltage surge arrester is required.
(9) Installation of the electronic pet containment system is prohibited
for aggressive or dangerous animals as determined by the Animal
Control Officer, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-26.
(10) A regiment training program consisting of at least two hours'
instruction time using a leash, in accordance with the
recommendations of the manufacturer of the electronic pet
containment system, must be incorporated with the installation of
the system, including a series of training flags. Such flags may be in
place for a period not to exceed 60 days from the issuance of the
permit. The Animal Control Officer shall have the discretion to
grant an extension for the time of the placement of such flags upon
a request in writing submitted prior to the expiration of such sixtyday
period.
(11) All animals which are introduced to an existing electronic pet
containment system are required to be controlled by a leash and
receive a regimented training program. The Animal Control Officer
must be notified in writing of any such animal.
D. Antenna wire. The antenna wire in connection with an electronic pet
containment system shall not be less than the following distances:
(1) R-1 Zone:
(a) Front yard: 10 feet from the sidewalk. If there is no sidewalk in
existence, 10 feet from the curbline.
(b) Side yard: 10 feet from the side lot line.
(c) Rear yard: 10 feet from the rear lot line.
(d) Corner lot: 10 feet from the sidewalk. If there is no sidewalk in
existence, 10 feet from the curblines for the front and side
yards that abut the side street.
(2) R-2 Zone:
(a) Front yard: 10 feet from the curbline or seven feet from the
sidewalk, whichever is greater.
(b) Side yard: Seven feet from the side lot line.
(c) Rear yard: Seven feet from the rear lot line.
§ 85-37.4 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-37.4
1:834
(d) Corner lot: 10 feet from the curbline or seven feet from the
sidewalk, whichever is greater for the front and side yards that
abut the side street.
(3) R-3 Zone:
(a) Front yard: 10 feet from the curbline or seven feet from
sidewalk, whichever is greater.
(b) Side yard: Seven feet from the side lot line.
(c) Rear yard: Seven feet from the rear lot line.
(d) Corner lot: 10 feet from the curbline or seven feet from the
sidewalk, whichever is greater for the front and side yards that
abut the side street.
(4) R-4 Zone:
(a) Front yard: 10 feet from the curbline or seven feet from
sidewalk, whichever is greater.
(b) Side yard: Seven feet from the side lot line.
(c) Rear yard: Seven feet from the rear lot line.
(d) Corner lot: 10 feet from the curbline or seven feet from the
sidewalk, whichever is greater for the front and side yards that
abut the side street.
(5) R-5 Zone:
(a) Front yard: 10 feet from the sidewalk. If there is no sidewalk in
existence, 10 feet from the curbline.
(b) Side yard: 10 feet from the side lot line.
(c) Rear yard: 10 feet from the rear lot line.
(d) Corner lot: 10 feet from the curbline or 10 feet from the
sidewalk, whichever is greater for the front and side yards that
abut the side street.
E. Signs. A permanent-type sign shall be installed to notify the public that
an electronic pet containment system is in service. The sign shall be
prominently displayed in the front yard in full view. The requirements
for such signs shall be as follows:
(1) Corner lots shall have two signs, one for each street. The Animal
Control Officer, in his or her discretion, may require additional
signs under which he or she considers unusual circumstances.
(2) Each sign shall be square, rectangular, or hexagonal in shape, the
area of which shall not exceed 95 square inches and shall not be
less than 92 square inches. Signs may be obtained from the
§ 85-37.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-37.4
1:835
Borough's Animal Control Office. The cost of the first sign obtained
from the Animal Control Office shall be included in the application
fee. Each additional sign may be obtained from that office at a cost
of $20. A resident may install a sign not obtained from the Animal
Control Office, provided that it is approved by the Animal Control
Officer prior to installation.
(3) The Borough shall furnish notice of requirements with regard to
such signs in an annual mailing or newsletter to residents issued in
or about the month of January.
(4) Any electronic pet containment system which lawfully existed at
the time of adoption of this section may be continued, provided that
it meets with all requirements of this subsection with regard to the
installation of signs.
F. Animal control enforcement procedures. Whenever the Animal Control
Officer determines that there is or has been a violation of any provision
of this section, he or she shall give notice of such violation to the person
or persons or entities responsible thereof under this section. Such
notice shall be in writing and shall include a concise statement of the
reasons for its issuance. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly and
sufficiently served if a copy thereof is sent, by registered or certified
mail, to the last known address of the person or entity upon which the
same is served, as shown by the most recent tax lists of the
municipality; or a copy thereof handed to said person or persons; or a
copy thereof left at the usual place of abode or office of said person or
persons or entities. Notice shall be given as aforesaid within or without
the municipality. The notice shall also state that unless the violation is
abated, removed, cured, prevented, or desisted from within 10 days of
the date of service of such notice, exclusive of the date of service, a
summons shall be issued for such violation. The Animal Control Officer
may, at the time he or she issued the notice, extend the period for
compliance, with the violation stated in the notice, for a period in
excess of the aforesaid 10 days, if in his or her judgment the abatement,
removal, prevention, cessation, or cure of the condition violated cannot
reasonably be effected within the ten-day period; and in such case the
Animal Control Officer shall state such reasonably required extended
period in the notice, which shall then be applicable instead of the
aforesaid 10 days. In the event the violation is not abated, removed,
cured, prevented, or desisted from or otherwise fully remedied within
said ten-day period or within such extended period as set forth in the
notice, pursuant to the foregoing, a summons shall then be issued
against the person, persons, entity, or entities so notified.
G. Violations and penalties. Any person or entity who shall violate any of
the provisions of this section or any order promulgated hereunder shall,
after a summons is issued under the terms hereof, upon conviction, be
punished as follows:
(1) For a first offense, by a fine not to exceed $50.
§ 85-37.4 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-37.4
1:836
§ 85-38. Private horse stables.
Private horse stables shall be permitted only in R-1 Residential Districts.
Every person who owns, keeps, harbors or maintains a horse shall keep and
maintain the property on which said animals are kept and all buildings and
facilities thereon in accordance with the following regulations:
§ 85-39. Transition requirements.
(2) For a second offense, by a fine not to exceed $250.
(3) For a third or any subsequent offense, by a fine not to exceed $500.
A. Maximum number of horses. The number of horses shall be limited to
one per acre. In the event that a lot contains more than one acre,
additional horses shall be permitted, limited to one per additional acre
or major fraction thereof. In no case, however, shall the total number of
horses exceed four.
B. Corrals and shelters. All horses shall be provided a stable or building
for shelter that is separate from the principal building on the property.
Said property shall also include a fully enclosed corral for the
containment of the horse(s). All corral areas shall be completely fenced
by a suitable fence not less than six feet in height. Horses shall be kept
within such areas except when being ridden.
C. Minimum setback distances. All fenced corral areas shall not be less
than 25 feet from any property line. No stable or horse shelter shall be
located closer than 50 feet to any property line.
A. Lots in two districts. Where a district boundary line divides a lot in
existence at the time such line is adopted, the regulations for the less
restricted portion of such lot shall extend not more than 20 feet into the
more restricted portion, provided that the lot has frontage on an
approved street in the less restricted district.
B. Business entrances on residential streets. Where a residence district is
bounded by a portion of a business district, then any side street
extending through such residence district shall not be used for any
business purpose, except as herein set forth. The business structure
erected in said business district shall face and open upon the street set
aside for business purposes, except that show windows in such business
structure within the area set aside as a part of such business district
and entrance may be made at the corner of such business and
residential streets, and all other entrances thereto must face on the
business street.
C. Side yard and rear yard transition. Where a lot in a business or
industrial district abuts a lot in a residential district, the user of the
business or industrial property shall provide along such abutting lines a
yard equal in width or depth to that required in the residential district
and within which an effective screen will be formed by a fence, wall or
§ 85-37.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-39
1:837
§ 85-39.1. Wireless communications towers and antennas. [Added
2-26-2002 by Ord. No. 845]
evergreen hedge six feet in height which also shall be provided and
maintained by the user of the business or industrial property.
D. Front yard transition. Where the frontage on one side of a street
between two streets is zoned partly as residence and partly as business
or industrial, the front yard depth in the business or industrial district
shall be equal to the required front depth of the residential district for a
distance of 50 feet.
A. Purpose.
(1) The purpose of this section is to establish general guidelines for the
siting of wireless communications towers and antennas. The goals
of this section are to:
(a) Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse
impacts of towers and antennas;
(b) Require the location of towers in nonresidential zones;
(c) Minimize the total number of towers throughout the
community;
(d) Require the joint use of new and existing tower sites as a
primary option rather than construction of additional singleuse
towers;
(e) Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the
extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the
community is minimal;
(f) Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a
way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and
antennas through careful design, siting, landscape screening
and innovative camouflaging techniques;
(g) Enable the ability of the providers of telecommunications
services to provide such services to the community quickly,
effectively and efficiently;
(h) Consider the public health and safety of communication
towers, as appropriate; and
(i) Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower
failure through engineering and careful siting of tower
structures.
(2) In furtherance of these goals, the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus shall give
due consideration to the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus Master Plan,
§ 85-39 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-39.1
1:838
Zoning Map,185 existing land uses and environmentally sensitive
areas in approving sites for the location of towers and antennas.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings set forth below:
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE — Man-made trees, clock towers,
bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting
structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or
towers.
ANTENNA — Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on
a tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiate
or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio
frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications
signals or other communication signals.
BACKHAUL NETWORK — The lines that connect a provider's towers/
cell sites to one or more cellular telephone switching offices and/or long
distance providers or the public switched telephone network.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
HEIGHT — When referring to a tower or other structure, the distance
measured from the lowest finished grade of the parcel to the highest
point on the tower or other structure, including the base pad and any
antenna.
PREEXISTING TOWERS and PREEXISTING ANTENNAS — Any tower
or antenna for which a building permit or conditional use permit has
been properly issued prior to the effective date of this section, including
permitted towers or antennas that have not yet been constructed so
long as such approval is current and not expired.
TOWER — Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily
for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone,
television, radio and similar communication purposes, including selfsupporting
lattice towers, guyed towers or monopole towers. The terms
include radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers,
common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower
structures and the like. The term includes the structure and any
support thereto.
C. Applicability.
(1) New towers and antennas. All new towers or antennas in the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus shall be subject to these regulations, except
as provided in Subsection C(2) through (4), inclusive.
(2) Amateur radio station operators/receive only antennas. This
section shall not govern any tower or the installation of any
185. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 85-39.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-39.1
1:839
antenna that is under 50 feet in height and is owned and operated
by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or is used
exclusively for receive only antennas. Application for towers under
this section shall be received and approved by the Planning Board.
(3) Preexisting towers or antennas. Preexisting towers and preexisting
antennas shall not be required to meet the requirements of this
section, other than the requirements of Subsection D(6) and (7),
absent any enlargement, structural modification, addition of any
structures, addition of any users or addition of any type of uses.
(4) AM array. For purposes of implementing this section, an AM array,
consisting of one or more tower units and supporting ground
system which functions as one AM broadcasting antenna, shall be
considered one tower. Measurements for setbacks and separation
distances shall be measured from the outer perimeter of the towers
included in the AM array. Additional tower units may be added
within the perimeter of the AM array, subject to the review of the
Planning Board to ensure that the additional units do not violate
any provisions in this chapter of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus Code.
D. General requirements.
(1) Principal or accessory use. Antennas and towers may be considered
either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use of an
existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation
of an antenna or tower on such lot.
(2) Lot size. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a
tower or antenna complies with zone development regulations,
including but not limited to setback requirements, lot coverage
requirements and other such requirements, the dimensions of the
entire lot shall control even though the antennas or towers may be
located on leased parcels within such lot. The minimum lot size for
new towers and antennas is 7,500 square feet.
(3) Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for an antenna and/or
tower shall provide to the Borough Engineer an inventory of its
existing towers, antennas or sites approved for the towers or
antennas, as well as all sites where an application is pending, that
are either within the jurisdiction of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus or
within five miles of the border thereof, including specific
information about the location, height and design of each tower.
The Borough Engineer may share such information with other
applicants applying for administrative approvals or permits under
this section or other organizations seeking to locate antennas
within the jurisdiction of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus; provided,
however, that the Borough Engineer is not, by sharing such
information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites
are available or suitable.
§ 85-39.1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-39.1
1:840
(4) Aesthetics. Towers and antennas shall meet the following
requirements:
(a) Towers shall maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to
any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color
so as to reduce the visual obtrusiveness. Monopoles may
include a design commonly referred to as a "monopole tree" to
provide camouflaging.
(b) At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related
structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors,
textures, screening and landscaping that will blend them into
the natural setting and surrounding buildings.
(c) If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the
antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment
must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely
compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to
make the antenna and related equipment as visually
unobtrusive as possible.
(5) Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by
the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the
lighting alternatives and design chosen must cause the least
amount of disturbances to the surrounding views.
(6) State or federal requirements. All towers must meet or exceed
current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any
other agency of the state or federal government with the authority
to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations
are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed
by this section shall bring such towers and antennas into
compliance with such revised standards and regulations within 120
days of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless
a different compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling
state or federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into
compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall
constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the
owner's expense.
(7) Building codes; safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity
of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in
compliance with standards contained in applicable state, local and
appropriate industry building codes. If, upon inspection, the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus concludes that a tower fails to comply with
such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or
property, then, upon notice being provided to the owner of the
tower, the owner shall have 30 days to bring such tower into
compliance with such standards. Failure to bring such tower into
compliance within said 30 days shall constitute grounds for the
removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense.
§ 85-39.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-39.1
1:841
(8) Measurement. For purposes of measurement, tower setbacks and
separation distances shall be calculated and applied to facilities
located in the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus irrespective of municipal and
county jurisdictional boundaries.
(9) Not essential services. Towers and antennas shall be regulated and
permitted pursuant to this section and shall not be regulated or
permitted as essential services, public utilities or private utilities,
unless mandated by federal or state law.
(10) Franchises. Owners and/or operators of towers or antennas shall
certify that all franchises required by law for the construction and/
or operation of a wireless communication system in the Borough of
Ho-Ho-Kus have been obtained and shall file a copy of all required
franchises with the Borough Engineer.
(11) Public notice and hearing. For purposes of this section, any
conditional use request, variance request or appeal of an
administratively approved use or conditional use shall require
public notice to all abutting property owners and all property
owners of properties that are located within the corresponding
separation distance listed in Subsection F(2)(e)[2], Table 2, in
addition to any notice otherwise required by this chapter. A public
hearing must be held before the Ho-Ho-Kus Planning Board for all
conditional use requests under this section.
(12) Signs. No signs or advertisements shall be allowed on an antenna
or tower.
(13) Buildings and support equipment. Buildings and support
equipment associated with antennas or towers shall comply with
the requirements of Subsection G.
(14) Multiple antenna/tower plan. The Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus
encourages the users of towers and antennas to submit a single
application for approval of multiple towers and/or antenna sites.
Applications for approval of multiple sites shall be given priority in
the review process.
(15) Height. The maximum height of new towers shall be 130 feet in
height.
E. Conditional and prohibited uses.
(1) Conditional uses. The following are specifically permitted as
conditional uses: tower or antenna, including the placement of
additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in
connection with said tower or antenna in the Industrial Park (IP)
District I, II and III. A tower or antenna, including the placement of
additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in
connection with said tower or antenna, in the general business
(GB) District are also permitted as conditional uses.
§ 85-39.1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-39.1
1:842
(2) Prohibited uses. Towers and antennas are prohibited in any
residential district. No towers or antennas shall be permitted on
any recreational facilities, parks, passive parks or areas set aside
as green acre areas by the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus. No towers or
antennas shall be permitted on any property in which a public or
private school is located or on which a church is located.
F. Conditional use standards.
(1) General. The following provisions shall govern the issuance of
conditional use permits for towers or antennas by the Planning
Board.
(a) If the tower or antenna is not a permitted use under Subsection
E of this section, then a conditional use permit shall be
required for the construction of a tower or the placement of an
antenna in designated zoning districts.
(b) Applications for conditional use permits under this section
shall be subject to the procedures and requirements of § 85-40
of the Borough Code, except as modified in this section.
(c) In granting a conditional use permit, the Planning Board may
impose conditions to the extent the Planning Board concludes
such conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse effect
of the proposed tower on adjoining properties.
(d) Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant
submits, whether civil, mechanical or electrical, shall be
certified by a licensed professional engineer.
(e) An applicant for a conditional use permit shall submit the
information described in this section and a nonrefundable
application fee and an escrow deposit as required by the
Borough Code for conditional use applications.
(2) Towers.
(a) Information required. In addition to any information required
for applications for conditional use permits pursuant to § 85-40
of the Borough Code, applicants for a conditional use permit
for a tower shall submit the following information:
[1] A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and
height of the proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning,
adjacent land uses and zoning (including when adjacent to
other municipalities), Master Plan classification of the site
and all properties within the applicable separation
distances set forth in Subsection F(2)(e), adjacent
roadways, proposed means of access, setbacks from
property lines, elevation drawings of the proposed tower
and any other structures, topography, parking and other
§ 85-39.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-39.1
1:843
information deemed by the Borough Engineer to be
necessary to assess compliance with this section.
[2] Legal description of the entire tract and leased parcel (if
applicable).
[3] The setback distance between the proposed tower and the
nearest residential unit, platted residentially zoned
properties and unplatted residentially zoned properties.
[4] The separation distance from other towers described in
the inventory of existing sites submitted pursuant to
Subsection D(3) shall be shown on an updated site plan or
map. The applicant shall also identify the type of
construction of the existing tower(s) and the owner/
operator of the existing tower(s), if known.
[5] A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials.
[6] Method of fencing and finished color and, if applicable, the
method of camouflage and illumination.
[7] A description of compliance with Subsections D(3), (4), (5),
(6), (7), (10), (12) and (13) and F(2)(d) and (e) and all
applicable federal, state or local laws.
[8] A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether
construction of the tower will accommodate collocation of
additional antennas for future users.
[9] Identification of the entities providing the backhaul
network for the tower(s) described in the application and
other cellular sites owned or operated by the applicant in
the municipality.
[10] A description of the suitability of the use of existing
towers, other structures or alternative technology not
requiring the use of towers or structures to provide the
services to be provided through the use of the proposed
new tower.
[11] A description of the feasible location(s) of future towers or
antennas within a two-mile radius surrounding the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus based upon existing physical,
engineering, technological or geographical limitations in
the event the proposed tower is erected.
[12] A visual study depicting where, within a three-mile radius,
any portion of the proposed tower could be seen.
[13] A statement of intent on whether excess space will be
leased.
§ 85-39.1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-39.1
1:844
(b) Factors considered in granting conditional use permits for
towers. In addition to any standards for consideration of
conditional use permit applications pursuant to the Borough
Code, the Planning Board shall consider the following factors
in determining whether to issue a conditional use permit:
[1] Height of the proposed tower;
[2] Proximity of the tower to residential structures and
residential district boundaries;
[3] Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
[4] Surrounding topography;
[5] Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
[6] Design of the tower, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or
eliminating visual obtrusiveness;
[7] Proposed ingress and egress;
[8] Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or
alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers or
structures, as discussed in Subsection F(2)(c) of this
section; and
[9] Availability of proposed tower to other potential users.
(c) Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or
alternative technology. No new tower shall be permitted unless
the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of
the Planning Board that no existing tower, structure or
alternative technology that does not require the use of towers
or structures can accommodate the applicant's proposed
antenna. An applicant shall submit information requested by
the Planning Board related to the availability of suitable
existing towers, other structures or alternative technology.
Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower,
structure or alternative technology can accommodate the
applicant's proposed antenna may consist of the following:
[1] No existing towers or structures are located within the
geographic area which meet applicant's engineering
requirements.
[2] Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to
meet applicant's engineering requirements.
[3] Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient
structural strength to support applicant's proposed
antenna and related equipment.
§ 85-39.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-39.1
1:845
[4] The applicant's proposed antenna would cause
electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the
existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the
existing towers or structures would cause interference
with the applicant's proposed antenna.
[5] The fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the
owner in order to share an existing tower or structure or to
adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are
unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development
are presumed to be unreasonable.
[6] The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting
factors that render existing towers and structures
unsuitable.
[7] The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology
that does not require the use of towers or structures, such
as cable microcell network using multiple low-powered
transmitters/receivers attached to a wireline system, is
unsuitable. Costs of alternative technology that exceed
new tower or antenna development shall not be presumed
to render the technology unsuitable.
(d) Setbacks. The following setback requirements shall apply to all
towers for which a conditional use permit is required:
[1] Towers must be set back a distance equal to at least 50%
of the height of the tower from any adjoining lot line.
[2] All accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum zoning
district setback requirements.
[3] No tower shall exist within required buffer areas if
adjacent to residential zones and as prescribed under local
ordinance.
(e) Separation. The following separation requirements shall apply
to all towers and antennas for which a conditional use permit is
required:
[1] Separation from off-site uses/designated areas.
[a] Tower separation shall be measured from the array
line to the lot line of the off-site uses and/or
designated areas as specified in Table 1, except as
otherwise provided in Table 1.
[b] Separation requirements for towers shall comply with
the minimum standards established in Table 1.
§ 85-39.1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-39.1
1:846
Table 1
Off-Site Use/
Designated Area Separation Distance
Residential, public parks,
schools or house of
worship
200 feet or 300% height of
tower, whichever is
greater from lot line
Vacant residentially
zoned land
200 feet or 300% height of
tower, whichever is
greater from lot line
Nonresidentially zoned
lands or nonresidential
uses
None, only setbacks in
this chapter apply
[2] Separation distances between towers. Separation
distances between towers shall be applicable for and
measured between the proposed tower and preexisting
towers. The separation distances shall be measured by
drawing or following a straight line between the base of
the existing tower and the proposed base, pursuant to a
site plan of the proposed/tower. The separation distances
(listed in linear feet) shall be as shown in Table 2.
Table 2
Existing Towers – Types
Lattice
(linear
feet)
Guyed
(linear
feet)
Monopole
75 Feet in
Height
(linear
feet)
Monopole
Less Than 75
Feet in
Height
(linear feet)
Lattice 5,000 5,000 1,500 750
Guyed 5,000 5,000 1,500 750
Monopole
75 feet in
height
1,500 1,500 1,500 750
Monopole
less than
75 feet
750 750 750 750
(f) Security fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing
not less than six feet nor more than eight feet in height and
shall also be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing
device.
(g) Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the
landscaping surrounding towers for which a conditional use
permit is required.
§ 85-39.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-39.1
1:847
[1] Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant
materials that effectively screen the view of the tower
compound from property used for residences or planned
residences. The standard buffer shall consist of a doublestaggered
row of evergreens consisting of no less than
seven-nor more than ten-foot wide buffer to screen views
of the facility.
[2] In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be
minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced.
[3] Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the
site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In
some cases, such as towers sited on large, wooded lots,
natural growth around the property perimeter may be
sufficient buffer.
(h) Access and parking. There must be a suitable ingress/egress
to/from the tower facility and a minimum of two parking
spaces.
(i) Real estate values. The tower will not have a material adverse
impact on real estate values of surrounding properties.
G. Buildings or other equipment storage.
(1) Antennas mounted on structures or rooftops. The equipment
cabinet or structure used in association with antennas shall comply
with the following:
(a) The cabinet or structure shall not contain more than 100
square feet of gross floor area or be more than 10 feet in
height. In addition, for buildings and structures which are less
than 40 feet in height, the related unmanned equipment
structure shall be located on the ground and shall not be
located on the roof of the structure.
(b) If the equipment structure is located on the roof of a building,
the area of the equipment structure and other equipment and
structures shall not occupy more than 10% of the roof area.
(c) Equipment storage buildings or cabinets shall comply with all
applicable building codes.
(2) Antennas mounted on utility poles or light poles. The equipment
cabinet or structure used in association with antennas shall be
located in accordance with the following:
(a) In front or side yards, provided the cabinet or structure is no
greater than six feet in height or 100 square feet of gross floor
area and the cabinet/structure is located a minimum of 75 feet
from all lot lines. The cabinet/structure shall be screened by an
§ 85-39.1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-39.1
1:848
evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of at least 42 to 48
inches and a planted height of at least 36 inches.
(b) In a rear yard, provided the cabinet or structure is no greater
than eight feet in height or 120 square feet in gross floor area.
The cabinet/structure shall be screened by an evergreen hedge
with an ultimate height of eight feet and a planted height of at
least 48 inches.
(c) In all other instances, structures or cabinets shall be screened
from view of all residential properties which abut or are
directly across the street from the structure or cabinet by a
solid fence six feet in height or an evergreen hedge with an
ultimate height of eight feet and a planted height of at least 72
inches.
(3) Antennas located on towers. The related unmanned equipment
structure shall not contain more than 200 square feet of gross floor
area or be more than 10 feet in height and shall be located in
accordance with the minimum yard requirements of the zoning
district in which located.
H. Removal of abandoned antennas and towers. Any antenna or tower that
is not operated for a continuous period of six months shall be
considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall
remove the same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the Borough
of Ho-Ho-Kus notifying the owner of such abandonment. Failure to
remove an abandoned antenna or tower within 90 days shall be grounds
to remove the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. If there are two
or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become
effective until all users cease using the tower. The Borough may
condition the issuance of any permit to demolish or remove a tower or
antenna on the posting of an appropriate performance bond or other
suitable guarantee in a face amount of not less than 120% of the cost
(as determined by the Planning Board Engineer) of such removal,
grading and restoration to a state required under all applicable
Borough ordinances.
I. Existing towers.
(1) Rebuilding damaged or destroyed nonconforming towers or
antennas. Nonconforming towers or antennas that are damaged or
destroyed may not be rebuilt without having to first obtain
administrative approval or a conditional use permit and without
having to meet the separation requirements specified in
Subsections F(2)(d) and (e). The type, height and location of the
tower on site shall be of the same type and intensity as the original
facility approval. Building permits to rebuild the facility shall
comply with the then applicable building codes and shall be
obtained within 180 days from the date the facility is damaged or
destroyed. If no permit is obtained or if said permit expires, the
§ 85-39.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-39.1
1:849
§ 85-39.2. Solar panels. [Added 6-27-2006 by Ord. No. 914]
tower or antenna shall be deemed abandoned as specified in
Subsection H.
A. Intent. The intent of this section is to establish requirements for the
installation of solar panels within the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
B. Permit requirements. Before any solar panel may be installed, plans for
such installation shall be submitted to the Construction Official and the
Electrical and Plumbing Subcode Officials. No solar panel shall be
installed without a permit issued by the Borough.
C. Requirements in residential zones. The requirements for the solar
panels in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5 Zone Districts are as follows:
(1) Solar panels are not permitted in any front yard or on any face of a
building or structure facing a street. This requirement shall also
apply to the side street of a corner lot.
(2) Ground-mounted solar panels shall be located in a side or rear yard
only. Such solar panel shall not exceed eight feet in height above
the ground, and shall be fully screened from adjacent properties by
fencing or a combination of evergreens and deciduous plantings.
(3) The location of such devices shall comply with the regulations for
accessory structures.
(4) Roof-mounted solar panels shall include integrated solar panels as
the surface layer of the roof structure with no additional apparent
change in relief or projection.
(5) Separate flush-mounted solar panels installed on a building or
structure with a sloped roof surface shall not project vertically
above the peak of the roof to which it is attached. No solar
collection equipment shall be visible from the street or project
vertically more than five feet above a flat roof installation. In the
case of corner lots, the panels shall be located on a rear-facing roof
only, and not on a street-facing roof.
(6) The removal of potential obstructions such as interceding
vegetation shall not be sufficient cause for permitting a front-facing
roof installation.
D. Requirements in commercial zones. The requirements for solar panels
in the GB, IP-1, IP-2, and IP-3 Zone Districts are as follows:
(1) Installation of solar panels shall be permitted only on the top of
commercial and nonresidential buildings.
(2) Installation of solar panels shall not interfere with the
architectural, historic, or other aesthetic features of the building,
neighborhood, or area.
§ 85-39.1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-39.2
1:850
(3) Appropriate and adequate screening and shielding shall be
required.
§ 85-39.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-39.2
1:851

ARTICLE VIII
Conditional Uses
§ 85-40. Purpose; standards.
Recognizing that certain uses, activities and structures are necessary to
serve the needs and conveniences of the Borough, and at the same time,
recognizing that such uses may be or become inimical to the public health,
safety and general welfare if located and operated without proper
consideration being given to existing conditions and the character of the
surrounding area, such uses are hereby designated as conditional uses
requiring a conditional use permit. The procedures for application, public
hearing and notice for conditional use permits are set forth in Chapter 32A,
Land Use Procedures, of the Code. The granting of a permit for conditional
uses shall comply with the terms and conditions established by this section
using the following stipulations and guiding principles:
§ 85-41. Service stations.
Automotive service stations may be permitted by special use permits in
all general business districts, provided that the following standards and
conditions are met:
A. Stipulations. The use for which application is being made is specifically
authorized as a conditional use in the zoning district in which it is
located.
B. Principles. The design, arrangement and nature of the particular use is
such that the public health, safety and welfare are protected and
reasonable consideration is afforded to the following:
(1) The character of the neighborhood and zone.
(2) The conservation of property values and the proposal's impact
upon the orderly development of adjacent properties in accordance
with the zoning classification of such properties.
(3) The health and safety of residents or workers on adjacent property
and in the surrounding neighborhood.
(4) The potential congestion of vehicular traffic or creation of undue
hazard.
(5) The principles and objectives of the Master Plan of the Borough.
(6) The protection of natural features.
C. Standards. In addition to the above stipulations and principals, such
permitted conditional uses shall adhere to the minimum standards
specified for the particular use in §§ 85-40 through 85-45.
§ 85-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-41
1:853
A. Lot size. The minimum lot or parcel of land so to be used shall be 10,000
square feet with a street frontage of at least 100 feet and a depth of at
least 100 feet.
B. Setbacks.
(1) Buildings. The walls of any building shall be set back at least 50
feet from any residential zone boundary or existing residential
property, at least 25 feet from any adjoining property line and at
least 40 feet from a street right-of-way line.
(2) Gasoline pumps. All fuel and oil pumps and other apparatus shall
be located as to permit safe and convenient traffic circulation.
Every gasoline or oil tank, pump or other device, appliance or
apparatus shall be located at least 40 feet from a street right-ofway
line or property line and at least 50 feet from a residential zone
boundary or existing dwelling. All fuel pumps shall be attendantoperated.
(3) Paved areas. All paved areas within the property shall be at least
five feet from a property line, 10 feet from a street right-of-way line
and 25 feet from a residential zone boundary or existing residential
use and bounded by concrete curbing at least six inches above the
surface.
(4) Driveways. Entrance and exit driveways shall be at least 30 feet in
width, with a three-foot radius at the curbline. There shall be a
safety zone between driveways of at least 30 feet, and the driveway
shall be at least 10 feet from adjoining property lines. Driveways
shall be at least 100 feet from an intersection of street lines. No
more than two driveways shall be permitted for each 200 feet of
street frontage.
C. Location. The nearest boundary line of the lot or parcel of land to be
used as an automobile service station shall be at least 300 feet from the
boundary line of property which is used as, or upon which is erected: a
public or private school playground, church or other place of worship,
public building or place of public assembly, public playground or civic
center, fire house or fire station. The distance shall be measured in a
straight line from the center line of streets forming the shortest route
from a point opposite the nearest side boundary line of the public
entrance to a point opposite the nearest boundary line of the service
station or garage lot. No automobile service station shall be located
within 300 feet of another service station or existing public garage.
D. Parking. Adequate parking for service vehicles and automobiles of
employees and patrons shall be provided. Not more than three patron
parking spaces shall be provided for each service bay. Not more than six
motor vehicles may be located upon any automobile service station
premises outside of a closed or roofed building for a period of time not
to exceed 48 hours, and provided that said motor vehicles are awaiting
repair by the owners thereof.
§ 85-41 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-41
1:854
§ 85-42. Churches, parish houses and Sunday schools. [Amended
3-24-1998 by Ord. No. 800]
Churches and places of worship may be permitted by conditional use permit
in any GB zone, provided that the following conditions are met:
E. Prohibited uses.
(1) No new or used automobile sales shall be conducted on the
premises.
(2) No major bodywork shall take place at automobile service stations.
(3) No junked motor vehicle, or part thereof, or motor vehicles
incapable of normal operation upon the highway shall be permitted
on the premises of any service station. It shall be deemed prima
facie evidence of violation of this chapter if more than three motor
vehicles incapable of operation are located at any one time upon
any premises not within a closed and roofed building.
F. Repairs. Any repairs of motor vehicles shall be performed in a fully
enclosed building. No parts or partially dismantled motor vehicles may
be stored out of doors.
G. Tanks and drains.
(1) Floor drains shall contain oil and grease traps and shall not be
connected to any sanitary sewer system or storm drain.
(2) All storage tanks shall be installed below ground level. Where the
possibility of contamination of underground water resources exists,
the applicant will be required to show that ample precautions
against leakage and seepage have been taken.
A. Minimum lot area. The minimum lot or parcel of land to be used shall be
two acres.
B. Minimum yard requirements. The minimum front, rear and side yards
shall conform to those established for the R-1 Single-Family Residential
Zone.
C. Maximum height of buildings. No principal building shall exceed a
height of 35 feet or 2 1/2 stories. No detached accessory building shall
exceed 3/4 the height of the principal building.
D. Detached accessory buildings. Minimum distances shall conform to
those established for the R-1 Single-Family Residential Zone.
E. Lot coverage. The lot coverage by principal and accessory buildings
combined shall not exceed 20% of the land area of the lot.
F. Driveways. Driveways shall be at least 10 feet from any side lot line and
25 feet from the side line of any residential property.
§ 85-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-43
1:855
§ 85-43. (Reserved)186
§ 85-44. Public utility facilities and uses.
Public utility uses intended to be regulated by this section apply to utility
installations such as power generating stations, electric substations, power
transmission lines, radio or television signal towers, telephone exchanges
and similar facilities, but shall not apply to telephone, gas, water, sewer,
electric or community antenna television facility distribution lines and
similar facilities intended to provide direct service to properties, and may be
permitted in any zone district by special permit, provided that the following
are complied with:
§ 85-44.1. Wireless communications towers and antennas and
associated facilities. [Added 4-23-2002 by Ord. No. 846]
Wireless communications towers, antennas and associated facilities may
be permitted by conditional use in the General Business (GB District) and
Industrial Park (IP) Districts I, II and III, provided that the applicable
standards and conditions set forth in this chapter are met.
§ 85-45. County, state and federal facilities and uses.
County, state and federal facilities may be permitted by conditional use
permit in any zone district, provided that the following standards and
conditions are met:
A. Lot size. The lot shall conform to the lot area requirements of the zone
in which it is located.
B. Setbacks. All structures shall meet the yard and height requirements of
the zone in which it is located.
C. Parking. Adequate provision shall be made for off-street parking in
accordance with the ratio, location and quantity specified in
§ 85-36A(1).
D. Location. The utility shall provide proof that the proposed installation in
its specific location is necessary and essential for the efficiency of the
public utility system or the satisfactory and convenient provision of
service by the utility to the neighborhood or area in which the
particular use is to be located.
A. Lot size. The lot shall conform to the lot area requirements of the zone
in which it is located.
B. Setbacks. All structures shall meet the yard and height requirements of
the zone in which it is located.
186. Editor's Note: Former § 85-43, Quick-service restaurants, was repealed 3-23-2010 by Ord.
No. 960.
§ 85-43 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-45
1:856
§ 85-45.0. Tobacco, smoke, cannabis and electronic vapor substance
inhalation shops. [Added 10-23-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-10]
C. Parking. Adequate provision shall be made for off-street parking in
accordance with the ratio, location and quantity specified in
§ 85-36A(1).
D. Location. The utility shall provide proof that the proposed installation in
its specific location is necessary and essential for the efficiency of the
public utility system or the satisfactory and convenient provision of
service by the utility to the neighborhood or area in which the
particular use is to be located.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the location and
operation of retail purveyors of tobacco and tobacco products,
cannabis, electronic vapor devices, electronic vapor inhalation
substances, hookahs, and electronic/vapor substance inhalation shops
in the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus, Bergen County, New Jersey in order to
maintain the Borough's character, the diversity and vitality of the
community's commercial areas, and the quality of life of Ho-Ho-Kus
residents. It is presumed that establishing or preserving an appropriate
and balanced mix of commercial business will more effectively serve to
achieve this purpose as a strategy to maintain the economic health of
the Borough's business districts and its suburban ambiance, and will
promote the redevelopment of the Borough's downtown area.
B. Title. This section may be known and cited as "Tobacco Shops, Smoke
Shops, Cannabis Shops and Vapor Inhalation Shops Regulations."
C. Definitions. The words and terms used in this section shall have the
meanings as provided herein. Where words or terms are not defined in
this section they shall have the meanings ordinarily ascribed to them.
Should any word, term or phrase defined in this section conflict with
any other word, term or phrase defined in this title, the definitions
provided in this section shall apply.
ADVERTISING — Media (printed, electronic or otherwise) that calls the
public's attention to things for sale.
BOROUGH ADMINISTRATOR — The Borough Administrator of the
Borough or the Borough Administrator's designee.
BUSINESS — Any sole proprietorship, joint venture, limited liability
company, corporation or other business entity formed for profit-making
purposes, including retail establishments where goods or services are
sold, as well as professional corporations and other entities where
legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural or other professional
services are delivered.
CANNABIS — All parts of the plant cannabis sativa linnaeus, cannabis
indica, or cannabis ruderals, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof;
the resin and/or oil extracted from any part of the plant; every
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, concentrate, or
§ 85-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-45.0
1:857
preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin; and edible or topical
products containing any of the above.
CANNABIS RETAILER — Any person or entity that operates a store,
stand, booth, concession, or other place at which sales, rentals, or
other giveaways of cannabis products are made to purchasers for
consumption or use.
CANNABIS SHOP — Any store, stand, booth, concession or other place
which sells, manufacturers, grows, rents or gives away cannabis or
any product containing cannabis or allows or permits the use or
consumption of cannabis or any product containing cannabis.
CREATION OF A TOBACCO OR SMOKE SHOP OR AN ELECTRONIC/
VAPOR SUBSTANCE INHALATION SHOP —
ELECTRONIC VAPOR DEVICE — Any device with a heating element, a
batter, or an electronic circuit that provides nicotine or other vaporized
liquids to the user in a manner that simulates tobacco products, shisha,
herbs, or any other product that produces smoke.
ELECTRONIC/VAPOR INHALATION SUBSTANCE PRODUCTS —
Cartridges, cartomizers, e-liquid, smoke juice, tanks, tips, atomizers,
vaporizers, electronic smoking device batteries, electronic smoking
device chargers, and any other item specifically designed for the
preparation, charging, or use of electronic vapor devices.
ELECTRONIC/VAPOR SUBSTANCE INHALATION SHOPS — Are
defined as those businesses where customers can smoke or inhale
vapor from electronic/vapor inhalation substance products, commonly
known as "electronic cigarettes," "e-cigarettes," "e-cigars," ecigarillos,"
"e-pipes," e-hookahs," "electronic nicotine delivery
systems," and other similar devices.
EMPLOYEE — Any person who is employed by an employer for
consideration for direct or indirect wages or profit, or is an independent
contractor, agent or consultant of an employer and any person who
volunteers his or her services for a nonprofit entity.
HOOKAH — A pipe commonly, but not always, made of glass, used
for vaporizing and smoking tobacco, flavored tobacco, nonflavored
tobacco, shisha, dried fruits, cannabis or other substances in which
vapor or smoke is passed through a water basin before inhalation.
MINOR — Any individual who is less than 21 years old.
The opening or commencement of any such establishment as a new
establishment; or
(1)
The conversion of an existing establishment, to a tobacco or smoke
shop establishment or an electronic/vapor substance inhalation
shop establishment as defined in this chapter; or
(2)
(3) The relocation of any such establishment.
§ 85-45.0 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-45.0
1:858
NONPROFIT ENTITY — Any corporation, unincorporated association
or other entity created for charitable, philanthropic, educational,
character-building, political, social, or other similar purpose, the net
proceeds from the operation of which are committed to the promotion
of the objectives or purposes of the entity and not to private gain.
A public agency is not a nonprofit entity within the meaning of this
section.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, cooperative association,
private or private corporation, limited liability company, personal
representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity.
PUBLIC PLAYGROUND/PARK/RECREATION AREA — An area to which
the public, and particularly minors, come to participate in athletic or
recreational activities, whether or not such activities are supervised or
organized. Such areas include, but are not limited to, publicly owned
and maintained parks, athletic fields, playgrounds, picnic areas, any
outdoor premises or grounds owned or operated by the Borough, a
public or private school, child care center, and any youth or recreational
facilities that contains any play or athletic equipment used or intended
to be used by minors.
SCHOOL — An institution of learning for minors, whether public or
private, preschool or day care services, kindergarten, elementary
school, junior high school, senior high school, or any special institution
of learning, a vocational or professional institution or an institution of
higher education, including a community or junior college, college, or
university.
SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING — Open display of tobacco products
and point-of-sale tobacco-related promotional products that the public
has access to without the intervention of an employee.
TOBACCO OR SMOKE SHOP — Any store, stand, booth, concession,
or other place that either devotes a substantial portion of its display
area (i.e., 15% or more of floor space) to tobacco products, or devotes
more than 16 cubic feet of shelf space, for the display or sale of
tobacco or drug paraphernalia to purchasers for consumption or use.
This definition includes electronic vapor devices, electronic vapor
inhalation substances and hookahs.
TOBACCO PRODUCT — Any product containing tobacco leaf, including,
but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, hookah tobacco,
snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, bidis, or any other preparation
of tobacco; and any product or formulation of matter containing
biologically active amounts of nicotine that is manufactured, sold,
offered for sale, or otherwise distributed with the expectation that the
product or matter will be introduced into the human lungs or mouth
in smoke or vapor form, using any tobacco paraphernalia, but does
not include any product specifically approved by the United States
Food and Drug Administration for use in treating nicotine or tobacco
dependence.
§ 85-45.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-45.0
1:859
TOBACCO RETAILER — Any person or entity that operates a store,
stand, booth, concession, or other place at which sales, rentals, or other
giveaways of tobacco products, electronic vapor devices, electronic
vapor inhalation substances, and hookahs are made to purchasers for
consumption or use.
TOBACCO VENDING MACHINE — Any electronic or mechanical device
or appliance, the operation of which depends upon the insertion of
money, whether in coin or paper currency, or other things
representative of value, that dispenses or releases a tobacco product.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A TOBACCO OR
SMOKE SHOP OR AN ELECTRONIC/VAPOR SUBSTANCE
INHALATION SHOP —
ZONING CODE — Chapter 85 of the Borough Code of the Borough of
Ho-Ho-Kus, Bergen County, New Jersey, as it may be amended from
time to time.
(1) The sale, lease or sublease of such establishment; or
The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in
such establishment, whether by sale, exchange, merger, or similar
means; or
(2)
The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal devise which
transfers ownership or control of such establishment, except for
transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the
person possessing such ownership or control.
(3)
D. Tobacco or smoke shop, or electronic/vapor substance inhalation shop
conditional use permit required.
(1) No person shall cause or permit the creation of a tobacco or smoke
shop or an electronic/vapor substance inhalation shop, any
substantial enlargement of a tobacco or smoke shop or an
electronic/vapor substance inhalation shop, or the transfer of
ownership or control of any tobacco or smoke shop or electronic/
vapor substance inhalation shop, without first obtaining and
maintaining a conditional use permit as provided in this chapter.
E. Development standards; general and specific. An application for a
conditional use permit shall be approved by the Planning Board upon a
determination that all of the following standards have been met.
(1) The tobacco or smoke shop, or electronic/vapor substance
inhalation shop shall be located within a permitted zone. Tobacco
or smoke shops, or electronic/vapor substance inhalation shops
may be located only within the GB District. No such establishment
shall be permitted to locate in any area outside such zoning
classifications.
§ 85-45.0 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-45.0
1:860
(2) The tobacco or smoke shop, or electronic/vapor substance
inhalation shop shall meet the following minimum spacing and
proximity requirements:
(a) No tobacco or smoke shop, or electronic/vapor substance
inhalation shop shall be located within one mile of any other
such shop.
(b) No tobacco or smoke shop, or electronic/vapor substance
inhalation shop shall be located within one mile of any parcel of
land zoned for residential use.
(c) No tobacco or smoke shop, or electronic/vapor substance
inhalation shop shall be located within one mile of any parcel of
land that contains any one or more of the following specific
land uses:
[1] Religious facility;
[2] Courthouse;
[3] Day nursery;
[4] Public playground/park/recreation area;
[5] School;
[6] Vocational or professional institution; or
[7] Institution of higher education, including community or
junior college, college or university.
(d) No tobacco or smoke shop, or electronic/vapor substance
inhalation shop located in a building sharing one or more
common walls with another retail or commercial
establishment, or sharing common attic space with any other
use, shall permit smoking or use of any electronic vapor device
or hookah anywhere on the premises.
(3) The tobacco or smoke shop, or electronic/vapor substance
inhalation shop shall be in substantial compliance with the
requirements of all health and safety codes, including, but not
limited to, the building code, fire code, electrical code, mechanical
code and plumbing code. Unless delay is caused by refusal of the
applicant to schedule or permit timely inspection, substantial
compliance shall be verified no later than 30 days following the
application or the applicant shall be deemed to be in substantial
compliance with such requirements for the purposes of permit
issuance.
(4) The tobacco or smoke shop, or electronic/vapor substance
inhalation shop shall be in substantial compliance with the
development standards for the commercial zone in which the
§ 85-45.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-45.0
1:861
establishment is to be located, and with the general provisions
of Chapter 85 relating to development standards and of § 85-37
relating to sign regulations, except that, to the extent that
provisions of this section may conflict or be more restrictive, this
§ 85-45.0 shall control.
(5) The tobacco or smoke shop, or electronic/vapor substance
inhalation shop meets the following minimum specific standards:
(a) No person or business shall engage in the sale of tobacco
products, hookahs, electronic vapor devices and/or electronic/
vapor inhalation substance products without first posting a
plainly visible sign at the point of purchase of tobacco
products, hookahs, electronic vapor devices and/or electronic
vapor inhalation substance products that has wording similar
to, "THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS, HOOKAHS, AND
ELECTRONIC VAPOR DEVICES AND PRODUCTS TO
PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW
AND SUBJECT TO PENALTIES. PHOTO IDENTIFICATION IS
REQUIRED OF PURCHASERS APPEARING TO BE 26 YEARS
OF AGE AND YOUNGER." The letters of the sign shall be at
least 1/4 inch high, as set forth in the N.J. Department of
Health Tobacco Control Regulations.
(b) No person, business, tobacco retailer, or owner, manager,
employee or operator of any establishment subject to this
section shall sell, offer to sell or permit to be sold any tobacco
or tobacco product, electronic vapor devices, hookahs and/or
electronic/vapor inhalation substance products to an individual
without requesting and examining identification of customers
appearing to be 26 years and younger for the purpose of
establishing the purchaser's age as 21 years or greater, unless
the seller has some other clear or convincing basis for
determining the buyer's age.
(c) No person, business, tobacco retailer or other establishment
shall sell or offer for sale cigarettes or other tobacco or
smoking products not in the original packaging provided by the
manufacturer and with all required health warnings.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any person, business or tobacco retailer
to sell, permit to be sold, offer for sale or display for sale any
tobacco product, electronic vapor devices and/or electronic/
vapor inhalation substance products by means of self-service
merchandising or by means other than vendor-assisted sales.
(e) No person, business or tobacco retailer shall locate, install,
keep, maintain, or use, or permit the location, installation,
keeping, maintenance, or use on his, her or its premises, any
tobacco vending machine for the purpose of selling or
distributing any tobacco product.
§ 85-45.0 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-45.0
1:862
(f) It shall be unlawful for any person, business or tobacco retailer
to distribute free tobacco products or promotional items,
except in enclosed areas where minors are not permitted.
(g) In addition to the standards in this chapter, each tobacco or
smoke shop, or electronic/vapor substance inhalation shop
shall comply with each and every provision of this Code.
F. Measure of distance. Distance, without regard to intervening
structures, shall be a straight line measured from the closest exterior
structural wall of a tobacco or smoke shop or electronic/vapor
substance inhalation shop to the closest property line of a religious
facility, courthouse, day nursery, public playground/park/recreation
area, school, residential zone, vocational or professional institution,
institution of higher education, including community or junior college,
college, university, other tobacco shops or smoke shops.
G. Prohibited in all districts.
(1) Cannabis shops and/or retailers.
H. Violations and penalties.
(1) Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this chapter may be charged with either an infraction or a
misdemeanor and shall be subject to the provisions of the penalty
clause as set forth in § 1-16 of this Code.
(2) Each person found guilty of a violation shall be deemed guilty of a
separate offense for every day during any portion of which a
violation of any section of this section is committed, continued or
permitted by such person, and shall be punishable as provided for
in § 1-16. Any use or occupation of any building or structure
maintained contrary to the provisions of this title shall constitute a
public nuisance.
I. Conflicts with other applicable laws. This chapter shall not be
interpreted or construed to permit tobacco vending machines and
distribution of tobacco product samples where they are otherwise
restricted by other applicable laws. Nor shall this chapter be construed
to be cause for breach of any preexisting private contract, or cause for
interference with regulations imposed by state or federal law or related
to interstate commerce.
J. Repealer. All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the
provisions of this section are hereby repealed to the extent of such
inconsistency.
K. Severability. Each subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this
section is declared to be an undisputed subsection, sentence, clause
and phrase, and the finding or holding of any such part of this section to
§ 85-45.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-45.0
1:863
be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause or reason shall not
affect any other portion of this section.
§ 85-45.0 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-45.0
1:864
ARTICLE IX
Nonconforming Uses and Structures
§ 85-45.1. Compliance.
Any nonconforming use, building or structure which lawfully existed at the
time of adoption of this chapter may be continued, and any such existing
nonconforming building or structure may be reconstructed or structurally
altered, provided that it meets with the requirements of this article.
§ 85-46. Unsafe structures.
Any structure, or portion thereof, declared unsafe by the Construction
Code Official must be restored to a safe condition. This work must be
accomplished within 30 days after written notice to the owner and
completed to the satisfaction of the Construction Code Official.
§ 85-47. Alterations.
There shall be no structural alterations made to any nonconforming building
or structure that is nonconforming because of use. Structural alterations
may be made in a building which is nonconforming because it fails to
comply with height, area, yard, off-street parking or other like requirements
of this chapter, as long as the structural alteration does not extend or
enlarge the nonconformance.
§ 85-48. Restoration.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the restoration of a nonconforming
building partially destroyed by fire, explosion, act of God or act of public
enemy or prevent the continuance of the use of such building, or part
thereof, as such use existed at the time of such partial destruction of such
building, or part thereof, or prevent a change of such existing use under the
limitations provided herein.
§ 85-49. Change to conforming use to be permanent.
Once changed to a conforming use, no building or land shall be permitted
to revert to a nonconforming use.
§ 85-50. Abandonment. [Amended 7-24-1990 by Ord. No. 657]
Whenever a nonconforming use has been abandoned, such use shall not
thereafter be reestablished, and any future use shall be in conformity with
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 85-45.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-50
1:865

ARTICLE X
Fees
§ 85-51. Fees.
(See Chapter 32A, Land Use Procedures, Article III, and Chapter 77,
Uniform Construction Code Department, Article III, of the Borough Code.)
§ 85-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-51
1:867

ARTICLE XI
Zoning Board of Adjustment
§ 85-52. Zoning Board of Adjustment.
(See Chapter 32A, Land Use Procedures, Article II, of the Borough Code.)
§ 85-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-52
1:869

ARTICLE XII
Administration and Enforcement
§ 85-53. Zoning Officer. [Amended 10-23-1990 by Ord. No. 669;
2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 980]
§ 85-54. Construction permits.
(See Chapter 77, Uniform Construction Code Department, of the Borough
Code.)
§ 85-55. Conditional use permits.
The Planning Board, in reviewing conditional use applications, shall use
the guiding principles and standards set forth in Article VIII to determine
that the proposed use will not be detrimental to the health, safety and
general welfare of the Borough, and is deemed necessary for the applicant's
purposes.
§ 85-56. Interpretation.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the
public health, morals, safety or the general welfare. Wherever the
requirements of this chapter are at variance with the requirements of
any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations or ordinances, the more
restrictive, or that imposing the higher standards, shall govern.
§ 85-57. Initiation of proceedings to prevent unlawful acts.
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, altered, repaired,
converted or maintained or any building, structure or land is used in
violation of this chapter, the proper local authorities as contained herein
or an interested party may institute any appropriate action or proceedings
to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration,
repair, conversion, maintenance or use to restrain, correct or abate such
violation, to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land or to
prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises.
Each and every day such violation continues after the expiration of an
abatement notice or after initial construction, as the case may be, shall be
deemed a separate and distinct violation.
§ 85-58. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-22-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-19]
A. This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Zoning Officer.
B. The Zoning Officer shall have all of the powers and duties as set forth in
§ 10-70.
§ 85-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-58
1:871
A. The owner or user of any building or structure, lot or land or part
thereof, who is in violation of this chapter, and any architect, builder,
contractor, agent, person or corporation employed in connection
therewith who assists in the commission of such violation shall each be
guilty of a separate violation thereof.
B. Any person or entity who shall violate the terms and provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a combination of
the following: a fine not exceeding $1,000, imprisonment not to exceed
90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days. Each
day upon which a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
C. In addition to the remedies provided for in this section, should an
owner, operator or occupant of any premises fail to comply with any
order and/or directive of the Zoning Officer within 10 days after notice
of such violation, the Zoning Officer may cause such condition to be
remedied. In such case, the Zoning Officer may cause such remediation
by retaining the services of a contractor, in accordance with applicable
laws, and the cost of such remediation shall be paid by the Borough.
The expenses incurred by the Borough shall become a charge or lien on
such lands and shall be added to and become and form a part of the
taxes to be assessed and levied upon such lands and shall bear interest
at the same rate as taxes and shall be collected and enforced in the
same manner.
§ 85-58 HO-HO-KUS CODE § 85-58
1:872
ARTICLE XIII
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 85-59. Amendments to Zoning Map and regulations.
The Mayor and Council may from time to time amend or change by
ordinance the number, shape or area of the districts established on the
Zoning Map187 and the regulations set forth in this chapter.
§ 85-60. Severability.
If any article, section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or provision of
this chapter shall for any reason be held unconstitutional or invalid, such
adjudication shall apply only to the article, section, paragraph, sentence,
clause, phrase or provision so adjudged, and the remainder of this chapter
shall be deemed valid and effective.
§ 85-61. Repealer.
Any and all ordinances, or parts thereof, inconsistent with the provisions of
this chapter are hereby repealed to such extent as they are so deemed in
conflict or inconsistent; provided, however, that the adoption of this chapter
shall not prevent or bar the continuance or institution of any proceedings
for offenses heretofore committed in violation of any existing ordinance of
the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus.
§ 85-62. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication in
the manner provided by law.
187. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 85-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-62
1:873
Chapter 86
(RESERVED)
Chapter 95
EDUCATION FOR GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS
§ 95-1. Duty to attend basic courses.
All elected officials of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus shall annually attend at
least one or more basic courses on the responsibilities and obligations in
local government, including, but not limited to, budgeting, policy setting,
local government contracting, risk management, ethics and compliance
with the Open Public Records Act and the Open Public Meetings Act.188
§ 95-2. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such
inconsistency.
§ 95-3. Severability.
If any portion of this chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate
the remainder of this chapter, but shall be confined in its effect to the
provision directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall
have been rendered.
§ 95-4. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect after final passage and publication as required
by law.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation. The following is a chronological
listing of legislation of the Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus adopted since
February 13, 2005, indicating its inclusion in the Code or the
reason for its exclusion. [Enabling legislation which is not general
and permanent in nature is considered to be non-Code material
188. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 and N.J.S.A. 10:4-6, respectively.
§ 85-62 HO-HO-KUS CODE § DL-1
1:874
(NCM).] The last legislation reviewed for the 2012 republication of
the Code was Ord. No. 999, adopted 10-25-2011.
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
893 2-15-2005 Exceed index rate NCM
894 2-15-2005 Board of Recreation
Commissioners amendment
Ch. 51A
895 2-15-2005 Vehicles and traffic:
handicapped parking
Ch. 79, Art. IV
896 2-15-2005 Soil importation Ch. 63A
897 3-22-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 85
898 5-24-2005 Bond NCM
899 5-24-2005 Salaries See Ch. 53
900 7-26-2005 Uniform Construction Code
Department amendment
Ch. 77
901 8-23-2005 Floodplain management
amendment
Ch. 27
902 12-20-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 85
903 2-28-2006 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
904 2-28-2006 Illicit connections Ch. 31A
905 2-28-2006 Improper disposal of waste Ch. 32
906 2-28-2006 Littering amendment Ch. 34
907 2-28-2006 Pet waste Ch. 43
908 2-28-2006 Recycling amendment Ch. 52, Art. I
909 2-28-2006 Wildlife feeding
amendment
Ch. 82
910 3-28-2006 Stormwater control Ch. 66A
911 4-25-2006 Personnel rules and
regulations amendment
Ch. 42
912 5-23-2006 Bond NCM
913 5-26-2006 Bond NCM
914 6-27-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 85
915 9-26-2006 Borough personnel:
Municipal Housing Liaison
Superseded by Ord.
No. 927
916 9-26-2006 Salaries See Ch. 53
917 10-24-2006 Paintball guns and devices Ch. 39B
918 12-19-2006 Development fees
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 937
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:875
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
919 12-19-2006 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 46
920 12-19-2006 Vehicles and traffic:
parking lots amendment
Ch. 79, Art. II
921 12-19-2006 Water and water rates:
distribution and use
regulations; payment of
water rates amendment
Ch. 81, Art. I
922 1-23-2007 Bond NCM
923 3-27-2007 Dogs amendment Ch. 18
924 3-27-2007 Public contracting pay-toplay
reform
Ch. 47A
925 3-27-2007 Public access to records
amendment
Ch. 51
926 3-26-2007 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
927 5-22-2007 Borough personnel:
Municipal Housing Liaison
repealer
Repealed by Ord.
No. 2017-09
928 6-26-2007 Bond NCM
929 6-26-2007 Bond NCM
930 9-25-2007 Salaries See Ch. 53
931 12-18-2007 Criminal history record
background checks
Repealed by Ord.
No. 1014
932 2-26-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 85
933 3-25-2008 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
934 4-22-2008 Entertainment, licensed:
bingo and raffles
Ch. 20, Art. V
935
936 5-27-2008 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 26
937 7-22-2008 Development fees Superseded by Ord.
No. 972
938 7-22-2008 Vehicles and traffic: traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 79, Art. I
939
940
941
942
§ DL-1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § DL-1
1:876
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
943 11-25-2008 Defined contribution
retirement program
Ch. 16B
944 2-24-2009 Personnel rules and
regulations amendment
Ch. 42
945 2-24-2009 Chief Financial Officer
amendment; Treasurer
Ch. 10, Arts. VI and
XIII
946
947
948 3-24-2009 Donation clothing bins Ch. 18B
949 3-24-2009 Dogs amendment Ch. 18
950 3-24-2009 Towing services Repealed by Ord.
No. 957
951 3-24-2009 Water and water rates:
distribution and use
regulations; payment of
water rates amendment
Ch. 81, Art. I
952 4-28-2009 Fire Department Ch. 25
953 4-28-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 85
954
955
956 11-24-2009 Municipal Court
amendment
Ch. 36
957 11-24-2009 Towing services Ch. 75
958 2-23-2010 Stream corridor protection Ch. 66B
959 3-23-2010 Salaries See Ch. 53
960 3-23-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 85
961 3-23-2010 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 46
962 5-25-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 85
963 5-25-2010 Water and water rates:
distribution and use
regulations; payment of
water rates amendment
Ch. 81, Art. I
964 5-25-2010 Stormwater control
amendment
Ch. 66A
965 6-22-2010 Vehicles and traffic:
Borough Hall parking lot
Ch. 79, Art. IIA
966 7-27-2010 Dogs amendment Ch. 18
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:877
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
967
968
969 8-24-2010 Cable television Ch. 12
970 10-25-2010 Soil movement Ch. 63
971 11-26-2010 Lightning warning system Ch. 33A
972 11-26-2010 Development fees Ch. 17
973 11-26-2010 Dogs amendment Ch. 18
974 11-26-2010 Vehicles and traffic:
parking lots amendment
Ch. 79, Art. II
975 11-26-2010 Cats amendment Ch. 13
976 2-22-2011 Landscaper registration Superseded by Ord.
No. 985
977 2-22-2011 Underground storage tanks
amendment
Ch. 65
978 2-22-2011 Uniform Construction Code
Department amendment
Ch. 77
979 2-22-2011 Zoning Officer Ch. 10, Art. XIV
980 2-22-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 85
981 2-22-2011 Snow, ice, grass and weeds:
general requirements
amendment
Ch. 61, Art. I
982 2-22-2011 Curfew Ch. 27A
983 3-22-2011 Dogs amendment Ch. 18
984 3-22-2011 Excessive number of dogs
and cats
Ch. 18A
985 3-22-2011 Landscaper registration Ch. 32C
986
987 5-24-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 85
988 5-24-2011 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 32A
989 5-24-2011 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 26
990 5-24-2011 Uniform Construction Code
Department amendment
Ch. 77
991 5-24-2011 Bond NCM
992 7-26-2011 Shade Tree Commission
Amendment
Ch. 57
993 7-26-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 85
§ DL-1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § DL-1
1:878
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
994 8-23-2011 Water and water rates:
water emergency
amendment
Ch. 81, Art. III
995 9-27-2011 Uniform Construction Code
Department amendment
Ch. 77
996 9-27-2011 Education for government
officials
Ch. 95
997 9-27-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 85
998 10-25-2011 Water and water rates:
water emergency
amendment
Ch. 81, Art. III
999 10-25-2011 Stormwater control
amendment
Ch. 66A
1000 11-22-2011 Vehicles and traffic:
parking lots amendment
Ch. 79, Art. II
1001 12-12-2011 Uniform Construction Code
Department amendment
Ch. 77
1002 12-20-2011 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 46
1003 2-28-2012 Alarm systems Ch. 3A
1004 Salaries See Ch. 53
1005 2-28-2012 Water and water rates:
distribution and use
regulations; payment of
water rates amendment
Ch. 81, Art. I
1006 3-20-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 85
1007 3-20-2012 Sidewalks, curbs and
streets: street openings
and excavations; pavement
cuts amendment
Ch. 58, Art. II
1008 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
1009 6-26-2012 Volunteer incentives:
volunteer incentive
program amendment
Ch. 80, Art. I
1010 9-25-2012 Sewer connection
agreement
NCM
1011 10-23-2012 Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 25
1012 12-18-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 85
1013 12-18-2012 Health Code amendment Ch. 29
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:879
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1014 2-26-2013 Criminal history record
background checks
repealer
Ch. 7, Art. I,
reference only
1015 2-26-2013 Criminal history record
background checks
Ch. 7, Art. I
1016 2-26-2013 Water and water rates:
distribution and use
regulations; payment of
water rates amendment
Ch. 81, Art. I
1017 Salaries See Ch. 53
1018 2-26-2013 Shade Tree Commission
amendment
Ch. 57
1019 4-23-2013 Vehicles and traffic:
parking lots amendment
Ch. 79, Art. II
1020 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
1021 Bond NCM
1022 Bond NCM
1023 6-25-2013 Outdoor cafes amendment Ch. 39A
1024 7-16-2013 Land use procedures
amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 32A; Ch. 85
1025 10-22-130 Vehicles and traffic:
parking lots amendment
Ch. 79, Art. II
1026 2-25-2014 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 32A
1027 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
1028 5-27-2014 Salaries See Ch. 53
1029 6-17-2014 Bond NCM
1030 8-26-2014 Volunteer Incentive
Program amendment
Ch. 80, Art. I
1031 9-23-2014 Uniform Construction Code
Department amendment
Ch. 77
1032 9-23-2014 Personnel rules and
regulations amendment
Ch. 42
1033 11-25-2014 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 46
1034 11-25-2014 Vehicles and traffic:
parking lots amendment
Ch. 79, Art. II
1035 11-25-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 85
§ DL-1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § DL-1
1:880
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1036 5-26-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 85
1037 6-23-2015 Bond NCM
1038 5-26-2015 Salaries NCM
1039 5-26-2015 Land subdivision and site
plan review amendment
Ch. 32B
1040 6-23-2015 Vehicles and traffic: traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 79, Art. I
1041 10-27-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 85
1042 11-24-2015 Vehicles and traffic: traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 79, Art. I
1043 11-24-2015 Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 25
1044 11-24-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
parking lots amendment
Ch. 79, Art. II
1045 12-22-2015 Land subdivision and site
plan review amendment
Ch. 32B
1045-1 12-22-2015 Land subdivision and site
plan review amendment
Ch. 32B
2016-01 2-23-2016 Uniform Construction Code
Department amendment
Ch. 77
2016-02 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
2016-03 Salaries NCM
2016-04 4-26-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 85
2016-05 4-26-2016 Uniform Construction Code
Department amendment
Ch. 77
2016-06 4-26-2016 Snow, ice, grass and weeds:
clearance of snow from fire
hydrants; locator poles
Ch. 61, Art. II
2016-07 4-26-2016 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 32A
2016-08 4-26-2016 Vehicles and traffic: traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 79, Art. I
2016-09 6-28-2016 Bond NCM
2016-10 10-25-2016 Peddlers, Solicitors and
Canvassers: General
Provisions Amendment;
Peddlers, Solicitors and
Canvassers: Canvassing or
Soliciting for Sale or Rental
of Property
Ch. 40, Art. I; Ch.
40, Art. II
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:881
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2016-11 10-25-2016 Property Maintenance
Amendment
Ch. 47
2016-12 10-25-2016 Short-Term Rental Property Ch. 57A
2017-01 2-28-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 79
2017-02 3-28-2017 Dogs Amendment Ch. 18
2017-03 3-28-2017 Landscaper Registration
Amendment
Ch. 32C
2017-04 4-25-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 85
2017-05 4-25-2017 Exceed Budget; Cap Bank NCM
2017-06 6-27-2017 Bond NCM
2017-07 6-27-2017 Vehicles and Traffic: Traffic
Regulations Amendment;
Vehicles and Traffic:
Handicapped Parking
Amendment
Ch. 79, Art. I; Ch.
79, Art. IV
2017-08 6-27-2017 Police Department
Amendment
Ch. 46
2017-09 7-25-2017 Affordable Housing;
Borough Personnel:
Municipal Housing Liaison
Repealer
Ch. 2; Ch. 10, Art.
XII
2017-10 7-25-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 85
2017-11 9-26-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 85
2017-12 9-26-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 85
2017-13 9-26-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 85
2018-01 1-23-2018 Vehicles and Traffic: Traffic
Regulations Amendment
Ch. 79, Art. I
2018-02 3-27-2018 Development Fees
Amendment
Ch. 17
2018-03 3-27-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 85
2018-04 3-27-2018 Affordable Housing
Amendment
Ch. 2
2018-05 4-24-2018 Exceed Budget; Cap Bank NCM
2018-06 5-22-2018 Borough Personnel:
Municipal Humane Law
Enforcement Officer
Ch. 10, Art. XV
2018-07 6-26-2018 Police Department
Amendment
Ch. 46
§ DL-1 HO-HO-KUS CODE § DL-1
1:882
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2018-08 7-24-2018 Vehicles and Traffic: Traffic
Regulations Amendment
Ch. 79, Art. I
2018-09 10-23-2018 Peddlers, Solicitors and
Canvassers: General
Provisions Amendment
Ch. 40, Art. I
2018-10 10-23-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 85
2018-11 11-27-2018 Water and Water Rates:
Distribution and Use
Regulations; Payment of
Water Rates Amendment
Ch. 81, Art. I
2018-12 11-27-2018 Land Use Procedures
Amendment
Ch. 32A
2018-13 11-27-2018 Vehicles and Traffic:
Parking Lots Amendment
Ch. 79, Art. II
2018-14 11-27-2018 Cats Amendment Ch. 13
2018-15 11-27-2018 Dogs Amendment Ch. 18
2018-16 1-7-2019 Board of Health
Amendment
Ch. 8
2019-17 1-22-2019 Social Media and Public
Outreach Policy and
Procedure"
Ch. 62
2019-18 1-22-2019 Property Maintenance
Amendment
Ch. 47
2019-19 1-22-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 85
2019-20 2-26-2019 Volunteer Incentives:
Volunteer Fee Exemptions
Amendment
Ch. 80, Art. II
2019-21 3-26-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 85
2019-22 3-26-2019 Zoning Amendment Ch. 85
2019-23 3-26-2019 Towing Services
Amendment
Ch. 75
2019-24 4-23-2019 Exceed Budget; Cap Bank NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:883