Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Terminology; Borough Seal
[Adopted 6-27-1972 by Ord. No. 72-9 as Ch. 1 of the Revised
Ordinances of 1972; amended in its entirety 5-13-1997 by Ord. No.
97-8]
§ 1-1. Word usage.
§ 1-2. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly provided, or unless there is something in the
subject or context repugnant to such construction, or unless inconsistent
with the manifest intent of the Council, the following words and phrases,
when used in the Code of the Borough of Hillsdale or in any other
ordinances of the Borough, shall have the meanings herein given:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Hillsdale.
CLERK — The Borough Clerk of the Borough of Hillsdale.
COUNTY — The County of Bergen.
GOVERNING BODY — The Mayor and Council members of the Borough of
Hillsdale or such other duly authorized legislative body as shall be charged
with governing the Borough.
MONTH — A calendar month.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Hillsdale.
A. In the construction of the Code of the Borough of Hillsdale and of all
other ordinances of the Borough, words and phrases shall be read and
construed with their context, and shall, unless inconsistent with the
manifest intent of the Council or unless another or different meaning is
expressly indicated, be given their generally accepted meaning,
according to the approved usage of the language.
B. Technical words and phrases, and words and phrases having a special
or accepted meaning in the law, shall be construed in accordance with
such technical or special and accepted meaning.
C. The terms "shall" and "must" have mandatory connotations, and the
term "may" has a discretionary and permissive connotation.
D. Gender. Words importing the masculine gender shall apply to females
as well as to males, and to all persons as herein defined.
E. Number. Words used in the singular number include the plural, and
words used in the plural include the singular number.
F. "Oath" includes "affirmation;" and "swear" and "sworn" include "affirm"
and "affirmed."
G. "Officer" or "official" shall be construed as if the words "of the Borough
of Hillsdale" followed it.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:3
NEW JERSEY STATUTES or N.J.S.A. — The New Jersey Statutes Annotated,
as amended and supplemented.
OCCUPANT — See "tenant."
OWNER — Includes sole owner and/or any of the following: part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by
the entirety, of the whole or of a part of a building or land and/or personal
property.
PERSON — Includes corporations, companies, societies, firms,
partnerships, associations, organizations and any other group or entity
acting as a unit, as well as an individual.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Includes goods and chattels, rights and credits,
moneys and effects, evidences of debt, choses in action and all written
instruments by which any right to, interest in, lien or encumbrance upon
property or any debt or financial obligation is created, acknowledged,
evidenced, transferred, discharged or defeated, in whole or in part, and
every thing, except real property as herein defined, which may be the
subject of ownership.
PROPERTY — Includes real and personal property.
PUBLIC GROUND, PUBLIC SQUARE or PUBLIC PLACE — Any and every
public ground, public square, public park or other public place within the
Borough which is within the jurisdiction and control of the Borough, and
which is or may be in general use by all citizens, and in which all have an
equal right of passage or use at will.
REAL PROPERTY — Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments, all rights
thereto and interests therein.
SIDEWALK — That portion of the roadway intended for the use of
pedestrians between the curbline or the lateral line of a shoulder or, if none,
the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent right-of-way line.
STREET — Includes highways, roads, avenues, boulevards, courts, public
lanes, alleys, sidewalks, foot paths and all other public highways for
vehicular or pedestrian travel.
TAX COLLECTOR — The Collector of Taxes of the Borough of Hillsdale.
TENANT or OCCUPANT — Includes any person who occupies the whole or
part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
WEEK — Seven days.
WRITING and WRITTEN — Include printing and any other mode of
representing words, letters and figures, except that the word "signature"
means the name of a person manually inscribed by himself.
YEAR — A calendar year (January 1 through December 31).
§ 1-2 HILLSDALE CODE § 1-3
1:4
§ 1-3. Borough Seal.
The Seal heretofore provided and used by and for the Borough is hereby
established and continued as the seal of the Borough.
§ 1-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3
1:5

ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code by Borough Council
[Adopted 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
§ 1-4. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Borough of Hillsdale of
a general and permanent nature adopted by the Mayor and Council of the
Borough of Hillsdale, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters
and sections by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters
1 through 310, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted,
ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Borough of Hillsdale," hereinafter
known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-5. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-6. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-7. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Borough Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the public
until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall
be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Borough of
Hillsdale by impressing thereon the Seal of the borough, as provided by
law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of
the borough, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-8. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Borough of Hillsdale" shall
be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-9
1:7
§ 1-9. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Borough of Hillsdale, pursuant to law, shall cause to be
published, in the manner required, a copy of this Adopting Ordinance in
a newspaper of general circulation in the borough. Sufficient copies of
the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by
the public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this Adopting Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-10. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-11. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code book containing the Code may be purchased from the
Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Mayor
and Council, which may also arrange, by resolution, for procedures for the
periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-12. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Borough of
Hillsdale to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or any
part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to one or more of
the following: a fine of not more than $1,000, imprisonment for not more
than 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, in the
discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-13. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-9 HILLSDALE CODE § 1-14
1:8
§ 1-14. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-15. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
Adopting Ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-16. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to December 10, 1996.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the borough's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:9
§ 1-17. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance adopting or amending the Zoning Map.
M. Any legislation relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension
fund for municipal employees.
N. All legislation dealing with vehicles and traffic.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Mayor and Council that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed
had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth in
Schedule A attached hereto1 and made a part hereof are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance
(chapter and section number references are to the ordinances as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code).
C. Nomenclature changes made throughout the Code:
(1) All references to the "Treasurer" will be amended to refer to the
"Chief Financial Officer."
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-14B, the chapters and sections which were added,
amended or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code by a footnote
referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II. During routine supplementation,
footnotes indicated amendments or additions will be replaced with the following history:
"Amended (added) 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8." Schedule A, which contains a complete
description of all changes, is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 1-16 HILLSDALE CODE § 1-17
1:10
ARTICLE III
Ordinances Adopted During Codification
[During the process of codification, certain complete new
ordinances were approved by the Borough Council for inclusion in
the Code of the Borough of Hillsdale. Such new ordinances are
noted in the histories of individual chapters as "Adopted ... during
codification; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III." During the
course of routine supplementation, specific dates will be inserted
where pertinent in the text of various chapters. The listing below
sets forth each chapter affected by any such legislation adopted
during codification. The complete text of such ordinances is on file
in the office of the Borough Clerk where it may be inspected during
regular office hours.]
Chapter Adoption Date Legislation
138, Fees 5-13-1997 Ord. No. 97-9
184, Library 5-13-1997 Ord. No. 97-10
226, Penalties 5-13-1997 Ord. No. 97-11
335, Fees 5-13-1997 Ord. No. 97-12
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-17
1:11
Chapter 9
CLAIMS, BILLS AND SALARIES, PAYMENT OF
§ 1-17 HILLSDALE CODE § 1-17
9:12
ARTICLE I
Payment of Bills and Claims 2
§ 9-1. Presentation to Chief Financial Officer of certified bill of
demand.
Any person claiming payment from the Borough shall present a duly
certified claim in the form of a detailed bill of demand to the Borough Chief
Financial Officer.
§ 9-2. Certification by signature of Borough representative.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Chief Financial Officer to make certain
that there appears on every claim the signature of the officer or employee
who has been duly designated by the governing body to certify that the
materials have been received by or the services rendered to the Borough.
§ 9-3. Reimbursement for travel expenses.
In the case of reimbursement for actual and necessary travel expenses
incurred by Borough officials where authorized to travel by the Borough,
itemized claims supported by receipts, where available, should be
presented in order to obtain the reimbursement for such expenses.
§ 9-4. Presentation of claims.
After the Borough Chief Financial Officer has ascertained that the
provisions of §§ 9-1, 9-2 and 9-3, where applicable, have been complied
with, every claim shall then be presented to the Borough Council for
approval.
§ 9-5. Council action; approval or rejection by resolution; referral
on rejection.
§ 9-6. Resolution to be incorporated in minutes.
The approving resolution shall be incorporated in the official minutes.
A. The governing body shall consider each claim and shall, by resolution,
approve or reject same.
B. If a claim shall be rejected, the reasons for the rejection shall be stated
thereon, and the claim shall be referred back to the Borough Chief
Financial Officer with such instructions as the governing body may give
at the time of disapproval.
2. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40A:5-17 provides that the governing body shall approve or
disapprove all claims and shall, by ordinance, prescribe the manner in which claims shall
be approved or disapproved. N.J.S.A. 40A:5-16 provides that the governing body shall not
pay out any of its moneys unless the bill or claim is itemized and the claimant certifies
that the payment sought is correct.
§ 9-1 CLAIMS, BILLS AND SALARIES, PAYMENT OF § 9-7
9:13
§ 9-7. Clerk to record Council action on all claims.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Clerk to record all claims in the official
minutes indicating that the governing body has by formal action approved
the claims or disapproved or rejected them.
§ 9-8. Approved claims to be noted.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Chief Financial Officer to indicate on
each claim that it has been approved for payment, with the date of approval
thereof noted on the claim.
§ 9-9. Payment of claims.
A. After the Clerk has certified that the claim has been approved, he or she
shall turn the same over to the Chief Financial Officer for payment.
B. The Chief Financial Officer will forthwith prepare the necessary check
or electronic transfer of funds for the payment thereof. Said check shall
be signed by the Mayor and the Clerk and thereafter countersigned by
the Chief Financial Officer.3
C. After preparing checks or electronically transferring funds for the
payment of claims, the Chief Financial Officer shall record them in
proper books of account and thereafter mail or otherwise distribute
payments to the claimants.
D. The Borough Council shall designate by resolution which claims may be
paid through electronic funds transfer.
3. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 9-7 HILLSDALE CODE § 9-9
9:14
ARTICLE II
Payment of Salaries4
§ 9-10. Rate of compensation provided by salary ordinance or
statute.
The rate of compensation of each officer and employee of the Borough shall
be as provided in the salary ordinances of the Borough or as otherwise
provided by statute.
§ 9-11. Preparation of payrolls; certification.
§ 9-12. Submission of payrolls; approval.
At each regular meeting of the Council, the Borough Chief Financial Officer
shall submit for approval or ratification, as the case may be, the necessary
payrolls for the amount due and payable to the several officers and
employees for compensation. The payroll shall be considered by the Council
in due course and approved, if found to be correct.5
§ 9-13. Designated officers to sign warrants.
Such officers as may be designated by the Council are hereby authorized
to sign warrants drawn in favor of the payroll account upon due notice
that the appropriate payrolls have been approved by the proper certifying
authorities.
§ 9-14. Deposits to Borough payroll account.
From time to time the Chief Financial Officer, upon receipt of a warrant for
the amount due such Borough payroll account, shall deposit the sum to the
credit of the Borough payroll account charging the appropriate budgetary
account therewith.
A. The appropriate department heads, or such officer or employee as may
be designated by the Borough Administrator, shall prepare the
necessary payrolls for all employees.
B. Said payrolls shall be duly certified, by the person authorized to certify,
that the services have been rendered and that the amounts specified
have been approved by the department head responsible therefor.
4. Editor's Note: For statute authorizing a municipality to adopt ordinances pertaining to the
form and manner of paying salaries, wages and other compensation, see N.J.S.A. 40A:5-19.
5. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 8-13, Payrolls account warrants presented, which immediately
followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II.
§ 9-10 CLAIMS, BILLS AND SALARIES, PAYMENT OF § 9-15
9:15
§ 9-15. Checks drawn; electronic transfers.
The Chief Financial Officer shall thereafter draw checks on the Borough
payroll account or issue payment electronically to the officers and
employees entitled to payment therefrom.
§ 9-16. Errors or adjustments.
In case of error or adjustment in the payroll, the Chief Financial Officer shall
see that such error or adjustment is properly corrected and an appropriate
record made thereof.
§ 9-15 HILLSDALE CODE § 9-16
9:16
Chapter 12
CONTRACTS, PUBLIC PROFESSIONAL SERVICE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Contracts with governmental contracting
units — See Ch. 13.
§ 12-1. Prohibition on awarding public contracts to certain
contributors. [Amended 5-5-2009 by Ord. No. 09-08]
A. Any other provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, the Borough
or any of its purchasing agents or agencies or those of its independent
authorities, as the case may be, shall not enter into an agreement or
otherwise contract to procure services from any professional business
entity, if that entity has solicited or made any contribution of money, or
pledge of a contribution, including in-kind contributions, to a campaign
committee of any candidate or holder of the public office having
ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract, or to any
municipal or county party or political committee or political action
committee, or any other entity which has contributed to candidates for
the governing body of Hillsdale within the current calendar year or the
two prior calendar years in excess of the thresholds specified in
Subsection D within two calendar years immediately preceding the date
of the contract agreement.
B. No professional business entity which enters into negotiations for or
agrees to any contract or agreement with the Borough or any
department or agency thereof or of its independent authorities for the
rendition of professional services shall solicit or make any contributions
of money, or pledge of a contribution, including in-kind contributions, to
any candidate or holder of the public office having ultimate
responsibility for the award of the contracts, or to any municipal or
county party committee, or political action committee, or any other
entity which has contributed to candidates for the governing body of
Hillsdale within the current calendar year or the two prior calendar
years, between the time of the first communications between the
business entity and the Borough regarding a specific professional
services agreement and the later of the termination of negotiations or
the completion of the contract or agreement.
C. For the purposes of this chapter, a "professional business entity"
seeking a public contract means an individual, including the
individual's spouse, if any, and any child living at home; person; firm;
corporation; professional corporation; partnership; organization; or
association. The definition of a business entity includes all principals
who own 10% or more of the equity in the corporation or business trust,
§ 9-16 CLAIMS, BILLS AND SALARIES, PAYMENT OF § 12-1
9:17
§ 12-2. Contributions made prior to effective date.
No contributions of money or any other thing of value, including in-kind
contributions, made by a professional business entity to any Borough of
Hillsdale candidate for Mayor or Borough Council, or Borough of Hillsdale
or Bergen County Party Committee shall be deemed a violation of this
section, nor shall an agreement for property, goods, or services, of any kind
whatsoever, be disqualified thereby, if that contribution was made by the
professional business entity prior to the effective date of this chapter.
§ 12-3. Contribution statement by professional business entity.
partners, and officers in the aggregate employed by the entity as well
as any subsidiaries directly controlled by the business entity.
D. Any individual meeting the definition of "professional business entity"
under this section may annually contribute a maximum of $300 each for
any purpose to any candidate, for Mayor and Council, or $300 to any
municipal or county party committee or political action committee, or
any other entity which has contributed to candidates for the governing
body of Hillsdale within the current calendar year or the two prior
calendar years, without violating Subsection A of this section. However,
any group of individuals meeting the definition of "professional
business entity" under this section, including such principals, partners,
and officers of the entity in the aggregate, may not annually contribute
for any purpose in excess of $1,000 to all municipal candidates and
office holders with the ultimate responsibility for the award of the
contract, and all municipal or county political parties or political action
committee, or any other entity which has contributed to candidates for
the governing body of Hillsdale within the current calendar year or the
two prior calendar years combined, without violating Subsection A of
this section. [Amended 10-4-2011 by Ord. No. 11-19]
E. For the purpose of this section, the office that is considered to have
ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract shall be the
governing body of the Borough of Hillsdale if that contracts requires
approval or appropriation from the governing body.
A. Prior to awarding any contract or agreement to procure services with
any professional business entity, the Council or any of its purchasing
agents or agencies, as the case may be, shall receive a sworn statement
from the professional business entity made under penalty of perjury
that the bidder or offeror has not made a contribution in violation of
§ 12-1 hereof.
B. The professional business entity shall have a continuing duty to report
any violations of this chapter that may occur during the negotiation or
duration of a contract. The certification required under this section
shall be made prior to entry into the contract or agreement with the
Borough and shall be in addition to any other certifications that may be
required by any other provision of law.
§ 12-1 HILLSDALE CODE § 12-4
9:18
§ 12-4. (Reserved)6
§ 12-5. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 13
CONTRACTS WITH GOVERNMENTAL CONTRACTING UNITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Payment of claims, bills and salaries — See
Ch. 9.
§ 13-1. Resolutions authorizing contracts.
The Borough is hereby authorized to enter into contract with the County
of Bergen, from time to time, and whenever the Council shall by resolution
determine it to be in the best interests of the Borough to do so, to provide
for either or both of the following:
§ 13-2. Contents of resolutions.
The resolution or resolutions adopted by the Council pursuant to the
provisions of § 13-1 of this chapter shall, by reference or otherwise,
prescribe the terms of the contract to be entered into with the County of
A. All Borough of Hillsdale professional service agreements shall provide
that it shall be a breach of the terms of the government contract for a
professional business entity, as defined herein, to violate any provision
herein.
B. Any professional business entity, as defined herein, who knowingly fails
to reveal a contribution made in violation of this chapter, or who
knowingly makes or solicits contributions through intermediaries for
the purpose of concealing or misrepresenting the source of the
contribution, shall be disqualified from eligibility for future municipal
contracts for a period of four calendar years from the date of the
violation.
A. The furnishing by the county to the Borough of any service or facility
which the Borough might otherwise lawfully furnish or provide to its
inhabitants, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:23-6.26 to
40:23-6.29, inclusive.
B. The purchasing by the county of materials and supplies for use by the
Borough, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-10 and
40A:11-11.
6. Editor's Note: Former § 12-4, Return of excess of contributions, was repealed 5-5-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-08.
§ 12-4 CONTRACTS WITH GOVERNMENTAL § 13-2
13:19
Bergen and shall designate the person or persons authorized to execute
such contract on behalf of the Borough.
§ 13-3. Cooperative purchasing.7
Chapter 17
COURT, MUNICIPAL
A. The Purchasing Agent shall have the authority to join with other units of
government in cooperative purchase plans as stated in the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey when the best interests of the Borough could be
served thereby.
B. Joint agreements for purchase of work materials and supplied. Pursuant
to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-10, the governing body of the
Borough of Hillsdale is hereby authorized to enter into cooperative
purchasing agreements with any other contracting unit in the County of
Bergen or adjoining counties for purchase of work, materials and
supplies. One contracting unit may arrange for contracts on behalf of
the Borough of Hillsdale and shall be responsible for complying with the
provisions of the Local Public Contract Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.)
and all other provisions and statutes of the State of New Jersey.
C. Interlocal services agreements. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:8A-1 et seq., the Borough of Hillsdale is hereby authorized to enter
into interlocal service agreements with other contracting agencies.
7. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 13-2 HILLSDALE CODE § 13-3
17:20
ARTICLE I
Municipal Court and Municipal Judge8
§ 17-1. Municipal Court established.
The Municipal Court of the Borough, heretofore established as of January 1,
1949 in accordance with law, is hereby continued.
§ 17-2. Name of Court.
The name of the Municipal Court shall be the "Municipal Court of the
Borough of Hillsdale."
§ 17-3. Municipal Court seal.
The Municipal Court shall have an official seal which shall bear the impress
of the name of the Court.
§ 17-4. Municipal Judge: appointment; qualifications; term.
The Municipal Court of the Borough shall have a municipal judge, who
shall be known as the "Municipal Judge." He or she shall be appointed by
the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council and shall have the
qualifications required by law. The Municipal Judge shall serve for a term
of three years from the date of his or her appointment and until his or her
successor is appointed and qualified.9
§ 17-5. Municipal Judge's oath.
Each Municipal Judge, or attorney temporarily designated in writing as
Municipal Judge, shall, before entering upon the duties of his or her office,
take, subscribe and file the oath of office required by law and rules of
court.10
§ 17-6. Jurisdiction; powers; duties.
A. The Municipal Court and the Municipal Judge shall have, possess and
exercise all the jurisdiction, powers, functions and duties which are or
may be conferred by law and the applicable Rules of the Supreme Court
of New Jersey.
B. The territorial jurisdiction of the Municipal Court shall be the territory
embraced within the Borough.
8. Editor's Note: For state statutes relating to penalty provisions of ordinances and the
discretionary power of the Municipal Judge with respect thereto, see N.J.S.A. 40:49-5. See
also Rules of the Supreme Court of New Jersey governing practice in municipal courts
including rules of administration.
9. Editor's Note: Original Section 14-5, Municipal Judge: compensation, which immediately
followed this section, was deleted 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8. For current provisions
relating to salaries, see Ch. 9.
10.Editor's Note: For statutory form of Municipal Judge's oath, see N.J.S.A. 41:2A-6. See also
Rules of the Supreme Court of New Jersey relating to oath of Municipal Judge.
§ 17-1 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 17-7
17:21
§ 17-7. Administrator and assistants: appointment; term;
qualifications; oath.
§ 17-8. Duties of Administrator and assistants.
The Administrator and assistants shall:
§ 17-9. Bond of Municipal Judge and Administrator.
The Municipal Judge and the Administrator of the Municipal Court, before
entering upon the duties of their respective offices, shall enter into a bond
as required by law.12
A. There shall be an Administrator of the Municipal Court and such other
assistants as may, from time to time, be necessary for the efficient
administration of the Court.
B. The Violations Clerk shall be designated by the Court pursuant to the
Rules of the Supreme Court of New Jersey. [Amended 5-13-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-8]
C. The Administrator, assistants and Violation Clerk shall not be required
to be residents of the Borough of Hillsdale. [Amended 3-10-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-1]
D. Before entering upon the duties of their offices, the Administrator and
assistants shall take and subscribe the oath and affirmation usually
taken by public officials.
A. Attend the sessions of the Court and the examinations, trials and
proceedings had therein.
B. Perform such other duties and services appertaining to the Court and
the business thereof as the Municipal Judge, the Rules of the Supreme
Court of New Jersey and the laws of this state may require.11
11.Editor's Note: Original Section 14-10, Administrator and assistants; compensation, which
immediately followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II. For current provisions dealing with salaries, see Ch. 9.
12.Editor's Note: For statutory requirements as to the bond, see N.J.S.A. 40A:5-39 to
40A:5-41.
§ 17-7 HILLSDALE CODE § 17-9
17:22
Chapter 21
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 51.
§ 21-1. Provision of indemnification and legal defense.
Except as hereinafter provided, the Borough of Hillsdale, hereinafter known
as the "Borough," shall, upon the request of any present or former official,
employee or appointee of the Borough, provide for the indemnification and
legal defense of any civil action brought against said person or persons
arising from an act or omission falling within the scope of their public
duties.
§ 21-2. Terminology.
The terms of this chapter and the definition of "official," "employee" and
"appointee" are to be construed liberally in order to effectuate the purposes
of this chapter except that these terms shall not mean any person who is
not a natural person; any person while providing goods or services of any
kind under any contract with the Borough except an employment contract;
any person while providing legal or engineering services for compensation
unless said person is a full-time employee of the Borough; and any person
who, as a condition of his or her appointment or contract, is required to
indemnify and defend the Borough and/or secure insurance.
§ 21-3. Applicability.
The Borough shall provide for defense of and indemnify any present or
former official, employee or appointee of the Borough who becomes a
defendant in a civil action if the person or persons involved acted or failed
to act in a matter in which the Borough has or had an interest; acted or
failed to act in the discharge of a duty imposed or authorized by law; and
acted or failed to take action in good faith. For purposes of this chapter, the
duty and authority of the Borough to defend and indemnify shall extend to
a cross-claim or counterclaim against said person.
§ 21-4. Circumstances in which Borough shall not provide defense
and/or indemnification.
The Borough shall not indemnify any person against the payment of punitive
damages, penalties, or fines, but may provide for the legal defense of
such claims in accord with the standards set forth herein. The Borough
may refuse to provide for the defense and indemnification of any civil
action referred to herein if the Borough Council determines that the act or
omission did not occur within the scope of a duty authorized or imposed
§ 17-9 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 21-4
21:23
by law; the act or failure to act was the result of actual fraud, willful
misconduct or actual malice of the person requesting defense and
indemnification; or the defense of the action or proceeding by the Borough
would create a conflict of interest between the Borough and the person or
persons involved.
§ 21-5. Proceedings other than civil actions.
In any other action or proceeding, including criminal proceedings, the
Borough may provide for the defense of a present or former official,
employee or appointee, if the Borough Council concludes that such
representation is in the best interest of the Borough and that the person to
be defended acted or failed to act in accord with the standards set forth in
this chapter.
§ 21-6. Control over representation of defendant; defendant's
cooperation required.
Whenever the Borough provides for the defense of any action set forth
herein and, as a condition of such defense, the Borough may assume
exclusive control over the representation of such persons defended, and
such person shall cooperate fully with the Borough.
§ 21-7. Representation.
The Borough may provide for the defense pursuant to this chapter by
authorizing its attorney to act in behalf of the person being defended or by
employing other counsel for this purpose or by asserting the right of the
Borough under any appropriate insurance policy that requires the insurer
to provide defense.
Chapter 25
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION
§ 25-1. Commission continued; purpose.13
§ 25-2. Membership: appointment; qualifications.14
A. The Commission known as the "Environmental Commission of the
Borough of Hillsdale," heretofore established, is hereby continued.
B. The Environmental Commission has been established for the
protection, development and use of natural resources, including water
resources, located within the territorial limits of the Borough.
13.Editor's Note: For state statute authorizing a municipality to provide for an Environmental
Commission, see N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq.
14.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 21-4 HILLSDALE CODE § 25-2
25:24
§ 25-3. Membership; terms; vacancies; removal from office.
§ 25-4. Duties of Commission.
The Environmental Commission shall have the following duties:
A. The Commission shall consist of seven (7) members, all of whom shall
be residents of the Borough, appointed by the Mayor. In addition, there
shall be two (2) alternate members designated as first and second
alternate, who may participate in the discussions of the proceedings,
but shall vote only in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member of the Commission. The terms of the alternate members first
appointed shall be for two (2) years, except that the alternate members
first appointed shall be two (2) years for Alternate No. 1 and one (1)
year for Alternate No. 2.
B. One (1) member of the Commission shall be from the Borough Planning
Board.
A. The full term of office of each Commissioner shall be three (3) years;
provided, however, that the terms of the Commissioners first appointed
pursuant hereto shall be as follows: three (3) members shall be
appointed for one (1) year; 2 members shall be appointed for 2 years;
and 2 members shall be appointed for 3 years. Thereafter, the successor
of each member shall be appointed for the full term of three (3) years
and until the appointment and qualification of his or her successor.
B. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by an expiration of a term shall be
filled for the unexpired term only.
C. The Borough Council may remove any member of the Commission for
cause, on written charges served upon the member and after a hearing
thereon at which the member shall be entitled to be heard in person or
by counsel.
A. To conduct research into the use and possible use of the open land
areas of the Borough.
B. To coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies organized for similar
purposes.
C. To advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts, plans
and pamphlets which in its judgment it deems necessary for its
purposes, within the limits of funds appropriated to the Commission.
D. To keep an index of all open areas, publicly and privately owned,
including open marshlands, swamps and other wetlands, and to obtain
information on the proper use of such areas.
E. To recommend, from time to time, to the Planning Board, plans and
programs for inclusion in the Master Plan of the Borough for the
development and use of such areas.
§ 25-2 ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION § 25-4
25:25
§ 25-5. Acquisitions by Commission.
Subject to the prior approval of the Borough Council after favorable
recommendation by the Planning Board, the Environmental Commission
may acquire property, both real and personal, in the name of the Borough,
by gift, pledges, grants, bequests, devises or lease, for any of the purposes
of the Commission, and it shall administer the same for such purposes,
subject to the terms of such conveyance or gift. The interest so acquired
may be the fee or any lesser interest, development right, easement
(including conservation easement), covenant or other contractual right
(including a conveyance on conditions, or with limitations or reversions), as
may be necessary to acquire, maintain, improve, protect, limit the future
use of or otherwise conserve and properly utilize open spaces and other
land and water areas in the Borough.
Chapter 29
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 29-1. Department established.16
The Fire Department heretofore established in the Borough is hereby
continued.
§ 29-2. Organization of Department.
The Fire Department of the Borough shall consist of the following officers
and members, whose offices and positions are hereby continued:
F. To do such other acts and things as are reasonably related to and
designed to carry out the purposes and objectives of the Commission,
including, without limitation, the payment of employees as the
Commission may from time to time require, within the limits of the
funds appropriated to the Commission.15
G. To keep records of the meetings and activities of the Commission and to
make an annual report to the Borough Council.
A. Chief: one.
B. Deputy Chief: one. [Amended 12-4-2007 by Ord. No. 07-28]
C. Captain: not more than one per company. [Added 5-13-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-8]
D. Lieutenant: not more than three per company. [Added 5-13-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-8]
15.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
16.Editor's Note: For state statutes generally affecting municipal fire departments, see
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-7 et seq.
§ 25-4 HILLSDALE CODE § 29-2
29:26
§ 29-3. Fire Committee established; members; designation; duties.
[Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8; 12-4-2007 by Ord. No. 07-28]
§ 29-4. Establishment and organization of Board of Fire Officers.
[Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8; 12-4-2007 by Ord. No. 07-28]
The Board shall consist of the Fire Chief, Deputy Fire Chief and the Captains
and Lieutenants of each of the companies.
§ 29-5. Authority of Board of Fire Officers; meetings.
§ 29-6. Bylaws and rules of Board of Fire Officers.
§ 29-7. Powers of Fire Chief; aid to other municipalities; seniority in
absence of Chief.
E. Firefighters: as many as may be authorized by ordinance.
A. The Fire Committee shall consist of three members of the Borough
Council appointed for a one-year term at the Council’s annual
reorganization.
B. The first member of the Committee appointed shall be the Fire
Commissioner.
C. It shall be the duty of the Fire Commissioner to make recommendations
looking to the general efficiency and welfare of the Fire Department.
D. In the absence of the Fire Commissioner, or in the event of his or her
inability to serve, duties shall be assumed by the Committee
members.17
A. The Board of Fire Officers shall have control over the management of
the Fire Department, subject to the approval of the Borough Council.
B. The Board of Fire Officers shall meet monthly, or more frequently when
business of the Board shall so require, for the transaction of business of
the Board.
A. The bylaws and rules heretofore adopted by the Board of Fire Officers
for the control, management and government of said Board are hereby
continued. Said bylaws and rules may be amended or supplemented by
the Board from time to time as it shall deem necessary or desirable.
B. Said amendments and supplements shall not become operative and
effective unless and until first approved by the Borough Council.
A. The Fire Chief shall be in complete charge of the equipment and
personnel of the Fire Department. In the event of emergency or
widespread conflagration, the Fire Chief may, in his or her discretion,
17.Editor's Note: Original Section 9-4, Fire Commissioner: duties; powers and duties of
Deputy Fire Commissioners, was deleted 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8.
§ 29-2 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 29-7
29:27
§ 29-8. Designation of companies; personnel.
§ 29-9. Membership in fire companies; maximum number.
[Amended 10-12-1976 by Ord. No. 76-14]
§ 29-10. Qualifications for membership in fire companies;
application; examination; transfer. [Amended 10-12-1976 by Ord.
No. 76-14; 8-11-1987 by Ord. No. 87-15]
order such equipment and personnel to respond to such requests as the
Fire Chief or Mayor of any other municipality in the vicinity may make
for fire-fighting purposes; provided, however, that adequate coverage
for fire-fighting purposes for the Borough shall be at all times
maintained or otherwise provided for.
B. In the absence of the Fire Chief, seniority shall prevail as indicated in
the official titles and as provided in the bylaws of the Board of Fire
Officers.18
A. The companies of the Fire Department of the Borough shall consist of
and be known as:
(1) Hillsdale Hook and Ladder Company No. 1.
(2) Hillsdale Hose Company No. 1.
(3) Such other companies as may be hereafter confirmed by the
Borough Council.
B. Each company specified in Subsection A of this section shall have the
following officers:
(1) Captain: one.
(2) First lieutenant: one.
(3) Second lieutenant: one.
(4) Third lieutenant: one.
A. Membership in each of the companies designated in § 29-8 shall consist
exclusively of active members.
B. The total membership of each company, inclusive of officers, shall not
exceed 40.
A. Any person not less than 18 years of age, except as provided in § 29-11,
nor more than 50 years of age, may apply for membership in the Fire
Department of the Borough, subject to the bylaws and rules of the
Board of Fire Officers.
18.Editor's Note: For state statutes authorizing fire aid to other municipalities, see N.J.S.A.
40A:14-26.
§ 29-7 HILLSDALE CODE § 29-10
29:28
§ 29-11. Fire cadet program. [Added 8-11-1987 by Ord. No. 87-15]
§ 29-12. Membership roll to be kept by Borough Clerk. [Amended
10-12-1976 by Ord. No. 76-14]
It shall be the duty of the Borough Clerk to keep a complete roll of each
active and exempt member of the Fire Department, designating the
company of such member and the date of admission to or exemption or
resignation from the company by such member.
§ 29-13. Annual meeting for elections.
An annual meeting for the election of departmental and company officers
shall be held on the night of the regular monthly meeting of the active
membership of the Fire Department in the month of November. The officers
elected at the annual meeting shall take their oath of office and assume
their respective duties as soon after the first day of January as their election
shall be approved and confirmed by the Borough Council.
B. No applicant shall be approved for membership without first having
passed a medical examination by a licensed medical practitioner
appointed by the Borough Council.
C. The status of any person accepted as a member of the Fire Department
shall be that of a probationary member, as provided for in the bylaws of
the Board of Fire Officers. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
D. The application of any person who has served as an active firefighter in
a fire department of any other municipality of the State of New Jersey
(said fire department being a member of the New Jersey State
Firemen's Association) for transfer of his or her membership to the Fire
Department of the Borough may be accepted, subject to the bylaws and
rules of the Board of Fire Officers governing new applications, except
that the age limits as required by said bylaws and rules are hereby
waived.
A. There shall be a fire cadet program within the Fire Department of the
Borough.
B. A person between the ages of 16 and 18 may apply for membership in
the fire cadet program, subject to the bylaws and rules of the Board of
Fire Officers.
C. Members of the fire cadet program shall assist with nonhazardous
fighting duties. Those duties may include assistance in the maintenance
of equipment and vehicles, the cleaning thereof and the restoration of
equipment after a fire drill or call. Members of the cadet program shall
receive training to prepare them to become full-fledged members of the
Department.
§ 29-10 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 29-14
29:29
§ 29-14. Oath of office of firefighters.
Every person appointed as a member of the Hillsdale Fire Department
shall promptly after such appointment subscribe to the oath of office of a
firefighter in the record book of the Borough Clerk.
§ 29-15. Exempt certificates.
§ 29-16. Annual inspection by Borough Council.
The Borough Council shall annually hold one inspection of the Fire
Department.
§ 29-17. Trial by Board of Fire Officers of charges against
personnel.
Chapter 32
FLAG, OFFICIAL
A. An exempt certificate shall be granted to each member of the Fire
Department if, during seven years, he or she shall have performed 60%
of fire duty in said department during each of said seven years, as
provided by the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-55 et seq.
B. The time served and the average attendance record at fires and drills
shall be certified by the captain of the company and the Fire Chief, and
approved by the Fire Chairperson. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No.
97-8]
C. Exempt certificates shall be ordered and provided by the Borough
Council upon recommendation by the Board of Fire Officers. They shall
be signed by the Mayor, the Fire Chairperson and Fire Chief, and shall
be attested by the Borough Clerk. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No.
97-8]
A. The Board of Fire Officers shall try all charges that may be preferred
against any active or associate member or officer of the Fire
Department for offenses committed on duty or in or about the fire
house, or for violation of any bylaws and rules of the Board of Fire
Officers.
B. The Board shall impose such penalties as it shall deem most advisable,
subject to an appeal from such determination to the Borough Council.
C. After hearing of such appeal, the Borough Council shall affirm, reverse
or modify the determination of the Board of Fire Officers, or refer it
back to such Board for rehearing and redetermination.
§ 29-14 HILLSDALE CODE § 32-1
32:30
§ 32-1. Adoption of flag.
In celebrating this Centennial year, the Borough of Hillsdale hereby adopts
an official Borough flag, designed by Gerard Bourcier of 59 Standish Road.
The flag shall consist of a field of hunter green with the outline of the State
of New Jersey in white. In the upper right-hand corner of the state outline
will be a white star and on the right and left sides of the state outline in
a half-moon shape will be five stars in white. At the top of the flag will be
the word Hillsdale and at the bottom of the flag will be "New Jersey," all in
white lettering and placed in a straight line centered horizontally.
Chapter 35
HEALTH, BOARD OF
§ 35-1. Board continued.
The Board of Health of the Borough heretofore established is hereby
continued.
§ 35-2. Composition of Board; appointment and term; vacancies.
§ 35-3. Powers and duties; limitations.
§ 35-4. Appointment of officers; rules; removal.20
A. The Board of Health shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by
the Council for a term of three (3) years.
B. If any vacancy shall occur in the Board of Health, it shall be filled by the
Council for the unexpired portion of the term only.
A. The Board of Health shall adopt rules and regulations for its own
government, and shall have all other powers conferred and all duties
prescribed by Title 26 of the Revised Statutes, any other statute, state
regulation or Borough ordinance.
B. The Board of Health shall not contract any debt or debts of all kind
beyond the amount of the appropriation made for its use by the
Council.19
A. 21The Board of Health may elect a president from among its own
members and may appoint the following officers:
(1) Registrar of Vital Statistics.22
19.Editor's Note: Original Section 2-20, Salary, which immediately followed this section, was
deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II. For current
provisions dealing with salaries, see Ch. 9.
20.Editor's Note: For statutory provisions relating to the appointment of officers, see N.J.S.A.
26:3-19.
21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 32-1 HEALTH, BOARD OF § 35-4
35:31
§ 35-5. Reporting of health violations.
Members of the Police Department shall promptly report to the Board of
Health every violation of any health ordinance of the Borough which may
come within their observation or knowledge.
Chapter 39
HOUSING AUTHORITY
(2) Clerk.
(3) Sanitary Inspector.
(4) Such other officers or assistants as the Board of Health may deem
necessary.
B. All appointees of the Board of Health shall be governed by the rules of
said Board, and they may be removed by the Board of Health for cause.
22.Editor's Note: For statutory provisions relating to local registrars and their powers and
duties, see N.J.S.A. 26:8-1 et seq.
§ 35-4 HILLSDALE CODE § 35-5
39:32
ARTICLE I
Senior Citizen Housing Participation
[Adopted 9-28-1976 as Ord. No. 76-1223 (Ch. 2, Art. 17 of the
Revised Ordinances of 1972)]
§ 39-1. Purpose and intent.
The Borough of Hillsdale desires to participate in the area of operations of
the Housing Authority of Bergen County throughout its territorial boundary
and the jurisdiction of its Mayor and Council for the purpose of alleviating
the shortage of safe and sanitary housing for low-income senior citizens.
§ 39-2. Consent to participation.
The Borough of Hillsdale does hereby consent to its inclusion in the area of
operation of the Housing Authority of Bergen County.
§ 39-3. Filing of provisions.
The Clerk be and he or she is hereby authorized and directed to file
a certified copy of this chapter with the Commissioner of the State
Department of Conservation and Economic Development and with the
Secretary of the Housing Authority of Bergen County.
23.Editor's Note: The preamble to this ordinance reads as follows: "WHEREAS, it is the
considered opinion of the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Hillsdale that senior
citizens of low income in the community are entitled to safe and sanitary housing
accommodations at rentals such persons can afford, and; "WHEREAS, such low-rental
housing accommodations are in extremely short supply, and overcrowded and congested
housing will eventuate from such a shortage and thereby impair public safety and
economic values; and "WHEREAS, the shortage of such safe and sanitary housing for lowincome
senior citizens cannot be totally relieved through private enterprise and that,
therefore, new and rehabilitated construction of housing projects and facilities would not
be competitive with private enterprise; and "WHEREAS, it is a governmental function to
seek public moneys to acquire property and construction and or rehabilitate or lease
housing facilities for low-income senior citizen; and "WHEREAS, the Borough of Hillsdale
is desirous of having its territorial area included in the area of operation of "The Housing
Authority of Bergen County."
§ 39-1 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 39-3
39:33
Chapter 45
LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 29.
§ 45-1. Program created.
A Length of Service Awards Program (LOSAP) is herewith created in
accordance with Chapter 388 of the Laws of 199724 to reward members of
the Volunteer Hillsdale Fire Department and Volunteer Ambulance Service
for their loyal, diligent and devoted services to the residents of the Borough
of Hillsdale.
§ 45-2. Annual contributions.
§ 45-3. Criteria for eligibility.
The LOSAP shall provide for annual contributions to each eligible member
that meets the criteria commencing January 1, 2000, as follows:
A. The LOSAP shall provide for fixed annual contributions to a deferredincome
account for each volunteer member who meets the criteria set
forth below; that such contributions shall be made in accordance with a
plan that shall be established by the Borough of Hillsdale pursuant to
P.L. 1997, c. 388; and that such plan shall be administered in
accordance with the laws of the State of New Jersey, the United States
Internal Revenue Code and this chapter.
B. The annual LOSAP payments to the participants to be increased by the
COLA (cost of living adjustment) percentage set by the DCA
(Department of Community Affairs) each year for this purpose. [Added
5-10-2005 by Ord. No. 05-07]
A. Hillsdale Fire Department and Hillsdale Volunteer Ambulance Service.
A year of service shall be credited under a Service Award Program for
each calendar year of which an active emergency service volunteer
accumulates at least 75 points.
(1) Year one.
(a) 75 points: 50% of award or $300.
(b) 100 points: 100% of award or $600.
(2) Year two.
24.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:14-183 et seq.
§ 39-3 HILLSDALE CODE § 45-3
39:34
§ 45-4. Prior years excluded.
The LOSAP shall not provide for any prior years of service.
§ 45-5. Estimated cost.
The estimated cost of the program has been calculated as follows:
§ 45-6. Points.
Each active volunteer member shall be credited with points for volunteer
services provided to the Volunteer Hillsdale Fire Department or Volunteer
Ambulance Service in accordance with the attached Schedules A and B.25
§ 45-7. When effective.
This chapter shall not take effect unless it is approved by voters as a public
question at the next general election.26
Chapter 51
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
(a) 75 points: 50% of award or $425.
(b) 100 points: 100% of award or $850.
(3) Year three.
(a) 75 points: 50% of award or $575.
(b) 100 points: 100% of award or $1,150.
A. For regular annual services: year one: $45,000; year two: $63,750; year
three: $86,250.
B. For contributions for prior years service: $0 per year for an estimated 0
years.
25.Editor's Note: Schedules A and B are included at the end of this chapter.
26.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 99-17 was approved at the general election held November 2,
1999.
§ 45-3 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 45-7
39:35

ARTICLE I
Public Information Officer
[Adopted 6-27-1972 by Ord. No. 72-9 as Ch. 2, Art. 11, of the
Revised Ordinances of 1972; amended in its entirety 5-3-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-9]
§ 51-1. Office created.
The office of Public Information Officer is hereby created.
§ 51-2. Designation.
The Public Information Officer (PIO) shall be the Mayor or a designee so
assigned by the Mayor. Should the Mayor be absent and unable to appoint
a designee during any multiagency incident, the Chief of Police shall be the
designee until the Mayor is present or assigns some other designee.
§ 51-3. Duties.
The PIO or designee shall be the exclusive individual in charge of
disseminating information about any multiagency event to the public, both
resident and nonresident, after first conferring with the Incident
Commander to obtain and coordinate all relevant and pertinent information.
Since the PIO is the exclusive individual to disseminate incident
information, this precludes dissemination by any other employee or
department head to residents or media without the permission of the PIO.
The PIO shall also maintain communication with the Incident Commander
(IC) throughout any such event. The duties of the Public Information Officer
shall also include the performance of any additional information-related
tasks as the Mayor and Council may from time to time require and approve.
§ 51-4. Duties of Mayor and Council not affected.27
Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to diminish, increase,
impair or alter the duties imposed by law upon the Mayor and members of
the Council, nor construed to authorize the delegation to others of any duty,
power or authority that is required by law to be performed by the Mayor or
by the members of the Council, jointly or severally.
27.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 2-54, Annual compensation, which immediately preceded this
section, was deleted 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8. For current provisions dealing with
salaries, see Ch. 9, Claims, Bills and Salaries, Payment of.
§ 51-1 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 51-4
39:37

ARTICLE II
Municipal Prosecutor
[Adopted 6-27-1972 by Ord. No. 72-9 as Ch. 14, Art. 2, of the
Revised Ordinances of 1972]
§ 51-5. Office established.
The office of Municipal Prosecutor of the Borough, heretofore established,
is hereby continued.
§ 51-6. Nomination and appointment.
The Mayor shall nominate and, with the advice and consent of the Council,
appoint the Municipal Prosecutor in accordance with and pursuant to the
statutes governing the appointment of the Borough Prosecutor.
§ 51-7. Term.
The term of the Municipal Prosecutor shall commence on January 1 and
terminate on December 31 of each year.
§ 51-8. Duties.
The Municipal Prosecutor shall appear in the Municipal Court of the
Borough and conduct the prosecution of matters pending therein when
so requested by the Municipal Judge or by any authorized officer of the
Borough or of any of the Borough's duly constituted bodies, boards or
agencies.28
28.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 14-16, Compensation, which immediately followed this
section, was deleted 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8. For current provisions dealing with
salaries, see Ch. 9, Claims, Bills and Salaries, Payment of.
§ 51-5 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 51-8
39:39

ARTICLE III
Municipal Public Defender29
[Adopted 12-11-1979 as Ord. No. 79-17 (Ch. 14, Art. 3, of the
Revised Ordinances of 1972)]
§ 51-9. Office established.
The office of Municipal Public Defender of the Borough is hereby
established.
§ 51-10. Nomination and appointment.
The Mayor shall nominate, with the advice and consent of the Council, and
appoint the Municipal Public Defender in accordance with and pursuant to
the statutes governing said appointment.
§ 51-11. Term.
The term of Municipal Public Defender shall commence on January 1 and
terminate on December 31 of each year.
§ 51-12. Duties.30
The Municipal Public Defender shall appear in Municipal Court of the
Borough when requested to do so by the Court and conduct the defense of
matters pending therein.31
29.Editor's Note: For statutory authority, see N.J.S.A. 2A:158A-5.2.
30.Editor's Note: For assignment of counsel for indigent persons, see Rule 3:27 of the Rules
Governing the Courts of New Jersey.
31.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 14-21, Compensation, which immediately followed this
section, was deleted 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8. For current provisions dealing with
salaries, see Ch. 9, Claims, Bills and Salaries, Payment of.
§ 51-9 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 51-12
39:41

ARTICLE IV
Purchasing Agent32
[Adopted 10-28-1980 as Ord. No. 80-17 (Ch. 2, Art. 14, of the
Revised Ordinances of 1972); amended in its entirety at time of
adoption of Code; Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
§ 51-13. Title.
This Article shall be known as the "Purchasing Ordinance of the Borough of
Hillsdale."
§ 51-14. Position of Purchasing Agent established.
§ 51-15. Powers and duties of Purchasing Agent.
§ 51-16. Requisitions.
A. The position of Purchasing Agent is hereby established. The Borough
Council by resolution shall appoint the employee or official who shall be
designated as the Purchasing Agent and who shall serve at the pleasure
of the Council.
B. No employee or official of the Borough of Hillsdale shall incur any
liability on the part of the Borough of Hillsdale unless it shall have been
properly authorized by a purchase order.
A. The Purchasing Agent shall act to procure for the Borough the highest
quality in supplies and services at the least expense to the Borough.
B. The Purchasing Agent shall have general supervision of the purchases
for the Borough of Hillsdale and shall coordinate all purchasing
activities. The Purchasing Agent shall have the powers and duties
prescribed by this Article and shall comply with all state and federal
laws regarding purchasing and public contracts.
C. The Purchasing Agent shall supervise purchasing and see that items
and services are properly purchased for the departments, boards and
agencies of the Borough. He or she shall also issue rules and
regulations governing the requisition and purchase of all municipal
supplies, equipment and services.
D. The authority of the Purchasing Agent shall not include construction of
buildings, water and sewer improvements, street improvements, parks
and other related projects.
A. The Borough Administrator shall designate the person or persons who
shall prepare and sign requisitions for purchase orders.
32.Editor's Note: For statutory provisions dealing with this topic, see N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
§ 51-13 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 51-16
39:43
§ 51-17. Purchase orders.
§ 51-18. Blanket purchase orders.
Blanket orders may be issued by the Purchasing Agent to local vendors
which are patronized frequently for a period not to exceed the calendar
year. Purchases under these blanket orders may be made by designated
personnel, and each individual purchase shall not exceed $100.
§ 51-19. Purchases under one hundred dollars.
Borough employees may make purchases of $100 or less and be reimbursed
from petty cash upon presentation of a sales receipt and in accordance with
the Borough's process for payment of claims.
§ 51-20. Emergency purchases.
When a genuine emergency occurs such as utility breaks and vehicle
breakdowns, materials or services may be obtained without a purchase
order by authorization of employees designated to sign requisitions. In such
cases, a purchase order will be required. The authorized personnel shall
submit to the Purchasing Agent on the next working day following said
purchase an appropriate requisition marked CONFIRMING – EMERGENCY.
§ 51-21. Direct payment vouchers.
Direct payment vouchers shall be issued in cases where it is inappropriate
to issue purchase orders. A direct payment voucher will be issued for the
B. Requisitions shall include prices, if available; otherwise estimated
prices should be entered. The budget line item shall be included on the
requisition. Purchase orders shall not be issued without prices.
A. Upon receipt of a requisition, the Purchasing Agent shall present same
to the Chief Financial Officer, who shall check the requisition with the
budget appropriation and, if the balance is sufficient, authorize the
purchase by signing, dating and returning same to the Purchasing
Agent for the preparation of a purchase order.
B. Purchase orders shall be numbered and contain six copies. The
purchase order copy and Borough voucher copy shall be forwarded to
the vendor. The vendor shall complete the voucher and return for
payment according to Chapter 9, Claims, Bills and Salaries, Payment of.
The office copy shall be filed in the office of the Purchasing Agent until a
delivery slip is received from the using agency, at which time the
delivery is verified with the purchase order and turned over to the Chief
Financial Officer for payment. The Chief Financial Officer shall
maintain a file of the paid purchase orders.
C. Borough personnel are expected to be good managers and plan ahead.
Emergency and confirmed purchases shall be kept to a minimum.
§ 51-16 HILLSDALE CODE § 51-21
39:44
purchase of the following services and in other cases at the discretion of the
Purchasing Agent:
§ 51-22. Public bidding required for large purchases.
A. Utilities (electric, gas, telephone, water).
B. Gasoline.
C. Legal advertising.
D. Professional services.
E. Payroll transfers.
F. Insurance coverages.
G. Social security.
H. N.J.S. pensions.
I. Contracted services.
J. Debt service payments.
K. Dues and conferences.
L. Subscriptions.
M. Auto mileage allowance.
A. New Jersey law requires that individual purchases or annual cumulative
purchases within a particular category of materials or services which
exceed $1,000 but are less than the statutory minimum set forth below
and governed by Subsection B herein shall be awarded in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40A:11-3.
B. New Jersey State law requires that individual purchases or annual
cumulative purchases within a particular category of materials or
services which exceed the maximum indexed amount as adjusted
biannually and set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:11-3 are required to be
advertised for public bidding.
C. A department with a category of purchases which is expected to be
above the maximum set forth in Subsection B above will so inform the
Purchasing Agent and assist in the preparation of specifications for bid,
as necessary. When a contract is awarded, the purchase order or direct
payment voucher method of purchase will be followed as appropriate.
§ 51-21 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 51-22
39:45

ARTICLE V
Borough Administrator33
[Adopted 8-13-1985 as Ord. No. 85-15 (Ch. 2, Art. 19, of the Revised
Ordinances of 1972)]
§ 51-23. Office created; title.
The office of Borough Administrator in and for the Borough of Hillsdale is
hereby created.
§ 51-24. Appointment and term.
§ 51-25. Qualifications.
The Borough Administrator shall be appointed on the basis of his or her
executive and administrative qualifications. Previous responsible,
successful experience in local government and possession of a degree in
public administration and municipal management shall be preferred.
§ 51-26. Duties and responsibilities. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-8]
A. The Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Council.
B. The term of office of the Borough Administrator shall be at the pleasure
of the governing body.
C. The Borough Administrator may be removed upon the adoption of a
resolution by a two-thirds vote of the governing body.
D. Said resolution of removal shall become effective at the discretion of
the governing body, immediately or three months after its adoption,
provided that, except in the case of removal for cause where, in the
discretion of the governing body, said resolution is to become effective
immediately upon its adoption, the governing body shall cause to be
paid to the Borough Administrator forthwith any unpaid balance of his
or her salary, and his or her salary for the next three calendar months
following the adoption of the resolution.
E. The Borough Administrator may designate a Borough officer or
employee as acting Administrator to perform the duties of the office
during his or her absence or disability of less than 10 days. Should he or
she not do so, the Mayor and Council shall make the appointment. Such
absence or disability shall be limited to three months, after which time
such absence or disability may be deemed a vacancy.34
33.Editor's Note: For statutory provisions relating to the office of the Borough Administrator,
see N.J.S.A. 40A:9-136
34.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 2-92, Compensation, which immediately followed this section,
was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II. For current
provisions regarding salaries, see Ch. 9, Claims, Bills and Salaries, Payment of.
§ 51-23 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 51-26
39:47
A. The Borough Administrator shall be the chief administrative officer of
the Borough, responsible to the Mayor and Council for the
administration of all Borough affairs, and with the following powers and
duties:
(1) The Borough Administrator shall direct and supervise the
administration of all departments and coordinate the functions of
offices, boards and agencies of the Borough.
(2) The Borough Administrator shall prepare and submit a budget for
the calendar year to the Mayor and Council by the second week in
January or on such alternate date as set by the Mayor and Council.
In preparing the budget, the Borough Administrator shall obtain
from the head of each department, agency, board or officer,
estimates of the revenues and expenditures and other supporting
data as he or she requests. The Borough Administrator shall review
such estimates and may revise them before submitting the budget
to the Mayor and Council. He or she shall be responsible for the
administration of the budget after its adoption by the Mayor and
Council.
(3) The Borough Administrator shall hire and, when necessary for the
good of the Borough, discharge any employee under his or her
supervision, provided that the Borough Administrator shall report
at a prior meeting to the Mayor and Council any action to be taken
by authority of this subsection. No person shall be discharged
without just cause, and the discharged employee shall have the
right to appeal his or her discharge to the Mayor and Council.
Lesser disciplinary action may be taken by the Borough
Administrator, and he or she shall report such action taken at the
next meeting of the Mayor and Council.
(4) The Borough Administrator shall hold such other municipal offices
or head one or more of the municipal departments as the governing
body may from time to time direct.
(5) The Borough Administrator shall attend all meetings of the Mayor
and Council and its committees, with the right to take part in the
discussion.
(6) The Borough Administrator shall keep the Mayor and Council
informed as to the conduct of Borough affairs, submit periodic
reports on the condition of Borough finances and such other
reports as the Mayor and Council may request.
(7) The Borough Administrator shall be responsible for continually
improving communications among all Borough employees,
departments, agencies, boards, the Mayor and Council and the
community as a whole. He or she will constantly try to upgrade the
image of the Borough of Hillsdale.
§ 51-26 HILLSDALE CODE § 51-26
39:48
(8) The Borough Administrator shall see that terms and conditions
imposed in favor of the Borough or its inhabitants in any statute or
contract are faithfully kept and performed, and upon knowledge of
any violation, call the same to the attention of the Mayor and
Council.
(9) The Borough Administrator shall continually review and supervise
the Borough's insurance program.
(10) The Borough Administrator shall be responsible for the overall
supervision and maintenance of real property owned by the
Borough of Hillsdale.
(11) The Borough Administrator shall act as liaison between the
Borough of Hillsdale and the various county, state and federal
agencies with respect to all applications for funds and/or services
needed or required by the Borough of Hillsdale.
(12) The Borough Administrator shall review daily any complaints
concerning the functions and obligations of the Borough of
Hillsdale made by any of its residents, and he or she shall have a
permanent record of complaints and the disposition made.
(13) The Borough Administrator shall participate in the negotiation of
all collective bargaining agreements for the Borough of Hillsdale.
(14) The Borough Administrator shall prepare the work session agenda.
(15) The Borough Administrator shall establish and maintain effective
personnel practices and maintain appropriate records of all
employees.
(16) The Borough Administrator shall delegate to any department head
such of his or her powers as he or she may deem necessary for
efficient administration.
(17) The Borough Administrator shall implement and enforce the policy
of the Mayor and Council with respect to the compiling and release
of public information.
(18) The Borough Administrator shall perform such other duties as may
be assigned to him or her from time to time by the Mayor and
Council.
(19) A Borough Administrator shall perform the duties of the
appropriate authority as that position is described pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A-14-118. [Added 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. 99-21]
B. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Mayor and Council and its
committees shall deal with the administrative service solely through the
Borough Administrator, and neither the Mayor and Council nor any of
its committees shall give orders, publicly or privately, to any
subordinates of the Borough Administrator.35
§ 51-26 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 51-26
39:49
35.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 2-95, Bond, which immediately followed this section, was
deleted 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8.
§ 51-26 HILLSDALE CODE § 51-26
39:50
ARTICLE VI
Borough Clerk
[Adopted 3-8-1988 as Ord. No. 88-5 (Ch. 2, Art. 9, of the Revised
Ordinances of 1972); amended in its entirety 5-13-1997 by Ord. No.
97-8]
§ 51-27. Appointment; term.
In every municipality there shall be a Municipal Clerk appointed for a threeyear
term by the governing body of the municipality. Reappointment shall
be governed in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133.4.
§ 51-28. Vacancies. [Amended 4-5-2016 by Ord. No. 16-07]
In the event of a vacancy in the office of Municipal Clerk, appointment
shall be made for a new term and not the unexpired term. The governing
body of the municipality shall appoint a person to a three-year term as
Municipal Clerk within six months after the Municipal Clerk has resigned
or the office has otherwise become vacant. Should the office of Municipal
Clerk become vacant, the governing body of the municipality, within 90 days
of said vacancy, may appoint a person to serve as Acting Municipal Clerk
for a period not to exceed one year and commencing on the date of the
vacancy in compliance with N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133(c). Any person so appointed
may be reappointed as acting Municipal Clerk, with the approval of the
Director of the Division of Local Government Services, for a maximum of
two subsequent one-year terms following the termination of the temporary
appointment.
§ 51-29. Powers and duties.
The Municipal Clerk shall:
A. Act as secretary of the municipal corporation and custodian of the
municipal seal and of all minutes, books, deeds, bonds, contracts and
archival records of the municipal corporation. The governing body may,
however, provide by ordinance that any other specific officer shall have
custody of any specific other class of record.
B. Act as secretary of the governing body, prepare meeting agendas at the
discretion of the governing body, be present at all meetings of the
governing body, keep a journal of the proceedings of every meeting,
retain the original copy of all ordinances and resolutions and record the
minutes of every meeting.
C. Serve as chief administrative officer in all elections held in the
municipality subject to the requirements of Title 19 of the Revised
Statutes.
D. Serve as the Chief Registrar of Voters in the municipality, subject to the
requirements of Title 19 of the Revised Statutes.
§ 51-27 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 51-29
39:51
§ 51-30. Residency requirement.
The Borough Clerk of the Borough of Hillsdale shall not be required to be a
resident of the Borough.
E. Serve as the administrative officer responsible for the acceptance of
applications for licenses and permits and issuance of licenses and
permits, except where a statute or municipal ordinance has delegated
that responsibility to some other municipal officer.
F. Serve as coordinator and records manager responsible for
implementing local archives and records retention programs as
mandated pursuant to Title 47 of the Revised Statutes.
G. Perform such other duties that are now or hereafter imposed by statute,
regulations or municipal ordinance or regulation.
H. He or she shall have the power of authority to take and administer oaths
and affirmations in all Borough matters.
I. Obtain N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133.8 certificate (RMC) as a prerequisite to
tenure.
§ 51-29 HILLSDALE CODE § 51-30
39:52
ARTICLE VII
Deputy Borough Clerk
[Adopted 6-23-1987 as Ord. No. 87-10 (Ch. 2, Art. 21, of the Revised
Ordinances of 1972)]
§ 51-31. Deputy Borough Clerk. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No.
97-8]
A. The position of Deputy Borough Clerk is hereby created within the
Borough of Hillsdale.
B. The Deputy Borough Clerk shall be appointed by the governing body.
C. The Deputy Borough Clerk shall serve at the pleasure of the governing
body.
D. In the absence of the Borough Clerk, the Deputy Borough Clerk shall
perform all the duties of the Borough Clerk.
§ 51-31 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 51-31
39:53

ARTICLE VIII
Chief Financial Officer
[Adopted 2-28-1989 as Ord. No. 89-3 (Ch. 2, Art. 6, of the Revised
Ordinances of 1972); amended in its entirety at time of adoption of
Code; Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
§ 51-32. Position created; title.
The position of Chief Financial Officer in and for the Borough of Hillsdale is
hereby created.
§ 51-33. Officer designated.
The Chief Financial Officer shall not be a member of the governing body.
§ 51-34. Appointment; term.
Unless sooner removed in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:87-15,36 the Chief
Financial Officer shall be appointed for a term of four years and shall serve
until the appointment and qualification of a successor.
§ 51-35. Qualifications.
No person shall be appointed or reappointed as a Chief Financial Officer
unless he or she holds a Certified Municipal Finance Officer's certificate.
§ 51-36. Powers and duties.
The duties and responsibilities of the Chief Financial Officer shall be:
A. To make provision for modernized practices of fiscal administration in
the Borough of Hillsdale by carrying out all the responsibilities as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 52:27BB-26 et seq.
B. To supervise the disbursement of all Borough funds and approve of all
vouchers and bills before submitting the same to the Borough Council
for final approval.
C. To analyze the cash needs of the Borough and recommend prudent
investment of such funds as temporarily may be in excess of the amount
needed to meet Borough obligations.
D. To maintain a continuing review and analysis of budget operations,
work programs and cost of municipal services.
E. At the close of the year, to prepare an annual report on the condition of
the Borough's finance activity to the Mayor and Council.
36.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:87-15 was repealed by L. 1987, c. 379. See now N.J.S.A. 40A:60-5.
§ 51-32 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 51-36
39:55

ARTICLE IX
Attorney
[Adopted 2-9-1993 as Ord. No. 93-1]
§ 51-37. Office created.
Pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-139, there is hereby created the
office of Municipal Attorney.
§ 51-38. Appointment and term.
The Mayor shall appoint, with the advice and consent of the Council, the
Borough Attorney, who shall be a person licensed to practice law in the
State of New Jersey, for a term of one year commencing January 1 and
terminating December 31 in each year. Whenever a vacancy should occur,
the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term only.
§ 51-39. Powers and duties.
The Borough Attorney shall have such powers and perform such duties as
are provided for the office of Borough Attorney by general law or ordinances
of the Borough. The Borough Attorney shall represent the Borough in all
judicial and administrative proceedings in which the municipality or any of
its officers or agencies may be a party or have an interest as directed by
the governing body. The Borough Attorney shall give all legal counsel and
advice where required by the governing body or any member thereof and
shall, in general, serve as the legal adviser to the governing body on all
matters of Borough business. In furtherance of such general powers and
duties, but without limitation thereto, the Borough Attorney shall:
A. Draft or approve as to form and sufficiency all legal documents,
contracts, deeds, ordinances and resolutions made, executed or
adopted by or on behalf of the Borough.
B. With the approval of the governing body, conduct appeals from orders,
decisions or judgments affecting any interest of the Borough.
C. Subject to the approval of the governing body, have power to enter into
any agreement, compromise or settlement of any litigation in which the
Borough is involved.
D. Render opinions in writing upon any question of law requested by a
majority of the governing body or the Borough Administrator with
respect to their official powers and duties and perform such duties as
may be necessary to provide legal counsel to the governing body in the
administration of municipal affairs.37
37.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 2-107, Compensation, which immediately followed this
section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8
§ 51-37 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 51-39
39:57

ARTICLE X
Engineer
[Adopted 2-9-1993 as Ord. No. 93-2]
§ 51-40. Office created.
Pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140, there is hereby created the
office of Municipal Engineer.
§ 51-41. Appointment and term.
The Mayor shall appoint, with the advice and consent of the Council,
the Borough Engineer, who shall be a person licensed as a professional
engineer in the State of New Jersey. The term of office shall be three years
commencing January 1. Whenever a vacancy should occur, the vacancy shall
be filled for the unexpired term only.
§ 51-42. Powers and duties.
The Borough Engineer shall provide professional engineering advice and
assistance to the governing body; maintain the Borough Official Map and
Borough Zoning Map; prepare plans and specifications for public works
authorized by the governing body or the Borough Administrator and make
such inspections of the work of public contractors as may be necessary
or desirable; when so directed, monitor the performance of public works
contracts, report to the governing body thereon and certify the amounts
due and payable thereunder; and provide any and all other professional
engineering advice and assistance as may be required by statute or as
assigned by the governing body or the Borough Administrator.38
38.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 2-111, Compensation, which immediately followed this
section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8.
§ 51-40 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 51-42
39:59

ARTICLE XI
Tax Collector
[Adopted 12-13-1994 as Ord. No. 94-15]
§ 51-43. Appointment.
There shall be appointed a Tax Collector for the Borough of Hillsdale
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-141.
§ 51-44. Term. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
The Tax Collector shall be appointed by the Borough Council and shall hold
office for a term of four years as provided by N.J.S.A. 40A:9-142.
§ 51-45. Tenure.
The Tax Collector may, after serving in office for a continuous period of
not less than five years or being reappointed upon the completion of one
full term of four years, upon filing a certificate evidencing satisfactory
completion of an approved course of instruction in the function and duties
of Tax Collectors, acquire tenure in office as provided by N.J.S.A. 40A:9-145.
The Borough Council may also grant tenure in office to any person who
shall have held the office of collector of taxes for 10 consecutive years, as
provided by N.J.S.A. 40A:9-144.
§ 51-46. Powers and duties.
The Tax Collector shall possess all of the powers and duties established by
law which include:
§ 51-47. Supervision.
The Tax Collector shall be supervised in the performance of his or her duties
by the Chief Financial Officer.
A. Collecting all taxes, whether current or delinquent, assessments, fees,
rents and all other moneys due to the Borough.
B. The Tax Collector shall enter, in suitable books to be kept for that
purpose, the sums received by him or her each day for taxes with the
names of the persons on whose account the some shall have been paid,
shall keep a record and account of the finances of the Borough and
shall, within 60 days after the end of the fiscal year or when otherwise
required by the Council, make and furnish a report thereof detailing all
moneys received by him or her and disbursed therefrom and for what
purpose, from the commencement of his or her official year to the date
of his or her report or for such period as the Council may require, and a
list of delinquent taxpayers for the previous year.
§ 51-43 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 51-48
39:61
§ 51-48. Office hours.
The hours of the Tax Collector and his or her office shall be as set forth by
the Borough Administrator.
§ 51-48 HILLSDALE CODE § 51-48
39:62
ARTICLE XII
Assistant Code Compliance Officer
[Adopted 5-11-1999 by Ord. No. 99-9]
§ 51-49. Position created.
The position of Assistant Code Compliance Officer is hereby created within
the Borough of Hillsdale.
§ 51-50. Appointment.
The Assistant Code Compliance Officer shall be appointed by the governing
body.
§ 51-51. Term.
The Assistant Code Compliance Officer shall serve at the pleasure of the
governing body.
§ 51-52. Responsibilities.
The responsibilities of the position of Assistant Code Compliance Officer
include but are not limited to:
§ 51-53. Compensation.
The compensation for the Assistant Code Compliance Officer shall be
established by ordinance.
§ 51-54. Absence of Code Compliance Officer.
In the absence of the Code Compliance Officer, the Assistant Code
Compliance Officer shall perform all the duties of the Code Compliance
Office.
A. Assisting the Code Compliance Officer to manage the Interlocal Code
Office and the Department's operations.
B. Interacting with the boards and officials of the participating
municipalities.
C. Reviewing and/or approving construction, site and other plans.
D. Performing inspections.
E. Interacting with residents, contractors, vendors, etc.
§ 51-49 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 51-54
39:63

ARTICLE XIII
Director of Public Health Nursing
[Adopted 4-8-2003 by Ord. No. 03-08]
§ 51-55. Position created.
This position is created in the Hillsdale Health Department.
§ 51-56. Compensation.
The compensation for the Director of Public Health Nursing shall be
established by ordinance.
§ 51-55 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 51-56
39:65

ARTICLE XIV
Community Activities Director
[Adopted 2-10-2004 by Ord. No. 04-09]
§ 51-57. Position created.
The following position is hereby created as part of the Borough's
unclassified positions: Community Activities Director.
§ 51-58. Compensation.
The rate of compensation of employees holding this position, which
compensation shall be on an annual basis, is hereby fixed and determined
to be set as follows:39
§ 51-59. Salary attributable to vacation time.
Whenever an employee in this position is entitled to a paid vacation, all
installments of salary attributable to such vacation time may be paid to such
employee immediately prior to the commencement of such vacation.
§ 51-60. Remittance of fees, costs and charges.
The compensation fixed and determined by this article for the persons
holding the respective offices and positions of employment herein named
shall, except as otherwise provided by statute, ordinance or resolution, be
in lieu of all other fees, costs and charges, and all such other fees, costs
and charges received and collected by such offices and employees shall be
remitted promptly to the Borough Treasurer.
39.Editor's Note: The amount of compensation is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 51-57 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 51-60
39:67

ARTICLE XV
Assistant Payroll Manager
[Adopted 9-2-2008 by Ord. No. 08-10]
§ 51-61. Position created.
The following position is hereby created as part of the Borough's
unclassified positions: Assistant Payroll Manager.
§ 51-62. Compensation.
The compensation fixed and determined by this article for the persons
holding the respective offices and positions of employment herein named
shall, except as otherwise provided by statute, ordinance or resolution, be
in lieu of all other fees, costs and charges, and all such other fees, costs
and charges received and collected by such offices and employees shall be
remitted promptly to the Borough Treasurer.40
40.Editor's Note: The amount of compensation is on file in the Borough Offices.
§ 51-61 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 51-62
39:69

ARTICLE XVI
COAH Coordinator
[Adopted 9-2-2008 by Ord. No. 08-11]
§ 51-63. Position created.
The following position is hereby created as part of the Borough's
unclassified positions: COAH Coordinator.
§ 51-64. Compensation.
A. The rate of compensation of employees holding this position, which
compensation shall be on an annual basis, is hereby fixed and
determined to be set as follows:41
B. The compensation fixed and determined by this article for the persons
holding the respective offices and positions of employment herein
named shall, except as otherwise provided by statute, ordinance or
resolution, be in lieu of all other fees, costs and charges, and all such
other fees, costs and charges received and collected by such offices and
employees shall be remitted promptly to the Borough Treasurer.
41.Editor's Note: The amount of compensation is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 51-63 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 51-64
39:71

ARTICLE XVII
CCI Inspector
(Adopted 12-4-2018 by Ord. No. 18-22)
§ 51-65. Position created.
The position of CCI Inspector is hereby created within the Borough of
Hillsdale.
§ 51-66. Appointment.
The CCI Inspector shall be appointed by the Governing Body.
§ 51-67. Term.
The CCI Inspector shall serve at the pleasure of the Governing Body.
§ 51-68. Responsibilities.
The responsibilities of the position of CCI Inspector include but are not
limited to:
§ 51-69. Compensation.
The compensation for the CCI Inspector shall be established by ordinance.
A. Performing inspections on one or two-family homes for sale in the
Borough of Hillsdale.
B. Interacting with residents, etc.
C. Issuing Certificates of Continuing Inspection as and when the
prerequisites set forth in Chapter 310 for the issuance of Certificates of
Continuing Inspection have been met.
§ 51-65 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 51-69
39:73
Chapter 55
OUR TOWN COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 51.
§ 55-1. Committee established; purpose.
§ 55-2. Membership; appointment.
§ 55-3. Terms; vacancies; removal from office.
A. A Committee to be known as the "Our Town Committee of the Borough
of Hillsdale" is hereby established.
B. The purpose of the Committee is to provide to new residents of the
Borough noncommercial, nonpartisan and nonpolitical information
about the Borough in general plus its structure, the agencies, facilities
and services available to Borough residents, as well as programs and
events held in the Borough, adjoining communities and elsewhere in
Bergen County.
A. The Committee shall consist of six (6) members, each of whom shall be
appointed by the Mayor, by and with the consent of the Council. All of
the members shall be residents of the Borough and shall serve without
compensation.
B. One (1) of the members of the Committee shall, concurrently with his or
her appointment, be designated Chairperson by the Mayor for a period
of one (1) year. The individual selected may be reappointed each year
by the Mayor. The Chairperson may, with the concurrence of a majority
of Committee members, and subject to ratification by the Mayor,
designate a Vice Chairperson to assist on reports and correspondence,
and to act as Chairperson as needed.
C. At his or her discretion, the Mayor may, by and with the consent of the
Council, appoint alternate members to serve during the disability or
prolonged absence of a regular member.
D. While desirable that appointed members be representative of all
geographic sections of the Borough, they shall be primarily selected on
the basis of individual qualifications, without regard to area of
residence.
A. The full term of each regular member shall be two (2) years. The term of
each alternate member shall be one (1) year.
§ 51-69 HILLSDALE CODE § 55-3
55:74
§ 55-4. Council liaison.
One (1) Councilmember shall annually be appointed by the Mayor, by and
with the consent of the Council, as Council liaison to the Our Town
Committee.
§ 55-5. Meetings; minutes and reports.
§ 55-6. Duties.
The Our Town Committee shall have the following duties:
B. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by an expiration of a term shall be
filled for the unexpired term only.
C. The Borough Council may remove any member of the Committee for
violation of the Committee's noncommercial, nonpartisan and
nonpolitical purpose or for inability or unwillingness to accept
assignments from the Chairperson for a period of ninety (90) days or
more. Written charges are to be served upon the member who shall be
entitled to a hearing in person before the Mayor and Council.
A. Name assignments may be made by the Chairperson without convening
a meeting. Meetings will be convened as deemed necessary by the
Chairperson or as requested by a majority of members of the
Committee, the Mayor or by a majority of the Borough Council. Advance
notice of such meetings will be posted on the Borough Hall bulletin
board and published for record in local newspapers as required by
statute. Said meetings shall be open to the public.
B. The Chairperson or Vice Chairperson shall keep and maintain minutes
of such meetings and records of its activities. Copies of said minutes
and records shall be provided to the Council liaison, who in turn shall
report thereon to the Council and file said minutes and reports with the
Borough Clerk.
A. To ascertain on a regular basis, not to exceed thirty (30) days, the
addresses of new homeowners and tenants from Borough records and
other available sources.
B. To visit new residents no later than sixty (60) days after arrival and to
present them with a current directory, revised as necessary by the
Committee, containing such information as would generally, and in a
noncommercial, nonpartisan and nonpolitical manner, inform new
residents about activities, government, schools and services within the
Borough. Supplementary information as to activities and services
elsewhere within Bergen County is to be included in a welcoming
packet of literature.
C. When directed by resolution of Mayor and Council, to schedule,
advertise and conduct public orientation programs and meetings at
which representatives of municipal, school, health, social and other
§ 55-3 OUR TOWN COMMITTEE § 55-6
55:75
§ 55-7. Purchases and expenses.
§ 55-8. Conflicts of interest.
Neither the Committee nor any of its individual members shall, in the
performance of their function and duties hereunder, act directly or
indirectly in any commercial, partisan or politically-related manner.
Chapter 57
PAYROLL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 51.
bodies, boards and agencies may describe their respective roles to
Hillsdale residents.
D. In serving the overall interest and well-being of the Borough, to relay to
the Mayor and Council complaints, suggestions and advisable future
actions based upon the Committee's contacts with old and new
residents.
E. To control the use of the town bulletin board, including placement of
messages thereon, and to maintain a calendar of future events and
establish standards and guidelines so that all persons and organizations
seeking to use this facility shall be treated in an equal and evenhanded
manner.
A. All purchases of materials, supplies and services by the Committee in
connection with the performance of its duties shall be made through the
Borough Purchasing Agent.
B. No expenditure by or on behalf of the Committee shall exceed the
amount previously appropriated therefor by the Borough Council.
§ 55-6 HILLSDALE CODE § 55-8
55:76
ARTICLE I
Direct Deposit
[Adopted 11-10-2015 by Ord. No. 15-19]
§ 57-1. Direct deposit required.
All full time employees and elected public officials who receive
compensation from the Borough of Hillsdale are mandated to have direct
deposit of their compensation as of January 1, 2016, in accordance with
Chapter 28 P.L. 2013, as defined under N.J.S.A. 52:14-15f(b).
§ 57-2. Exemptions.
A. Seasonal and temporary employees who are employed by the Borough
of Hillsdale are exempt from the direct deposit mandate.
B. Municipal employees may request, in writing, an exemption from the
direct deposit mandate to the Borough of Hillsdale's Administrator.
Such requests will be presented to the Mayor and Council within 15
days of the next scheduled Council meeting. The Mayor and Council
may grant such an exemption by resolution and only for good cause.
§ 57-1 OUR TOWN COMMITTEE § 57-2
55:77
Chapter 59
PERSONNEL PRACTICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 21.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 51.
Sexual harassment policy — See Ch. 69.
§ 59-1. Titles for public employment; salary ranges.
The Borough Council shall by ordinance(s) establish titles for public
employment by the Borough and salary ranges for Borough employees. Said
titles shall conform to regulations promulgated by the New Jersey State
Department of Personnel.
§ 59-2. Personnel policies and procedures to be adopted by
resolution.
The Borough Council shall by resolution(s) adopt and amend from time
to time personnel policies and procedures including rules concerning the
hiring and termination of employees, terms and conditions of employment
and regulations required to comply with applicable federal and state
employment related law. The personnel policies and procedures adopted
pursuant to said resolution(s) shall be applicable to all officials, appointees,
employees, prospective employees, volunteers and independent contractors
of the Borough of Hillsdale.
§ 59-3. Implementation and enforcement; duties of Borough
Administrator.
As set forth in the Borough of Hillsdale's Administrative Code, the Borough
Administrator shall direct and supervise the administration of all
departments and coordinate the functions of boards and agencies of the
Borough, and the Borough Administrator shall hire and, when necessary
for the good of the Borough, take disciplinary action or discharge any
employee, advising the Borough Council of such actions as stated in the
Code. Therefore, the Borough Administrator is responsible for the
implementation and enforcement of the personnel practices adopted by
ordinance or resolution authorized pursuant to this section. If there is a
conflict between said personnel practices and any duly adopted and lawful
collective bargaining agreement, personnel services contract or federal or
state law, the terms and conditions of that contract or law shall prevail. In
all other cases, the practices adopted pursuant to this chapter shall prevail.
§ 57-2 HILLSDALE CODE § 59-4
59:78
§ 59-4. Conflicting regulations.
If prior ordinances or resolutions contain sections that conflict with this
chapter or future ordinances or resolutions, the more recent enactment
shall be in effect.
Chapter 63
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Payment of claims, bills and salaries — See
Ch. 9.
Contracts with governmental contracting
units — See Ch. 13.
Municipal Court — See Ch. 17.
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 21.
Fire Department — See Ch. 29.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 51.
Alarm systems — See Ch. 84.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 88.
Amusements — See Ch. 92.
Animals — See Ch. 96.
Auctions — See Ch. 100.
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 130.
Fees — See Ch. 138.
Firearms — See Ch. 142.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 146.
Flood hazard areas — See Ch. 154.
Games of chance — See Ch. 158.
Garage sales — See Ch. 162.
Gasoline service stations — See Ch. 166.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 188.
Limousines — See Ch. 192.
Littering — See Ch. 196.
Noise — See Ch. 208.
Outdoor cafes — See Ch. 212.
Parades and street meetings — See Ch. 216.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 220.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 224.
Target ranges — See Ch. 268.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 272.
Trailers and camp cars — See Ch. 276.
Traveling shows, carnivals and circuses — See
Ch. 284.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 288.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 292.
§ 59-4 PERSONNEL PRACTICES § 59-4
59:79

ARTICLE I
Establishment; Mission and Purpose
§ 63-1. Establishment.
There is hereby created in and for the Borough of Hillsdale a Police
Department (previously established in 1972 and revised in 1997) within the
County of Bergen, State of New Jersey, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40A:4-118. This chapter is intended to ratify the existence and operation of
the Police Department which has historically operated within and served the
Borough of Hillsdale, and at the same time satisfy statutory requirements of
the legislation as amended in 1981 and 1988.
§ 63-2. Statement of mission.
The Police Department shall preserve the peace, protect life and property,
detect, arrest and prosecute offenders of the laws of New Jersey and the
ordinances of the Borough of Hillsdale; direct and control traffic; provide
attendance at and protection during emergencies; provide appearances
in court; cooperate with all the law enforcement agencies; and provide
training for the efficiency of its members and officers as well as perform and
fulfill all other responsibilities normally associated with the operation of a
Police Department.
§ 63-1 PERSONNEL PRACTICES § 63-2
59:81

ARTICLE II
Composition; Line of Authority
§ 63-3. Composition. [Amended 2-10-2004 by Ord. No. 04-03]
Said Police Department shall consist of one Chief of Police, one Captain, one
Lieutenant, two Detectives or Detective Sergeants, four Patrol Sergeants,
one School Resource Officer, and 11 patrol officers, and such civilian
employees as may be deemed necessary and appropriate by the Borough
Administrator in his discretion and judgment with the approval of the Mayor
and Council. The Borough Administrator and/or Mayor and Council may,
from time to time, leave one or more of the above positions vacant, as they
see fit. The express purpose for renaming these offices is to establish a
statutory line of authority from all police employees to a higher elected
authority. Whenever any such office is intentionally left vacant, it will be
deemed not to exist and will be passed in the chain of command. The Chief
of Police, with the approval of the Mayor and Council, may therefore recreate
or resurrect an office that has been so abolished by naming a person
to fill said office. No personnel may be appointed to the Borough of Hillsdale
Police Department until they have satisfied all statutory requirements and
have complied with the selection process and standards established by the
Rules and Regulations adopted by the appropriate authority to govern said
Police Department.
§ 63-4. Line of authority.
A. Appropriate authority. The Borough of Hillsdale Police Department
shall come under the jurisdiction of the appropriate authority, which is
hereby created pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118. Said appropriate
authority shall be the Borough Administrator. The appropriate authority
shall be directly responsible to the Mayor and Council. The Chief of
Police shall be responsible for the operation of the Police Department
pursuant to policies established by said Borough Administrator and
shall be responsible for the promulgation, updating and/or ratification
of Rules and Regulations for police personnel which shall be known as
the "Rules and Regulations for the Police Department of the Borough of
Hillsdale."
B. Hearing authority.
(1) In the event of any disciplinary proceedings against any member of
the Police Department of the Borough of Hillsdale, the Borough
Administrator or his/her designee shall be the sole hearing officer
and person in charge of all such proceedings.
(2) Nothing herein shall prevent the Borough Administrator from
designating a hearing officer for the purpose of conducting the
hearing, receiving evidence, preparing a record and submitting
findings and a proposed recommendation of penalty to the
appointing authority.
§ 63-3 PERSONNEL PRACTICES § 63-4
59:83
§ 63-5. Disciplinary hearings.
§ 63-6. Responsibilities of Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police, as the executive head of the Police Department, shall be
charged with the duties of supervising and directing the Police Department
and shall be directly responsible to the Borough Administrator for the
efficiency and operation of the Police Department.
§ 63-7. Powers and duties of Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police of the Borough of Hillsdale shall:
§ 63-8. Monthly reports to Borough Administrator.
The Chief of Police shall submit monthly reports to the Borough
Administrator concerning the operation of the Police Department during
the preceding month in such form as shall be prescribed by the Borough
Administrator. The Chief of Police shall make such other reports as may be
requested by the Mayor and Council.
C. Charging authority. Only the Chief of Police or his designee may initiate
disciplinary charges against any member of the Police Department
pursuant to the powers vested in said office by this chapter.
A. Any employee seeking to appeal disciplinary charges shall do so in
writing submitted to the Office of the Borough Administrator. Said
appeal shall be filed in writing within five business days, not including
Saturday, Sunday and legal holiday, from the date said disciplinary
charges were served upon the employee.
B. The Borough Administrator or designee shall schedule a hearing no
sooner than 10 calendar days nor later than 30 calendar days from the
date of service of the charges upon the employee.
C. Any preliminary notice of disciplinary action served upon any employee
shall contain the date, time and location of the hearing on the charges.
A. Administer and enforce the Rules and Regulations of the Police
Department and any special emergency directive for the disposition and
discipline of the Department and its officers and members.
B. Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of the
chief executive officer of the Police Department.
C. Prescribe the duties and assignments of all members and officers.
D. Delegate such authority as may be deemed necessary for the efficient
operation of the Police Department to be exercised under the direction
and control of the Borough Administrator.
§ 63-4 HILLSDALE CODE § 63-9
59:84
§ 63-9. Creation and composition. [Amended 7-12-2017 by Ord. No.
17-1042; 9-5-2017 by Ord. No. 17-17; 8-6-2019 by Ord. No. 19-14;
2-4-2020 by Ord. No. 20-03]
A. Pursuant to the authority granted by N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, the Borough
of Hillsdale hereby establishes a Police Department in and for the
Borough of Hillsdale, New Jersey, to consist of the following positions,
and the maximum number of individuals assigned to each respective
rank, as follows:
(1) Chief of Police: one.
(2) Captain: one.
(3) Lieutenant: one.
(4) Sergeant: five.
(5) Patrol officers: 12. See Subsection C below.
(6) Class I Special Law Enforcement Officers (SLEO I) who are special
law enforcement officers authorized to perform routine traffic
details, spectator control and other similar duties. Class one
officers shall be empowered to issues summons for disorderly
persons and petty disorderly person's offenses, violations of
municipal ordinances and violations of Title 39. Class one officers
are not authorized to carry a firearm and shall not be assigned to
any duty which may require the carrying of a firearm. Such officers
are subject to the qualifications and provisions of N.J.S.A.
40A:14-146.10 et seq., including terms of office;
(7) Class II Special Law Enforcement Officers (SLEO II) who are
special law enforcement officers authorized to exercise full police
powers and duties similar to those of a permanent, regularly
appointed full-time police officer. Class two officers may only carry
a firearm while engaged in the actual performance of the officer's
official duties and when specifically authorized by the Chief of
Police. Such officers are subject to the qualifications and provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.10 et seq., including terms of office;
(8) Class III Special Law Enforcement Officers (SLEO III) who are
retired regular police officers and who may from time to time be
appointed and shall serve at the pleasure of the governing body for
a term not to exceed one year, which officers shall not be members
of the regular police force but shall nevertheless be under the
control and supervision of the Chief of Police for use solely as
school security officers as detailed in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.10 et
seq.: as necessary.
42.Editor's Note: This ordinance also amended the title of this section, which was formerly
Graphic table of organization.
§ 63-9 PERSONNEL PRACTICES § 63-9
59:85
§ 63-10. Policies of Chief of Police.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, the Chief of Police shall issue any
operations orders, general orders or standard operating procedures or
policies as the Borough Administrator deems necessary for the efficiency
and operation of the Police Department.
§ 63-11. Emergency directives.
Nothing contained herein shall infringe upon or limit the duty and authority
of the Chief of Police to act to provide for the health, safety and welfare
of the municipality in an emergency through special emergency directives
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118 and 40A:14-146.9.
§ 63-12. Civilian employees.
The Borough Administrator shall with the approval and consent of the
Mayor and Council appoint civilian members to the Police Department to
serve in the capacity of dispatcher. Said civilian employees will provide
dispatch services, clerical duties and logistical services in support of the
Police Department and shall perform other duties as specified by the Chief
of Police.
B. This section shall not be construed as establishing any right on the part
of any member or members of the Police Department to appointment to
any position within the Department, nor shall it be construed as
terminating or interrupting any period of service or tenure of any
member of the Hillsdale Police Department. The existence and
continuance of any of the above-specified offices and the number of
appointees to each such office shall be determined by the governing
body as it may, from time to time, in its sole discretion, deem reasonably
necessary for the efficient and effective operation of the Department.
C. In the event that there is an unfilled vacancy in any of the superior
officer positions, the maximum number of patrol officers shall be
increased by the number of such vacancies. However, in no event shall
the maximum number of officers in the Police Department, including
the Chief, Captain, Lieutenant, Sergeants and Patrol Officers, but
excluding Special Law Enforcement Officers, exceed 19 members,
unless the Police Department has an officer on loan with a "On-Loan
Program," at which time the maximum number officers will be
increased to 20 members for the duration of the on-loan program, as
approved by the Police Chief, Borough Administrator, and the Mayor
and Council.
D. The Borough Administrator of the Borough of Hillsdale shall be deemed
to be the "appropriate authority" for purposes of the Borough Code and
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118.
§ 63-9 HILLSDALE CODE § 63-12
59:86
ARTICLE III
Rules and Regulations and Police Manual
§ 63-13. Authority of Chief of Police; duty of members.
§ 63-14. Authority of appropriate authority.
The appropriate authority, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, is hereby
authorized to update, adopt and promulgate rules and regulations for the
governing of the Police Department and for the discipline of its members
with a view to making the Police Department and all its members thereof
efficient, vigilant and effective in the service of the Borough of Hillsdale.
Said rules and regulations will be in manual form and shall be called
the "Rules and Regulations of the Police Department for the Borough of
Hillsdale" and shall govern the conduct of and be binding upon the entire
membership of said Police Department, including the Borough
Administrator and all subordinates as listed in Article I hereof. Said Rules
and Regulations shall provide for penalties and forfeitures for violations
thereof.
§ 63-15. Distribution of manual; copy to be maintained by Clerk.
The Rules and Regulations shall be distributed in manual form as follows:
A serialized copy will be issued to and signed by each employee of the
Police Department for the Borough of Hillsdale. A copy will be maintained
by the Borough Clerk for the personnel designated as special officers and to
provide public access to same.
§ 63-16. Responsibility of members to maintain manual.
All members and employees who are assigned a manual shall be responsible
for its maintenance and care. Said manuals shall remain the property of
the Borough of Hillsdale, County of Bergen, State of New Jersey, and, upon
separation from police service, each person is bound to return same. Each
A. The Chief of Police with the approval of the Borough Administrator,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, is hereby authorized to update, adopt
and promulgate rules and regulations for the government of the Police
Department and for the discipline of its members.
B. Said rules and regulations shall govern the conduct of and be binding
upon the entire membership, sworn officers and civilian employees of
the Police Department.
C. Said rules and regulations shall be in manual form and shall be called
the "Rules and Regulations of the Police Department of the Borough of
Hillsdale."
D. Each sworn officer and each civilian employee is duty bound to be
thoroughly familiar with the provisions of the Police Manual and rules
and regulations of the Police Department.
§ 63-13 PERSONNEL PRACTICES § 63-16
59:87
person will be responsible for the security of his/her manual, and loss of
same will constitute neglect of duty and will result in disciplinary action.
All manuals shall be kept current, and supplementary pages concerning
additions, revisions or amendments shall be promptly and properly inserted.
No Police Department operating policies will be inserted as part of this
manual unless and until properly assimilated by the appropriate authority.
§ 63-16 HILLSDALE CODE § 63-16
59:88
Chapter 67
RECREATION COMMISSION
§ 67-1. Continuation.
There shall be a Division of Public Parks and Playgrounds in the Department
of Public Works.
§ 67-2. Functions.
The said Division shall comprise the administrative and supervisory
activities of the Borough in connection with the development, improvement,
maintenance and use of all public park and playground lands now owned or
which may hereafter be owned or leased by the Borough.
§ 67-3. Recreation Commission.
The commission shall be known as the "Hillsdale Recreation Commission."
§ 67-4. Recreation Commission: appointment; qualifications; term;
vacancies.
§ 67-5. Recreation Commission: organization meeting; election of
officers; meetings.
A. The Commission shall consist of nine (9) members appointed by the
Mayor, by and with the consent of the Council.
B. All members of the Commission shall be residents of the Borough, and,
of the said nine (9) members, seven (7) shall be not less than eighteen
(18) years of age at the time of their appointment, and two (2) shall not
be less than fourteen (14) years of age and not more than eighteen (18)
years of age at the time of their appointment.
C. The term of each of the seven (7) members who shall be at the age of
eighteen (18) years of age at the time of appointment shall be five (5)
years commencing January 1 of the year of their appointment. The term
of each of the two (2) members who shall be between the ages of
fourteen (14) years and eighteen (18) years at the time of their
appointment shall be two (2) years. The seven (7) members who shall be
at least eighteen (18) years of age at the time of appointment shall
succeed to the terms of those members previously of the minimum age
of twenty-one (21) years of age as vacancies occur. The term of the
members who shall be between the ages of fourteen (14) and eighteen
(18) years of age at the time of appointment shall succeed to the terms
of those individuals previously appointed between the ages of 16 and 18
years of age as those vacancies occur.
D. Vacancies in the Commission shall be filled for the unexpired term only.
§ 63-16 RECREATION COMMISSION § 67-5
67:89
§ 67-6. Recreation Commission: powers and duties; limitations.
§ 67-7. Compensation prohibited.
The seven (7) adult voting members of the Recreation Commission shall
receive no salary or other compensation for their services. The aforesaid
clause of no salary or other compensation for services shall not serve
to prohibit the two (2) teenage, nonvoting members of the Recreation
Commission from being employed in seasonal positions on the recreation
staff.
Chapter 68
A. The Commission shall hold its annual organization meeting within
seven (7) days of the Borough Council reorganization meeting.
B. At such organization meeting the Commission shall elect a Chairperson
and a Vice Chairperson, who shall be chosen from among its members.
C. The Commission shall determine the times for holding its regular
meetings and shall provide for the calling of special meetings. Meetings
shall be held in the Borough Hall, and the minutes thereof shall be kept,
and a copy put on file with the Borough Clerk within ten (10) days of the
meeting by the Secretary. The regular meetings shall be held at least
once each month in connection with the performance of the duties of
the members, and for the consideration of matters affecting the public
parks and playgrounds of the Borough.
A. The Commission shall:
(1) Propose plans for the development and improvement of the public
park and playground lands owned or leased by the Borough;
(2) Propose methods or arrangements for the proper maintenance and
care of such lands and the improvements thereon;
(3) Propose rules and regulations for the public use of such lands and
improvements;
(4) Submit all such plans, methods, arrangements, rules and
regulations to the Mayor and Council for their consideration and
action thereon;
(5) Put into effect such plans, methods, arrangements, rules and
regulations which have been approved and authorized by the
Mayor and Council and exercise administrative and supervisory
authority in connection therewith.
B. The Commission shall not have the power to incur any obligations in the
name, or for the account of, the Borough, except as authorized from
time to time by the Mayor and Council.
§ 67-5 HILLSDALE CODE § 67-7
67:90
RETIREMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Court — See Ch. 17.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 51.
Personnel practices — See Ch. 59
§ 67-7 RECREATION COMMISSION § 67-7
67:91

ARTICLE I
Defined Contribution Retirement Program
[Adopted 10-14-2008 by Ord. No. 08-12]
§ 68-1. Eligible positions.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and shall participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program:
§ 68-2. Exempt positions.
Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from Defined
Contribution Retirement Program membership, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
43:15C-2:
A. Borough Administrator;
B. Borough Prosecutor;
C. Municipal Court Judge;
D. Municipal Public Defender;
E. Mayor and Council members.
A. Tax Collector;
B. Chief Financial Officer;
C. Assistant Finance Officer;
D. Construction Code Official;
E. Code Compliance Officer;
F. Qualified Purchasing Agent;
G. Tax Assessor;
H. Borough Clerk;
I. Licensed Uniform Subcode Inspector;
J. Superintendent of Public Works;
K. Borough Court Administrator;
L. Welfare Director;
M. Director of Public Nursing;
N. Recreation Director;
§ 68-1 RECREATION COMMISSION § 68-3
67:93
§ 68-3. Construal of provisions.
This article shall be implemented, construed and subject to the aforesaid
Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et seq.), as amended from
time to time, and any regulations or guidance documents from the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
§ 68-3 HILLSDALE CODE § 68-3
67:94
Chapter 69
SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY
§ 69-1. Adoption of policy.
The Borough of Hillsdale hereby adopts a formal policy on sexual
harassment which shall be distributed to every employee of the Borough of
Hillsdale and which shall be strictly enforced.
§ 69-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SEXUAL HARASSMENT — Unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual
favors and other verbal or physical conduct based on gender when
§ 69-3. Policy.
All employees, female or male, shall be permitted to work in an environment
free from all forms of unlawful discrimination and conduct which can be
considered harassing, coercive or disruptive, including sexual harassment.
Sexual harassment is a form of employee misconduct which undermines
the integrity of the employment relationship. Sexual harassment debilitates
morale and interferes with work productivity and, therefore, will not be
tolerated.
Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term
or condition of an individual's employment;
A.
Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as
the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual; or
B.
Such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with
an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or
offensive working environment, including but not limited to:
GENDER HARASSMENT — Generalized gender-based remarks
and behavior.
(1)
SEDUCTIVE BEHAVIOR — Inappropriate, unwanted, offensive
physical or verbal sexual advances.
(2)
SEXUAL BRIBERY — Solicitation of sexual activity or other sexlinked
behavior by promise of reward.
(3)
SEXUAL COERCION — Coercion of sexual activity by threat of
punishment
(4)
SEXUAL ASSAULT — Gross sexual imposition such as touching,
fondling, grabbing or assault.
(5)
C.
§ 68-3 RECREATION COMMISSION § 69-4
67:95
§ 69-4. Procedure.
§ 69-5. Contents of filing.
§ 69-6. Investigation of filed complaints.
A complaint of sexual harassment shall be investigated by the Borough
Administrator in a timely manner and shall include but not be limited to:
A. Supervisory. In order to ensure the integrity of the work environment,
supervisory personnel are required to ensure adherence to and
compliance with this policy; and, upon being informed of possible
sexual harassment, are required to take appropriate immediate action
in response, including informing employees of their right to file a
discrimination complaint with the Administrator.
B. Employee. Employees are encouraged, whether directly or through a
third party, to notify the alleged harasser that the behavior in question
is offensive and unwelcome. However, failure to do so does not preclude
filing a complaint. Employees are encouraged to promptly report all
alleged incidents of sexual harassment to the Borough Administrator.
A. The complaint filed must include the following information:
(1) The name of the complainant;
(2) The name of the charged party;
(3) The nature and circumstances, in detail, of the alleged sexual
harassment, including but not limited to the injuries or
consequences suffered by the complainant, the names of any
witnesses to such actions and the duration of the actions
questioned; and
(4) Whether such harassment has been previously reported to a
supervisor or other person, and, if so, when and to whom.
B. Nothing in this section shall prevent the complainant from providing
other information or documents they believe are essential to the fair
adjudication of their case.
C. The initial complaint may be made orally or in writing. If the complaint
is made orally, the Administrator shall reduce the same to a written
document, which shall, if it is deemed accurate, be signed by the
complainant.
D. The Borough Administrator is hereby designated as the Sexual
Harassment Officer. The Borough Clerk is hereby designated as the
alternate officer. Persons who, by reason of the circumstances, are
uncomfortable directing a complaint to the Borough Administrator may
report the same to the alternate officer.
A. Interviewing the complainant in detail.
§ 69-4 HILLSDALE CODE § 69-6
67:96
§ 69-7. Confidentiality.
To the extent possible, the sexual harassment investigative proceedings will
be conducted in a manner to protect the confidentiality of the complainant,
the alleged harasser and all witnesses. All parties involved in the
proceedings will be advised to maintain strict confidentiality, from the initial
meeting to the final decision, to safeguard the privacy and reputation of all
involved.
§ 69-8. Retaliation.
It shall be a violation of this policy for any employee to take reprisals against
any person because she or he has filed a complaint, testified or assisted
in any proceeding under this policy. Threats, other forms of intimidation
and/or retaliation against the complainant or any other party based on
involvement in the complaint process may be cause for disciplinary action.
§ 69-9. Protection of all parties.
All complaints will be addressed by the Borough Administrator. The alleged
harasser will be notified once a formal complaint is filed with the
Administrator. A finding of no probable cause as a result of an investigation
does not necessarily establish that an accusation is false. However, this
policy shall not be used to intentionally bring frivolous or malicious charges
against an employee.
§ 69-10. Disciplinary action.
Disciplinary action for employees found in violation of this policy may be
progressive in nature, but is not required to be, and may include:
B. Interviewing all potential witnesses, including those persons who may
have knowledge of similar incidents.
C. Interviewing the charged party in detail.
D. Reviewing municipal files for similar incidents involving the
complainant and the charged party.
E. Assessing the presence or absence of corroborative evidence for either
party.
A. Written reprimand.
B. Suspension (with or without pay).
C. Demotion.
D. Termination.
E. Referral to the criminal justice system.
§ 69-6 RECREATION COMMISSION § 69-11
67:97
§ 69-11. Exhaustion of remedies.
To the extent permitted by law, the Borough will not be liable for damages
obtained as a result of a decision of a non-local agency or court of superior
administrative remedies described herein.
§ 69-12. Training.
Employees of the Borough shall be provided with training, by a person
trained to lead or implement such training, which shall include a detailed
discussion of the following:
§ 69-13. False accusations.
Chapter 71
SWIMMING POOL COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recreation Commission — See Ch. 67.
Fees — See Ch. 138.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 220.
Stonybrook Swim Club — See Ch. 256.
Private swimming pools — See Ch. 264.
Land use — See Ch. 310.
§ 71-1. Establishment.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:61-22.24, there is hereby
established a Board of Commissioners to be known as the "Hillsdale
Swimming Pool Commission."
A. A detailed explanation of what constitutes sexual harassment.
B. The procedures for filing a sexual harassment charge.
C. The procedures to be followed in the investigation of a sexual
harassment charge.
D. Management's obligation regarding incidents of sexual harassment.
E. Recordkeeping requirements.
A. Since a charge of sexual harassment is a grave and serious one, false
accusations of sexual harassment are, and will be treated as, a
disciplinary offense and will result in a level of punishment appropriate
for a person actually engaging in such behavior.
B. A person who knowingly and/or recklessly fails to give truthful
testimony to the Borough Administrator shall also be guilty of having
made false accusations.
§ 69-11 HILLSDALE CODE § 71-2
67:98
§ 71-2. Members.
§ 71-3. Meetings. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
The Commission shall meet (at the Borough Hall or the Stony Brook facility
not fewer than 12 regular monthly meetings) in each calendar year in
accordance with applicable state and municipal regulations, ordinances and
statutes. At its organizational meeting, it shall:
§ 71-4. General powers and duties. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No.
97-8]
Subject to the provisions of applicable statutes and of this chapter, there
are hereby assigned to the Commission the general supervision and control
over the maintenance, operation and regulation of the swimming pool and
associated recreational facility, hereinafter collectively referred to as the
"facility."
§ 71-5. Powers and duties: development, rules and fees.
A. Number. The Commission shall consist of five residents of the Borough
of Hillsdale appointed by the Mayor, by and with the consent of the
Council.
B. Term. Members shall serve for three years, except that a Commissioner
appointed to fill a vacancy occurring other than by reason of expiration
of any term hereinbefore established shall serve only for the unexpired
portion of his or her predecessor's term. The terms of two members
shall expire at the end of each year and the third year cycle will be one
member. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
C. Compensation: The members of the Commission shall serve without
salary or other compensation for their service. Excluded from the
prohibition is membership rate afforded Borough volunteers.
[Amended 3-7-2017 by Ord. No. 17-02; 2-6-2018 by Ord. No.
18-02; 3-3-2020 by Ord. No. 20-04]
A. Determine the date and hour of its regular meetings.
B. Elect from among its members a Chairperson and a Vice Chairperson.
C. Appoint a Secretary, who need not be a member of the Commission;
who shall among his or her duties keep minutes, which shall be filed
with the Borough Clerk within 10 days.
D. Adopt bylaws regulating its internal organization and the conduct of its
meetings.
A. The Commission shall:
(1) Propose plans for the development and improvement of the facility.
[Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
§ 71-2 RECREATION COMMISSION § 71-5
67:99
§ 71-6. Annual budget. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
The Commission shall prepare and submit to the Borough Administrator its
proposed budget for the operation of the facility during the next following
calendar year. The Borough Council shall have the plenary power to
approve, disapprove, modify or revise such budget.
§ 71-7. Purchases; municipal costs.
§ 71-8. Financial records.
All financial records of the Commission shall be kept and preserved
permanently and in accordance with law and standard municipal
accounting practices consistently applied. Such records shall be deemed
public records and shall be open to public inspection during reasonable
business hours.
§ 71-9. Personnel.
(2) Propose methods or arrangements for the proper maintenance and
care of the facility.
(3) Formulate proposed rules, regulations, fees and rental charges for
the public use of the facility. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No.
97-8]
(4) Submit all such plans, methods, arrangements, rules and
regulations to the Borough Council for its consideration and action
thereon.
(5) Put into effect administrative and supervisory authority over such
plans, methods, arrangements, fees and rental charges, rules and
regulations as have been approved and authorized by the Borough
Council.
B. The Commission shall not have the power to incur any obligations in the
name or for the account of the Borough or of the Commission, except as
authorized from time to time by the Borough Council, or except as
provided in the Commission's annual budget previously approved by the
Borough Council.
A. All purchases of supplies, equipment, construction work and services,
other than employees' services, shall be made through the Office of the
Borough Purchasing Agent.
B. The estimated cost of services or material furnished by Borough
departments or Borough employees to the facility shall be charged to
the Commission's budget so that the total cost of the facility to the
Borough can be determined in accordance with standard municipal
accounting procedures consistently applied. [Amended 5-13-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-8]
§ 71-5 HILLSDALE CODE § 71-9
67:100
§ 71-10. Powers reserved.
All matters relating to the general supervision, control, operation,
maintenance and regulation to the facility not expressly delegated by this
chapter to the Commission are hereby reserved by and to the Borough
Council, including (by way of example and not by way of limitation of the
generality of this reservation):
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 84
ALARM SYSTEMS
A. The Commission shall have full charge of the employment of all
personnel whose services are required for the operation, maintenance
and regulation of the facility, provided that provision for the payment of
the compensation of such personnel shall have been made in the
Commission's approved annual budget and in the annual salary
ordinance of the Borough.
B. The Commission may, in its discretion, by resolution, delegate to a pool
manager revocable employment powers, including the power to employ
and to terminate employment of such personnel as may be included in
the scope of the Commission's resolution.
C. By reason or the nature of the services to be rendered by the
Commission's personnel, the provisions of the Borough's personnel
policy with respect to holidays, hours of attendance and like matters not
consistent with the operation of the facility shall not apply to such
personnel; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be deemed to
impair or modify the status, eligibility or any other right that may have
heretofore or may hereafter become vested in any person as a Borough
employee.
A. The establishment, promulgation, charge and collection of reasonable
fees, rents and other charges for admission to and use and enjoyment of
the facility and the recreational privileges, entertainment and other
activities conducted thereon;
B. The power to make, alter, amend and repeal rules and regulations for
the supervision, regulation and control of all activities carried on,
sponsored, arranged and provided for in connection with the facility,
and for the protection of person and property, and for the enforcement
of such rules and regulations.43
43.Editor's Note: Original §§ 2-75.1, Fees, and 2-76, Inconsistent ordinances, which
immediately followed this section, were deleted 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8. For current
provisions regarding fees, see Ch. 138, Fees.
§ 71-9 ALARM SYSTEMS § 84-1
84:101
§ 84-1. Findings.
The Borough Council does hereby find and declare that:
§ 84-2. Definitions.44
As used in this chapter, the hereinafter defined words and phrases shall,
subject to the provisions of Chapter 1, General Provisions, of the Code of
the Borough of Hillsdale, have the following meanings:
A. The occupants of numerous residential, commercial and industrial
establishments in the Borough of Hillsdale have found it desirable to
make provision for the installation upon their premises, at their own
cost and expense, of alarm systems for emergencies such as burglary,
intrusion, fire, smoke, flood and like perils.
B. There is a growing number of private enterprises that have embarked
upon the business of selling or leasing such alarm systems, entering
into contract with such occupants for the installation, operation and
maintenance of such alarm systems, and providing, either individually
or in concert with other private business enterprises similarly engaged,
for the connection of the individual alarm systems so installed by them
to an alarm device or devices installed in Police Headquarters in the
Borough of Hillsdale.
C. The proliferation of the number of private enterprises engaged in the
alarm business, each with its own system and equipment, has resulted
in conditions that, if not remedied, will lead to an unnecessary drain on
the manpower, time, space, facilities and finances of the Borough of
Hillsdale and its public safety departments and agencies, a
deterioration of the quality of service to persons subscribing to alarm
services and inequities among the various private enterprises engaged
in the alarm business in the Borough of Hillsdale.
D. The public interest, therefore, requires the enactment of rules,
regulations, standards and procedures to regulate and control the
private alarm business in the Borough of Hillsdale to the end that:
(1) The municipal departments and agencies charged with the
protection of public safety may efficiently and economically
coordinate their functions with the various alarm services to which
the public of the Borough of Hillsdale may subscribe.
(2) The quality of the alarm services rendered to the public may be
improved and maintained at a high level.
(3) The private alarm enterprises retained by occupants of buildings in
the Borough of Hillsdale may perform their services on a basis of
standards and requirements that are fairly, equitably and
impartially applicable to all such enterprises.
44.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 84-1 HILLSDALE CODE § 84-2
84:102
ALARM DEVICE — Any mechanism designed to actuate the alarm console.
ALARM SYSTEM — The installation in one (1) or more buildings of one (1)
or more alarm devices or local alarms for the express purpose of giving
visual or audible warning, or both, of an emergency such as burglary,
intrusion, fire, smoke, flood or like perils.
DIAL ALARM — An alarm device that employs an automatic dialing system
precoded to connect with a special telephone in Police Headquarters rather
than to the alarm console.
FALSE ALARM — The actuation of an alarm system by causes other than
those to which the alarm system was designed or intended to respond.
LOCAL ALARM — Any mechanism that constitutes, in whole or in part, an
alarm system that is not connected with and is not designed to actuate the
alarm console.45
§ 84-3. Dial alarms.46
A. No dial alarm shall be permitted unless it shall first have been:
(1) Registered with the Chief Law Enforcement Officer as hereinafter
required.
(2) Approved by the Chief Law Enforcement Officer after approval
thereof by the telephone company providing local service and the
performance of a test alarm conducted by or on behalf of the
applicant.
B. All dial alarms shall be coded to dial a special separate number which
shall be provided by the Chief Law Enforcement Officer. No dial alarm
shall be coded to dial the number of the general police switchboard of
the Borough of Hillsdale.
C. All dial alarms shall be coded as well to notify a relative, neighbor or
other third party who shall be named in the registration required by this
chapter and who will respond within fifteen (15) minutes of notification.
D. All dial alarms shall be capable of being disconnected by the owner to
permit a call to the police switchboard in the event that a false alarm
occurs.
E. The owner of each dial alarm system shall pay to the Borough of
Hillsdale an annual fee as provided in Chapter 138, Fees, to cover the
cost of registration and testing, and to amortize the cost of the special
telephone line or lines required in Police Headquarters, along with
ancillary tape devices necessitated by these systems.
45.Editor's Note: Original Secs. 16A-3, Alarm console, 16A-4, Issuance of license, and 16A-5,
Issuance of permits, which immediately followed this section, were deleted at time of
adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
46.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 84-2 ALARM SYSTEMS § 84-3
84:103
§ 84-4. Registration.47
No person shall install, operate or maintain any alarm system unless the
alarm system has been registered with the Chief Law Enforcement Officer
as follows:
F. Owners of dial alarms shall be governed by the false alarm procedures
and penalties set forth in this chapter.
G. If any dial alarm shall hereafter be found to be dialing the general
Police Headquarters number rather than the special telephone number
reserved for dial alarms, the occupant of the building or other person in
whose name the telephone is listed shall be sent a notice, in writing, by
the Chief Law Enforcement Officer requiring compliance with the terms
of this chapter. If the occupant or telephone subscriber shall fail within
thirty (30) days after receipt of said notice to comply, he or she shall be
liable to a penalty as provided in Chapter 226, Penalties.
H. The contents of any recorded message from a dial alarm must be
intelligible and in a format approved by the Chief Law Enforcement
Officer. No such message shall be transmitted more than three (3) times
as a result of a single stimulus of the mechanism. Messages shall not
exceed fifteen (15) seconds, and the time gap between delivery shall be
approximately ten (10) seconds.
I. The sensory mechanism of dial alarms shall be adjusted so as to
suppress false indications and not to be actuated by impulses due to
pressure changes in water pipes, short flashes of light, wind, noises,
rattling or vibration of doors or windows or other forces unrelated to
general alarms.
J. All components of dial alarms shall be maintained by the owner in good
repair. When evidence exists that there has been failure to comply with
the operational requirements of this chapter, the Chief Law
Enforcement Officer is then authorized to demand that such device be
disconnected until such time as compliance with such requirements is
reestablished.
A. Alarm system connected to alarm console. The alarm system of each
permittee shall be deemed registered at such time as the permit
therefor is issued.
B. Dial alarm system. Am alarm system employing the dial alarm shall be
deemed registered when the annual dial alarm fee is remitted to the
Borough and the system has been approved by the Chief Law
Enforcement Officer.
C. Local alarm system.
47.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 84-3 HILLSDALE CODE § 84-4
84:104
§ 84-5. False alarms.48
In the case of a false alarm, the Chief Law Enforcement Officer shall cause
an investigation to be made and keep a record of said alarm on file. For the
first and second false alarm in any given calendar year, a warning shall be
issued; for the third or subsequent false alarm in the same calendar year, a
penalty as provided in Chapter 226, Penalties, shall be paid to the Borough
of Hillsdale.
§ 84-6. Equipment maintenance.49
Each owner or lessee of an alarm system shall be responsible on a twentyfour-
hour-per-day basis for service to equipment owned or lease by him or
her. Malfunctioning equipment shall be disconnected until repaired.
§ 84-7. Appeals.50
Whenever, under the provisions of this chapter, the Chief Law Enforcement
Officer or any authorized representative he or she may have designated is
empowered to make a decision with respect to the installation, operation
and maintenance of any alarm equipment, or with respect to the issuance
or denial of any application relating thereto, any person aggrieved by said
decision may, within ten (10) days following said decision, file a written
appeal therefrom with the Borough Clerk and with the Chief Law
(1) A local alarm system shall be deemed registered when the
occupant of the building in which it is installed shall have filed with
the Chief Law Enforcement Officer a registration form, which shall
include, among other data, the location of the device, the name of
the installer of said device, the type of device, provisions relating to
false alarms and testing procedures, a list of persons to be
contacted in the event of an alarm and other information as may be
required by the Chief.
(2) No further or renewed registration shall be required for a local
alarm system unless and until there has occurred any material
change in the information previously submitted with respect to
such local alarm system. It shall be the duty of the occupant of a
building served by a local alarm system, within ten (10) days after a
change in information previously submitted to the Borough shall
have occurred, to file a supplemental or revised registration
containing accurate current information with respect to the data
required by the registration form.
(3) No charge shall be made for the filing of any local alarm
registration or any amended, revised or supplemental local alarm
registration.
48.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
49.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
50.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 84-4 ALARM SYSTEMS § 84-7
84:105
Enforcement Officer, whereupon the Borough Council shall promptly
conduct a hearing and affirm, modify or reverse the decision appealed from.
§ 84-8. Rule-making authority.51
The Chief Law Enforcement Officer may from time to time promulgate
rules and regulations supplementing this chapter in order to provide for
recordkeeping and efficient management of said system; provided, however,
that the said rules and regulations, or any revisions thereof, shall not take
effect until first approved by resolution of the Borough Council.52
Chapter 88
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 138.
Outdoor cafes — See Ch. 212.
Penalties — See Ch. 226.
Land use — See Ch. 310.
§ 88-1. Classes of licenses.53 [Amended 2-24-1981 by Ord. No. 81-5;
5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
The classes of licenses to be issued by the Borough are hereby fixed as
follows:
§ 88-2. Number of licenses restricted. [Amended 2-24-1981 by Ord.
No. 81-5; 12-14-1993 by Ord. No. 93-21; 8-9-1994 by Ord. No.
94-13]
The maximum number of licenses to be issued under this chapter shall be
as follows:
A. Plenary retail consumption licenses.
B. Plenary retail distribution licenses.
C. Club licenses.
A. Plenary retail consumption licenses: five.
B. Plenary retail distribution licenses: three.
51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
52.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 16A-13, Penalties, which immediately followed this section,
was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II. For current
penalty provisions, see Ch. 226, Penalties.
53.Editor's Note: For statutory provisions relating to alcoholic beverage control, see N.J.S.A.
33:1-1 et seq., as amended and supplemented, and state regulations promulgated by the
State Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 84-7 HILLSDALE CODE § 88-2
84:106
§ 88-3. License fees. [Amended 3-14-1978 by Ord. No. 78-2;
2-24-1981 by Ord. No. 81-5; 4-26-1983 by Ord. No. 83-4; 10-14-1986
by Ord. No. 86-16; 12-8-1987 by Ord. No. 87-28; 2-28-1989 by Ord.
No. 89-2; 12-12-1989 by Ord. No. 89-25; 11-13-1990 by Ord. No.
90-17; 8-3-1991 by Ord. No. 91-15; 11-10-1992 by Ord. No. 92-13;
12-14-1993 by Ord. No. 93-21; 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
License fees shall be as provided in Chapter 138, Fees.
§ 88-4. Hours of sale. [Amended 4-26-1983 by Ord. No. 83-4]
C. Club licenses: one.
A. Package sales (for off-premises consumption in original containers): No
plenary retail distribution or plenary retail consumption licensee shall
sell, deliver, allow, permit or suffer the sale or delivery of any alcoholic
beverage at retail in its original container for consumption off the
licensed premises or allow, permit or suffer the removal of any alcoholic
beverage in its original or open container from its licensed premises
before 9:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. on any day of the week, with the
exception of the following days, when the foregoing permission shall be
further limited and prohibited as follows:
(1) 54On Christmas Day prior to 12:00 noon;
(2) On New Year's Day, when it is on Sunday, prior to 12:00 noon.
B. Consumption on premises (plenary retail consumption license). The
holder of a retail consumption license, in addition to being permitted to
make package sales (off-premises in original container), in premises as
set forth in Subsection A above, shall be permitted the sale and delivery
of any alcoholic beverage for the purposes of consumption on the
premises any day of the week except during the following hours:
(1) On weekdays between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.;
(2) On Sundays between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon;
(3) On Christmas Day between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon;
(4) On New Year's Day, when it is a weekday, between the hours of 5:00
a.m. and 8:00 a.m.;
(5) On New Year's Day, when it is a Sunday, between the hours of 5:00
a.m. and 12:00 noon.
C. Sale for consumption off-premises of wine and malt alcoholic beverages
in the original container. The sale of wine and malt alcoholic beverages
in the original bottles or can containers by retail consumption or retail
54.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(1), which prohibited sales on Sunday prior to 12:00
noon, was repealed 7-12-2017 by Ord. No. 17-12. This ordinance also provided for the
renumbering of former Subsection A(2) and (3) as Subsection A(1) and (2), respectively.
§ 88-2 ALARM SYSTEMS § 88-4
84:107
§ 88-5. Place of consumption or possession. [Amended 6-13-1978 by
Ord. No. 78-10]
No person on any premises or occupying any vehicle within the limits of
the Borough of Hillsdale shall consume any alcoholic beverage, or have in
his or her possession any opened or unsealed alcoholic beverage container
or any open receptacle with alcoholic beverage therein, unless at the time
of such consumption or possession such person or the vehicle occupied by
such person shall be:
§ 88-5.1. Consumption or possession by underage persons. [Added
12-4-2001 by Ord. No. 01-21]
distribution license, as the case may be, is permitted during the hours
governing the applicable license.55 [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No.
97-8]
A. On premises on which the sale and service of alcoholic beverages for
consumption on said premises is permitted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 33:1-1
et seq.; or
B. On public, semipublic or private property the owner or other person or
body in charge of which has given express and lawful permission for
such consumption or possession.
A. It shall be unlawful for a person under the legal age to knowingly
possess or consume alcoholic beverages on private property in the
Borough of Hillsdale as is provided herein.
B. Violations and penalties. Those person or persons who violate this
section will be subject to a fine of $250 for the first offense and $350 for
any subsequent offense.
C. Exemptions.
(1) Those persons who are under the legal age who are engaged in the
employment of an establishment, place or business which serves
alcoholic beverages and are required to deliver or place alcoholic
beverages on display are exempt from this chapter for the course of
their employment at that place.
(2) Any underage person or persons who possesses or consumes
alcoholic beverages in connection with religious observance,
ceremony or rite or who consumes or possesses an alcoholic
beverage in the presence of and with the permission of a parent,
guardian or relative, who has attained the legal age to purchase
and consume alcoholic beverages, is exempt from this section.
55.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 33:1-40.3 and N.J.A.C. 13:2-38.1 et seq. authorize taverns and
package stores to sell beer, ale and wine in original containers for consumption off the
licensed premises on the same days and during the same hours as taverns are authorized
to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the licensed premises.
§ 88-4 HILLSDALE CODE § 88-5.1
84:108
§ 88-6. Violations and penalties. [Added 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8;
amended 12-4-2001 by Ord. No. 01-21]
Except as may be provided herein or in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., a violation of
this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 226, Penalties.
Chapter 92
AMUSEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 138.
Games of chance — See Ch. 158.
Library — See Ch. 184.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 188.
Penalties — See Ch. 226.
Traveling shows, carnivals and circuses — See
Ch. 284.
Land use — See Ch. 310.
(3) As used herein, a guardian is a person who has qualified as a
guardian of the underage person pursuant to a testamentary or
court appointment. "Relative" means the underage person's
grandparent, aunt, uncle, sibling or any other person related by
blood or affinity.
§ 88-5.1 AMUSEMENTS § 88-6
92:109

ARTICLE I
Amusement Businesses56
[Adopted 6-27-1972 by Ord. No. 72-9 as Ch. 7, Art. 5, of the Revised
Ordinances of 1972]
§ 92-1. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MISCELLANEOUS AMUSEMENT BUSINESSES — Refers to and includes,
but shall not be limited to, such businesses as traveling shows, carnivals,
circuses, bazaars, carousels, roller coasters, merry-go-rounds, Ferris
wheels, pony or train rides, midways, sideshows, miniature golf courses,
golf driving ranges, concerts, exhibitions and any show or performance or
other place of business wherein amusement is provided and to which an
entrance fee is charged.57
§ 92-2. License required.58
No person shall conduct any miscellaneous amusement business or
maintain, use or advertise any premises or place within the Borough at
which a miscellaneous amusement business is or will be conducted without
first obtaining a license therefor in accordance with the provisions of this
Article, Chapter 188, Licenses and Permits, and Chapter 310, Land Use,
§ 310-55I(6).
§ 92-3. Application for license.
Any person desiring a license under this Article shall file an application as
provided in Chapter 188, Licenses and Permits, § 188-2. In addition to the
information required by said section, the applicant shall also state the name
of the manager or operator to be in charge of the proposed amusement or
place of amusement.
§ 92-4. Investigations and reports.59
Upon receipt of an application for a license, the Borough Clerk shall
transmit copies thereof to the Chief Law Enforcement Officer, Chief of
the Fire Department, Construction Code Official and Health Officer, to
investigate the applicant, his or her manager and the proposed licensed
premises in accordance with their respective jurisdictions and in
accordance with such rules and regulations as may, from time to time, be
promulgated. They shall report back in writing to the Borough Clerk their
56.Editor's Note: For statutory provisions authorizing municipal regulation and licensing of
amusements, amusement businesses and places of public amusement, see N.J.S.A.
40:48-1, Subdivision 2, 40:48-2, 40:52-1, Subdivision f, and 40:52-2.
57.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
58.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 92-1 AMUSEMENTS § 92-4
92:111
findings of fact and recommendations, which shall be forwarded to the
Borough Council, together with the application.
§ 92-5. License fees.60
The fees for licenses issued under this Article shall be as provided in
Chapter 138, Fees.
§ 92-6. Issuance of license; contents.
§ 92-7. Term of license.62
Licenses requiring the payment of a per diem fee shall be issued for the
length of time therein expressed.
§ 92-8. License not transferable.
§ 92-9. Violations and penalties.64
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this Article shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 226, Penalties.
A. All licenses herein provided for shall be issued by the Borough Clerk.61
B. The Borough Clerk shall issue the license in the name of the Borough,
setting forth:
(1) The name of the person to whom it is issued;
(2) The place of amusement for which the license is issued;
(3) Designation of the amusement licensed; and
(4) The term of license.
A. Each license shall be valid only for the place of amusement, for the type
of amusement and for the licensee as set forth in the license.
B. No license shall be transferred.63
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
61.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
63.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
64.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 92-4 HILLSDALE CODE § 92-9
92:112
ARTICLE II
Automatic Amusement Devices
[Adopted 6-27-1972 by Ord. No. 72-9 as Ch. 7, Art. 3, of the Revised
Ordinances of 1972]
§ 92-10. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTOMATIC AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any machine which, upon the
insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc or card, may be operated by the
public generally for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether
or not registering a score. It shall include such devices as marble machines,
pinball machines, skill ball, mechanical grab machines, and all games,
operations or transactions similar thereto under whatever name they may
be indicated. It shall include video-type games or machines, or similar
device that uses a display screen for points, lines and dots of light that
can be manipulated to simulate games or other types of entertainment.
[Amended 3-25-1980 by Ord. No. 80-465]
§ 92-11. License required.
Any person displaying for public patronage or keeping for operation any
automatic amusement device shall be required to obtain for each such
automatic amusement device a license issued by the Borough Clerk as
provided in this Article and in Chapter 188, Licenses and Permits, of this
Code.
§ 92-12. Application for license. [Amended 3-25-1980 by Ord. No.
80-466]
With each separate application for an automatic amusement device filed
with the Borough Clerk, as provided under § 92-11 of this chapter, an
application fee as provided in Chapter 138, Fees, shall be paid to the
Borough of Hillsdale.
§ 92-13. Disqualification of applicant.
No license shall be issued to any person who, within three (3) years next
preceding the application, shall have been convicted of an offense involving
gambling. This disqualification shall extend to the persons described in
Chapter 188, Licenses and Permits, § 188-2B(2).
§ 92-14. License fee.67
65.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
66.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
67.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 92-10 AMUSEMENTS § 92-14
92:113
§ 92-15. Investigation and report.
§ 92-16. Issuance of license; contents and display of license.
A. All licenses issued under this chapter shall expire on June 30 of each
year.
B. The annual license fee for each automatic amusement device is as
provided in Chapter 138, Fees.
C. Any applicant for a license shall pay the sum as provided in Chapter
138, Fees, per month or any part of a month from the date said
application shall be approved until June 30 of each year; thereafter said
applicant shall pay the annual fee herein set forth under Subsection B.
A. Upon receipt of an application for a license, the Borough Clerk shall
transmit copies thereof to the Chief Law Enforcement Officer, Chief of
the Fire Department, Construction Code Official and Health Officer,
each of whom shall investigate the applicant and proposed licensed
premises in accordance with their respective jurisdiction and in
accordance with such rules and regulations as may, from time to time,
be promulgated. They shall report back, in writing, to to Borough Clerk
their findings of fact and recommendations, which shall be forwarded to
the Borough Council for action.68
B. The Chief Law Enforcement Officer shall investigate the location
wherein it is proposed to operate such device and also ascertain if the
applicant is a person of good moral character and make a report of the
findings to the Borough Clerk.69
A. All licenses herein provided for shall be issued by the Borough Clerk
only after a resolution of the Borough Council shall have been adopted
approving said application.
B. The license shall be issued to and in the name of the proprietor of the
premises wherein the automatic amusement device is to be installed.
The licensee shall be permitted to transfer the license within the year
for which it was issued to any other like device operated in the same
premises as the device for which the license is held.70
C. The license shall be affixed to a conspicuous part of the automatic
amusement device licensed, so that the device described in said license
may be easily and quickly identified.
68.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
69.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
70.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 92-14 HILLSDALE CODE § 92-17
92:114
§ 92-17. Separate license required for each device; limitation on
number of machines. [Amended 3-25-1980 by Ord. No. 80-4]
The applicant shall be required to obtain a license for each device or
machine, located in a building, which is secured, displayed or operated by
him. A limitation of five (5) machines located in one (1) building shall be
placed on every applicant.71
§ 92-18. Gambling prohibited.
No person shall use, or permit to be used, any automatic amusement device
for the purpose of gambling.72
§ 92-19. Maintenance or use near schools or churches.
No person shall use, place, operate or maintain any automatic amusement
device or permit or suffer it to be used, placed, operated or maintained in
any premises within two hundred (200) feet of any school or church.
§ 92-20. Enforcement. [Amended 3-25-1980 by Ord. No. 80-473]
Enforcement of any license or permit issued pursuant to this chapter may
be suspended or revoked by the Borough Council for any violations of any
applicable provisions of this chapter or of any other applicable ordinances
of the Borough or of an applicable state law or federal law. It shall be
the duty of the Police Department to enforce the terms and conditions
of this section and, should the violations concern building, health or fire
regulations, said Department shall be the complaining witness.
§ 92-21. Violations and penalties.74
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this Article
shall be subject, upon conviction thereof, to the provisions of Chapter 138,
Penalties, in addition to revocation or suspension by the Borough Council.
71.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 7-25, Transfer of licenses; notice to Borough Council, which
immediately followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II.
72.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 7-27, Age restriction, which immediately followed this section,
was deleted 3-25-1980 by Ord. No. 80-4.
73.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
74.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 92-17 AMUSEMENTS § 92-21
92:115
Chapter 96
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 138.
Littering — See Ch. 196.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 220.
Penalties — See Ch. 226.
Land use — See Ch. 310.
Feeding of waterfowl — See Ch. 365
§ 92-21 HILLSDALE CODE § 92-21
96:116
ARTICLE I
Dogs75
[Adopted 6-27-1972 by Ord. No. 72-9 as Ch. 4, Art. 1 of the Revised
Ordinances of 1972]
§ 96-1. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Any dog which has attained the age of seven
(7) months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.76
KENNEL — Any establishment wherein or whereon the business of
boarding or selling dogs or breeding dogs for sale is carried on, except a pet
shop.
OWNER — Every person having a right of property in such dog and every
person who harbors or has such dog in his or her keeping.
PET SHOP — Any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen, not part
of a kennel, wherein dogs for sale are kept or displayed.
§ 96-2. Compliance required.
No person shall:
§ 96-3. Annual license and registration tag required; placing tag on
dog.
Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog of licensing age in the
Borough shall, in the month of January in each year, apply for and procure
from the Clerk of the Borough a license and official metal registration tag
for each such dog so owned, kept or harbored, and shall place upon each
such dog a collar or harness with the registration tag securely fastened
thereto.
A. Keep or harbor any dog within the Borough without first obtaining a
license therefor as provided by this Article.
B. Keep or harbor any dog within the Borough except in compliance with
the provisions of this Article.
75.Editor's Note: For municipal authority to regulate or restrict the running at large of dogs,
see N.J.S.A. 40:48-1. For state statutes relating to licensing, tagging, impounding,
destruction or disposal of dogs and licensing, keeping and operating of kennels, pet shops
and the like, see N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.1 et seq. License fees, registration tag fees and certain
costs and expenses incurred for the detention and maintenance of dogs, collected
pursuant to this Article, and fines are turned over and disposed of in accordance with and
as provided by law. See N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.11 and 4:19-15.20. See also Lamanna v. Kennedy,
130 N.J.L. 223, 32 A. 2d 446 (Sup. Ct. 1943); Blakely v. Moorestown, 3 N.J. Super. 518, 67
A. 2d 330 (Law Div. 1949).
76.Editor's Note: The definition of "Dog," which immediately preceded this definition, was
deleted 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8.
§ 96-1 ANIMALS § 96-4
96:117
§ 96-4. Newly acquired dogs; dogs attaining licensing age.
The owner of any newly-acquired dog of licensing age or of any dog which
attains licensing age shall apply for a license and registration tag for such
dog within ten (10) days after such acquisition or licensing age attainment.
§ 96-5. Dogs brought into Borough.
§ 96-6. Application: contents. [Amended 11-22-1983 by Ord. No.
83-19]
The application for a dog license and registration tag shall state:
§ 96-7. Duties of Clerk relating to application.
The Clerk of the Borough shall:
A. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Borough any
dog licensed in another state for the current year, and bearing a
registration tag, and who shall keep the same or permit the same to be
kept within the Borough for a period of more than ninety (90) days shall
immediately apply for a license and registration tag for each such dog.
B. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Borough any
unlicensed dog of licensing age and who shall keep the same or permit
the same to be kept within the Borough for a period of more than ten
(10) days shall immediately apply for a license and registration tag for
each such dog.
C. The provisions of Subsections A and B of this section shall not apply
where the dogs are licensed under §§ 96-11 through 96-16.
A. The breed, sex, age, color and markings of the dog for which license
and registration are sought.
B. Whether the dog is of a long- or shorthaired variety.
C. The name, telephone number, street and post office address of the
owner and of the person who shall keep or harbor such dog.
D. Proof of rabies inoculation by licensed veterinarian.
E. Proof of spaying or neutering by a licensed veterinarian.
A. Issue each registration number in the order in which the application is
made.
B. Preserve, for a period of three (3) years, the information contained in
the application and the registration number issued for the dog.
C. Forward such information to the State Department of Health each
month on forms furnished by said Department.
§ 96-4 HILLSDALE CODE § 96-8
96:118
§ 96-8. Exemption from licensing and tag requirements.
Only one (1) license and registration tag shall be required in any licensing
year for any dog owned in New Jersey, and such license and tag issued by
any other municipality of this state shall be accepted by the Borough as
evidence of compliance with the provisions of this Article.77
§ 96-9. Fees for dogs; expiration date of license. [Amended
9-13-1977 by Ord. No. 77-12; 9-22-1981 by Ord. No. 81-14;
11-22-1983 by Ord. No. 83-19; 3-11-1986 by Ord. No. 86-07;
7-9-1991 by Ord. No. 91-13]
§ 96-10. Removal or transfer of tag prohibited.
No person, except an officer in the performance of his or her duties, shall
remove a registration tag from the collar or harness of any dog without the
consent of the owner, nor shall any person attach a registration tag to a dog
for which it was not issued.
§ 96-11. Kennel and pet shop licenses.
A. As to dogs generally:
(1) The person applying for the license and registration tag shall pay to
the Clerk of the Borough of Hillsdale the fee as set forth in Chapter
138, Fees. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
(2) For each annual renewal, the fee for the license and registration
tag shall be the same as for the original license and tag subject to
the foregoing fees being paid. Said licenses, registration tags,
renewal thereof shall expire on the last day of January of each year.
B. As to Seeing Eye, hearing-ear and service dogs: Dogs used as guides for
blind persons commonly known as "Seeing Eye dogs," those used for
hearing-impaired persons, known as "Hearing-Ear dogs" and those
used by handicapped persons known as "Service dogs" shall be licensed
and registered as other dogs as hereinabove provided for in this Article,
except that the owner or keeper of such dogs shall not be required to
pay any fee therefor.
C. As to late charge: Should the applicant fail to apply for and procure a
license in the month of January of each year, the applicant shall be
charged as provided in Chapter 138, Fees, in addition to the fees set
forth in § 96-9A. Said late charge shall be payable to the Clerk of the
Borough. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
A. Any person who keeps, operates or establishes a kennel or a pet shop in
the Borough shall obtain from the Clerk of the Borough a license
entitling him or her to keep or operate such establishment.
77.Editor's Note: State law requires that the license in one (1) municipality be accepted in
other municipalities. See N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.3.
§ 96-8 ANIMALS § 96-11
96:119
§ 96-12. Application for kennel or pet shop license.
The application for a license to keep or operate a kennel or pet shop shall:
§ 96-13. License fees for kennel and pet shop. [Amended 5-13-1997
by Ord. No. 97-8]
The annual license fee for a kennel is as provided in Chapter 138, Fees.
§ 96-14. Contents of kennel and pet shop licenses; term; revocation.
§ 96-15. Information to be forwarded to State Department of
Health.
The Clerk of the Borough shall forward to the State Department of Health
a list of all kennels and pet shops licensed, within thirty (30) days after the
licenses therefor are issued. This list shall include the names and addresses
of the licensees and the kinds of licenses issued.
B. Such license shall not be transferable to another owner or to different
premises.
C. Any person holding such license shall not be required to secure
individual licenses for dogs owned by such licensee and kept at such
establishments.
A. Describe the premises where the kennel or pet shop is located or
proposed to be located.
B. Specify the purposes for which the establishment is to be maintained.
C. Be accompanied by the written approval of the Health Officer of the
Borough showing compliance with the local and state rules and
regulations governing location of and sanitation at such establishments.
D. Be accompanied by payment of the license fee prescribed by § 96-13.
A. All licenses issued for a kennel or pet shop shall state the purpose for
which the establishment is maintained.
B. All such licenses shall expire on the last day of June of each year.
[Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
C. All such licenses shall be subject to revocation by the Borough Council
on recommendation of the State Department of Health or the Board of
Health of the Borough for failure to comply with the rules and
regulations of the State Department or the Board of Health of the
Borough governing the same, after the owner has been afforded a
hearing by either the State Department or the Board of Health of the
Borough.
§ 96-11 HILLSDALE CODE § 96-16
96:120
§ 96-16. Restrictions on dogs kept in kennels and pet shops.
No dog kept in a kennel or pet shop shall be permitted off such premises,
except on a leash or in a crate or other safe control.
§ 96-17. Running at large prohibited. [Amended 6-13-1978 by Ord.
No. 78-9]
No person owning, keeping, harboring or responsible for the control of any
dog shall suffer or permit it to run at large or to be:
§ 96-18. Soiling or committing of nuisance by dogs prohibited.
[Amended 4-12-1988 by Ord. No. 88-9; 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8;
10-10-2006 by Ord. No. 06-10]
Purpose: A section to establish requirements for the proper disposal of pet
solid waste in the Borough of Hillsdale, so as to protect public health, safety
and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
A. Upon any public street or sidewalk or in any public place or in any
public building within the Borough unless such dog is securely
controlled by an adequate leash not more than six (6) feet long held by a
person able to control said dog; or
B. Upon the private property of another without the permission of the
owner or other person having dominion over said private property.
A. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings stated
herein unless their use in the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a
different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used
in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number
include the singular number, and words used in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and
not merely directory.
IMMEDIATE — That the pet solid waste is removed at once, without
delay.
OWNER/KEEPER — Any person who shall possess, maintain, house or
harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or not the
owner of such pet.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PET — A domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance
animal) kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SOLID WASTE — Waste matter expelled from the bowels of the
pet; excrement.
§ 96-16 ANIMALS § 96-18
96:121
§ 96-19. Habitual barking, howling or crying prohibited.
No person shall keep, harbor or maintain any dog which habitually or
continuously barks, howls or cries.
§ 96-20. Injury or damage to property.
No person owning, keeping or harboring a dog shall permit or suffer it to do
any injury, or to do any damage to any lawn, shrubbery, flowers, grounds or
property of another.78
§ 96-21. Interference forbidden.
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this Article.
§ 96-22. Vicious and potentially dangerous dogs. [Amended
7-9-1991 by Ord. No. 91-13]
PROPER DISPOSAL — Placement in a designated waste receptacle, or
other suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container which is
regularly emptied by the municipality or some other refuse collector; or
disposal into a system designed to convey domestic sewage for proper
treatment and disposal.
B. Requirement for disposal: All pet owners and keepers are required to
immediately and properly dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited
on any property, public or private, not owned or possessed by that
person.
C. Exemptions: Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability
assistance animal shall be exempt from the provisions of this section
while such animal is being used for that purpose.
D. Enforcement: The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the
Borough of Hillsdale Police Department and Board of Health.
E. Violations and penalties: Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of
the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed
$2,000 or the maximum permitted by law.
A. The Animal Control Officer appointed by the governing body or any
police officer shall seize and impound a dog when there is reasonable
cause to believe that the dog is vicious, potentially dangerous or shows
signs of rabies in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-17
through N.J.S.A. 4:19-37.
B. N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 through N.J.S.A. 4:19-37, all amendments and
supplements thereto and rules and regulations promulgated pursuant
78.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 4-21, When muzzle to be used, which immediately followed
this section, was deleted 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8.
§ 96-18 HILLSDALE CODE § 96-22
96:122
§ 96-23. Annual canvass; report. [Amended 11-22-1983 by Ord. No.
83-19; 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
The Chief Law Enforcement Officer or such official, police officer or other
person designated by the governing body shall annually cause a canvass
to be made of all dogs owned, kept or harbored within the limits of the
Borough. He or she shall report on or before September 1 of each year
to the Borough Clerk, to the Borough Board of Health and to the State
Department of Health the result thereof, setting forth in separate columns
the names and addresses of persons owning, keeping or harboring such
dogs; the number of licensed dogs owned, kept or harbored by each of said
persons, together with the registration numbers of each of said dogs; and
the number of unlicensed dogs owned, kept or harbored by each of said
persons, together with a complete description of each of said unlicensed
dogs.
§ 96-24. Enforcement. [Amended 7-9-1991 by Ord. No. 91-13;
5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 through N.J.S.A.
4:19-37, it shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer of the Borough,
the Chief Law Enforcement Officer, each police officer of the Borough and
the Municipal Health Officer and the Sanitary Inspector to assist in carrying
out the provisions of this Article and the provisions for the control of
dogs contained in N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.1 through N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.29 and N.J.S.A.
4:19-17 through N.J.S.A. 4:19-37, as amended and supplemented.
§ 96-25. Seizure of dogs; entry upon premises for such purpose.
Any officer or agent authorized or empowered to perform any duty under
this Article is hereby authorized to go upon any premises to seize for
impounding any dog or dogs which he or she may lawfully seize and
impound when such officer is in immediate pursuit of such dog or dogs,
except upon the premises of the owner of the dog if said owner is present
and forbids the same.
§ 96-26. Care of impounded animals; holding place. [Amended
7-9-1991 by Ord. No. 91-13; 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
The Animal Control Officer, the Municipal Health Officer or the Sanitary
Inspector of the Borough shall be responsible for all dogs and other animals
impounded and taken into custody under the terms of this Article and
statutes incorporated herein, as amended and supplemented. The Animal
Control Officer, Municipal Health Officer or Sanitary Inspector of the
to the authority thereof, are incorporated herein and made a part
hereof as though set forth at length herein.
C. A complete copy of the aforesaid legislation shall be on file in the office
of the Borough Clerk and will remain on file there for the use and
examination of the public.
§ 96-22 ANIMALS § 96-26
96:123
Borough shall designate the place where such dogs and animals are to be
impounded or held in custody, subject to the approval of the Mayor and
Council.
A. The Chief Law Enforcement Officer or any official, police officer, or
other person designated by the said Chief Animal Control Officer,
Municipal Health Officer or Sanitary Inspector shall take into custody
or impound or cause to be taken into custody and impounded and
thereafter destroyed, offered for adoption or disposed of as hereinafter
provided in this section:
(1) Any dog at large off the premises of the owner or of the person
keeping or harboring said dog; and
(2) Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring said dog without a current registration tag on its collar
or harness.
B. If any dog so seized wears a collar or harness having inscribed thereon
or attached thereto the name and address of any person or a
registration tag, or if the owner or the person keeping or harboring said
dog is known, the Chief Law Enforcement Officer or anyone authorized
by him or her shall forthwith serve on the person whose address is
given on the collar or harness, or on the owner or the person keeping or
harboring said dog, if known, a notice, in writing, stating that the dog
has been seized and will be liable to be disposed of or destroyed if not
claimed within seven (7) days after the service of the notice.
C. A notice under Subsection B of this section may be served either by
delivering it to the person on whom it is to be served, or by leaving it at
the person's usual or last known place of abode, or at the address given
on the collar or by forwarding it by mail in a prepaid letter addressed to
that person at his or her usual or last known place of abode or to the
address given on the collar or harness.
D. When any dog so seized has been detained for seven (7) days after
notice, when notice can be given as above set forth in this section or has
been detained for seven (7) days after seizure, when notice has not
been and cannot be given as above set forth in this section and if the
owner or person keeping or harboring said dog has not claimed said
dog and paid all expenses incurred by reason of its detention, including
maintenance not exceeding the maximum amount set by the Hillsdale
Animal Control Service, and if the dog be unlicensed at the time of the
seizure and the owner or person keeping or harboring said dog has not
produced a license and registration tag for said dog, the Animal Control
officer may cause the dog to be destroyed in a manner causing as little
pain as possible.
E. The Animal Control Officer shall immediately file, in the office of the
Borough Clerk, a written report of the disposal of such dog.
§ 96-26 HILLSDALE CODE § 96-27
96:124
§ 96-27. Disposition of fees collected.
§ 96-28. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-9-1991 by Ord. No.
91-13; 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
Any person who violates or fails or refuses to comply this Article or with
the rules and regulations promulgated by the State Department of Health
governing the sanitary conduct and operation of kennels, pet shops, shelters
and pounds, to preserve sanitation therein and to prevent the spread of
rabies and other diseases of dogs within and from such establishments,
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in Chapter 226,
Penalties.
A. License fees and other moneys collected or received under the
provisions of this Article, except registration tag fees, shall be
forwarded to the Borough Chief Financial Officer within thirty (30) days
after collection or receipt and shall be placed in a special account
separate from any of the other accounts of the Borough. Such moneys
shall be used for the following purposes only: for collecting, keeping
and disposing of dogs liable to seizure under this Article; for local
prevention and control of rabies; for providing anti-rabic treatment
under the direction of the Borough Board of Health for any person
known or suspected to have been exposed to rabies; for all other
purposes prescribed by the statutes of New Jersey governing the
subject, and for administering the provisions of this Article. Any
unexpended balance remaining in such special account shall be
retained therein until the end of the third fiscal year following and may
be used for any of the purposes set forth in this section. At the end of
the said third fiscal year following, and at the end of each fiscal year
thereafter, there shall be transferred from such special account to the
general funds of the Borough any amount then in such account which is
in excess of the total amount paid into said special account during the
last two (2) fiscal years next preceding.
B. The registration tag fee for each dog shall be forwarded within thirty
(30) days after collection by the Borough Clerk to the State Department
of Health.
§ 96-27 ANIMALS § 96-28
96:125

ARTICLE II
Cats
[Adopted 7-9-1991 as Ord. No. 91-14 (Ch. 4, Art. 2, of the Revised
Ordinances of 1972)]
§ 96-29. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY — Any person or agency designated or
certified by the State of New Jersey to enforce the provisions of this
Article.79
CAT SHELTER — Any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen, not
part of a kennel, wherein cats for sale are kept or displayed.[Amended
5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
LICENSING AUTHORITY — The agency or department of the Borough
of Hillsdale or any designated representative thereof charged with
administering the issuance and/or revocation of permits and licenses under
the provisions of this Article.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a cat, includes every
person having a right of property (or custody) in such cat and every person
who has such a cat in his or her keeping, or who harbors or maintains a cat
or knowingly permits a cat to remain on or about any premises occupied by
that person.80
SPAYED-NEUTERED — Rendered permanently incapable of reproduction as
certified by a licensed veterinarian.
§ 96-30. Provisions relating to rabies vaccination of cats.
A. No person shall own, keep, harbor or maintain any cat over four (4)
months of age, or younger if so prescribed by New Jersey State
Department of Health guidelines in a rabies emergency, within the
Borough of Hillsdale unless such cat is vaccinated and licensed. The
provisions of this section do not apply to cats held in a cat shelter or
those held by a state or federal licensed research facility or a veterinary
establishment where cats are received or kept for diagnostic, medical,
surgical or other treatments, or licensed animal shelters, pounds,
kennels or pet shops. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
B. Vaccination: All cats shall be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed
veterinarian in accordance with the latest "Compendium of Animal
Rabies Vaccines and Recommendations for Immunization" published by
79.Editor's Note: The definition of "Animal," which immediately preceded this definition, and
the definition of "Cat," which immediately followed this definition, were deleted 5-13-1997
by Ord. No. 97-8.
80.Editor's Note: The definition of "Person," which immediately followed this definition, was
deleted 5-13-1997 by Ord.No. 97-8.
§ 96-29 ANIMALS § 96-30
96:127
§ 96-31. Display and procedure of licensing.
the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians, except as
provided for in Subsection D.
C. Vaccination certificate: A certificate of vaccination, on a form
recommended by the state, shall be issued to the owner of each animal
vaccinated.
D. Exemptions: Any cat may be exempt from the requirements of such
vaccination for a specified period of time by the Hillsdale Board of
Health, upon presentation of a veterinarian's certificate stating that,
because of an infirmity or other physical condition or regimen of
therapy, the inoculation of such cat shall be deemed inadvisable.
A. Cats must have a license number displayed. Any person who shall own,
keep or harbor a cat of the minimum age or older set forth in § 96-30A
of this Article shall annually apply for and procure from the Clerk of the
municipality, or other official designated by the governing body thereof
to license cats in the municipality in which he or she resides, a license
and official registration tag with license number for each cat so owned,
kept, harbored and shall place upon such cat a collar or other device
with the license number securely fastened or displayed thereto.
Acceptable methods of displaying license number shall include but are
not limited to breakaway or elastic collars. License tags are not
transferable. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
B. Time to apply for license. The owner of any newly acquired cat which is
the minimum age set forth in § 96-30 of this Article or older shall make
application for license tag for such cat within ten (10) days after such
acquisition or age attainment. This requirement will not apply to a
nonresident keeping a cat within the Borough of Hillsdale for no longer
than ninety (90) days. A thirty-day period for licensing hereunder shall
apply when a rabies emergency has been declared by New Jersey
Department of Health. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
C. Cats brought into jurisdiction. Any person who shall bring or cause to
be brought into the Borough of Hillsdale any cat licensed in another
state for the current year and bearing registration tag and shall keep
the same or permit the same to be kept within the Borough of Hillsdale
for a period of more than ninety (90) days shall immediately apply for a
license and registration tag for each such cat. A thirty-day period for
licensing hereunder shall apply when a rabies emergency has been
declared by New Jersey Department of Health. [Amended 5-13-1997
by Ord. No. 97-8]
D. Application, contents, preservations or information. The application
shall state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of the cat for which
license and registration are sought and whether it is of a long- or
shorthaired variety; also the name, street, post office address and
telephone number of the owner and the person who shall keep or
§ 96-30 HILLSDALE CODE § 96-31
96:128
harbor such a cat. The information on said application and the
registration number issued for the cat shall be preserved for a period of
three (3) years by the Clerk or other local official designated to license
cats in the municipality.
E. License forms and tags. License forms and official tags shall be
furnished by the municipality and shall be numbered serially and shall
bear the year of issuance and the name of the municipality. [Amended
5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
F. Evidence of inoculation with rabies vaccine or certification of
exemption; requirement for license. No Municipal Clerk or other official
designated by the governing body of any municipality to license cats
therein shall grant any such license and official registration tag for any
cat unless the owner thereof provides evidence that the cat to be
licensed and registered has been inoculated with a rabies vaccine of a
type approved by and administered in accordance with the
recommendations of the United States Department of Agriculture and
the United States Department of Human Services, current
recommendations of the New Jersey State Department of Health or has
been certified exempt as provided by § 96-30 of this Article II. The
rabies inoculation shall be administered by a duly licensed veterinarian,
or by such other veterinarian permitted by law to do so. [Amended
5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
G. License fee schedule. Fees shall be as provided in Chapter 138, Fees.
[Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
H. Fees, renewals, expiration date of license.
(1) Licenses from another municipality shall be accepted. The person
applying for the license and registration tag and/or sleeve shall pay
the fee fixed or authorized. The fee for the renewal of the license
and registration tag or sleeve shall be the same as for the original
license, registration tag or sleeve and renewal thereof shall expire
on January 31 of the following year. Owners who have complied
with the registration fee provisions of this Article for 1991 shall be
exempt from the Borough's 1992 registration fee requirements
when reregistering their cat(s).
(2) Only one (1) license and registration tag shall be required in the
licensing year for any cat in the Borough of Hillsdale. Any valid
New Jersey license tag issued by a New Jersey municipality shall be
accepted by this municipality as evidence of compliance, provided
that proof of inoculation of appropriate duration in accordance with
the current recommendations of the New Jersey Department of
Health is presented. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
(3) Should the applicant fail to apply for and procure a license in the
month of January of each year, the applicant shall be charged a fee
as provided in Chapter 138, Fees, in addition to the fees set forth in
§ 96-31 ANIMALS § 96-31
96:129
§ 96-32. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No.
97-8]
Any person who violates or fails or refuses to comply this article or with
the rules and regulations promulgated by the State Department of Health
governing the sanitary conduct and operation of kennels, pet shops, shelters
and pounds, to preserve sanitation therein and to prevent the spread of
rabies and other diseases of dogs within and from such establishments,
shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 226, Penalties.
Subsection G. Said late charge shall be payable to the Clerk of the
Borough. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
I. Loss of license. Replacement of misplaced or lost license/issuance of
duplicate shall be free.
J. Proof of licensing. Proof of licensing shall be produced by any person
owning, keeping, maintaining or harboring a cat upon the request of
any health official, police officer, Animal Control Officer, Sanitary
Inspector or other authorized person.
K. Interfering with persons performing duties under this Article. No
person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this Article.
L. Disposition of fees collected. License fees and other moneys collected
or received under the provisions of this Article shall be forwarded to the
Chief Financial Officer of the municipality and shall be placed in a
special account separate from any of the other accounts of the
municipality and shall be used for the following purposes only:
collecting, keeping and disposing of cats liable to seizure, for local
prevention and control of rabies, providing anti-rabies treatment under
the direction of the local Board of Health for any person known or
suspected to have been exposed to rabies and for administering the
provisions of this Article. Any unexpected balance remaining in such
special account shall be retained until the end of the third fiscal year
following and may be used for any of the purposes set forth in this
section. At the end of the said third year thereafter, there shall be
transferred from such special account to the general funds of the
municipality any amount then in such account which is in excess of the
total amount paid into the special account during the last two (2) fiscal
years next preceding.
§ 96-31 HILLSDALE CODE § 96-32
96:130
Chapter 100
AUCTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 138.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 188.
Penalties — See Ch. 226.
§ 100-1. Definitions.81
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUCTIONEER — A person who cries off, sells or exposes or offers for sale
real or personal property at public auction.
PUBLIC AUCTION — A public sale of real or personal property in which the
price at which the property offered for sale is sought to be increased by
bids. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "public auction" shall not
include
§ 100-2. License required.
No person shall, within the Borough, act as an auctioneer or maintain, use
or advertise any premises as the place at which a public auction is or will be
conducted unless he or she first applies for and obtains a license therefor in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and of Chapter 188, Licenses
and Permits.
§ 100-3. Investigations and reports.82
Upon receipt of an application for a license, the Borough Clerk shall
transmit copies thereof to the Chief Law Enforcement Officer, Chief of
the Fire Department, Construction Code Official and Health Officer, to
investigate the applicant and proposed licensed premises in accordance
with their respective jurisdictions and in accordance with such rules and
Any auction conducted by or for the exclusive benefit of any bona fide
charitable, religious, educational or similar nonprofit organization.
A.
Any auction conducted by a federal, state, county or municipal officer
or by any fiduciary or other person who is acting under the order of or
who is accountable to any court or who is acting in compliance with a
requirement of law.
B.
81.Editor's Note: For statute authorizing municipalities to license and regulate public
auctions and auctioneers, see N.J.S.A. 40:52-1, Subdivision i, and 40:52-2. For statute
requiring auctioneers to keep books and records and providing for municipal licensing of
nonresidents to auction jewelry or silverware, see N.J.S.A. 45:17-1.
82.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 96-32 AUCTIONS § 100-3
100:131
regulations as may, from time to time, be promulgated. They shall report
back in writing to the Borough Clerk their findings of fact and
recommendations.
§ 100-4. License fee; refund.83
§ 100-5. Posting of bond.84
Each applicant shall post with the Borough a bond not exceeding five
thousand dollars ($5,000.) penal sum.
§ 100-6. Violations and penalties.85
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 226, Penalties.
Chapter 106
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 228.
A. The fee for a license issued under this chapter shall be as provided in
Chapter 138, Fees.
B. If the application shall be denied, one-half (1/2) of the amount of the
license fee paid by the applicant shall be refunded.
C. No more than one (1) license for an auction shall be granted to an
applicant per calendar year, and it shall not exceed three (3) days in
duration.
83.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
84.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
85.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 100-3 HILLSDALE CODE § 100-6
100:132
ARTICLE I
Bamboo
[Adopted 2-10-2015 by Ord. No. 15-07]
§ 106-1. Purpose.
This article is adopted to control the planting, cultivating and/or growing of
bamboo in the Borough of Hillsdale and to require barriers to prevent the
spread of existing bamboo into other areas of the Borough.
§ 106-2. Regulation of planting, growing or cultivating of bamboo.
Subject to certain exemptions set forth in this article, no persons, residents,
citizens, property owners and/or tenants of the Borough shall plant,
cultivate, or cause to grow any bamboo on any lot and/or parcel of ground
anywhere within the geographic boundaries of the Borough of Hillsdale,
except for:
§ 106-3. Exemptions.
This article shall not apply to any land owner or possessor of said land who,
prior to the effective date of this article, has any bamboo on any property
within the Borough limits. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no portions of
such bamboo shall be allowed to grow upon, extend roots across, or extend
branches, stalks or leaves over any public way or onto any private property.
If such occurs, the provisions of § 106-4 shall apply.
§ 106-4. Complaint notice, order for removal and compliance.
Whenever a complaint is received by the Borough regarding the
encroachment of any bamboo plant or root, or whenever the Borough,
on its own observations and inspections, determines that there is an
encroachment of bamboo plants or roots on to the property of another land
owner, or tenant in possession of the property, or both, the Borough shall
cause notice to be served and the following actions occur:
A. Where the root system of such bamboo plants is entirely contained
within an above-ground-level planter, barrel, or other vessel of such
design, material and location as to entirely prevent the spread of
growth of the bamboo plants' root system beyond the container beyond
which it is planted.
B. Whether planted or growing in a container, as described herein, all
bamboo plants shall be located, trimmed and maintained so that no part
of the plant shall be closer than 10 feet from any property line.
A. The notice shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested,
properly addressed and with sufficient postage, and also by First Class
mail. Notice by certified mail shall be deemed complete on the date of
personal delivery, or the date the certified mail is marked refused or
unclaimed or otherwise undeliverable by the United States Post Office.
§ 106-1 AUCTIONS § 106-4
100:133
§ 106-5. Repealer.
All ordinances of the Borough of Hillsdale which are inconsistent with
the provisions of this article are hereby repealed as to the extent of such
inconsistency.
§ 106-6. Violations and penalties.
First Class mail shall be deemed delivered within five calendar days of
its being mailed by the Borough.
B. The notice shall specify the nature of the violation(s).
C. The notice shall state that the violation(s) must be corrected within 30
calendar days from the date of the received or returned mailing.
D. The notice shall state specifically what must be done by the responsible
party to correct the violation(s).
A. Any person determined by any court of competent jurisdiction to have
violated this article shall be subject to pay a fine of not less than $25 per
day nor more than $100 per day, for each day the violation exists after
the date for removal as set forth in the notice which was sent to violator
and received by the violator as defined above. Each day of a continuing
violation shall constitute a separate offense, for which an additional fine
can be levied. The per day fine will be in addition to a penalty for failure
to comply with this article. This fine can be up to the maximum penalty
set by the State of New Jersey.
B. If the violation is not remedied within the time set forth in the aforesaid
notice, the Borough is hereby authorized to remove or have removed
any encroaching bamboo and to take all reasonable steps to eradicate
the regrowth of the bamboo on the public rights-of-way, including
sidewalks, and to restore such land to its normal condition, prior to
such removal and eradication.
C. The cost of the corrective action together with any civil penalties, legal
fees and other costs shall be recoverable from the responsible party.
§ 106-4 HILLSDALE CODE § 106-6
100:134
Chapter 110
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
§ 110-1. General numbering system.86
All buildings and lots of land along the streets of the Borough shall be
numbered as follows:
§ 110-2. Display of numbers on buildings.
The owner, occupant, tenant or agent of every building along the streets in
the Borough shall display an assigned number on or in front of such building
as to be plainly visible from the center of the abutting street. The numerals
of said number shall be at least three (3) inches in height.
§ 110-3. Duty of owner or tenant to obtain numbers.
The numbers referred to in section § 110-2 shall be ascertained by the
owner, occupant, tenant or agent thereof from the current assessment map
on file in the office of the Clerk of the Borough. Said number shall also
correspond with the number assigned on said assessment map.
§ 110-4. Failure to comply; number affixed by Borough; cost.
In cases where the property owner shall have failed to ascertain and affix
upon any building the number or numbers applicable to said building as
provided in §§ 110-2 and 110-3, the Borough Engineer shall serve a notice
A. Every twenty-five (25) feet of land facing on every street in the Borough
shall, for the purpose of this chapter, be regarded as a separate lot and,
as such, bear a separate number.
B. All lots facing on the northerly side of streets shall be assigned even
numbers. All lots facing on the southerly side of streets shall be
assigned odd numbers.
C. All lots facing on the easterly side of streets shall be assigned even
numbers. All lots facing on the westerly side of streets shall be assigned
odd numbers.
D. Streets running in a northerly or southerly direction shall be assigned
numbers beginning on the southerly end and increasing as the street
runs north.
E. All streets running in an easterly or westerly direction shall be assigned
numbers beginning on the easterly ends and increasing as the street
runs west.
86.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:67-1 authorizes municipalities to provide, by ordinance, for a
system of numbering buildings and lots, either at the expense of the owner or of the
municipality.
§ 106-6 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 110-4
110:135
upon the owner, by personal service or by registered or certified mail
addressed to his or her last known address, to affix the required number
within three (3) days after receipt of said notice. In cases where the owner
shall have failed or refused to affix said required number within the time
provided in the notice, the Borough Engineer shall cause to be affixed to
said building the number or numbers applicable to the same. The Borough
Engineer shall certify the cost thereof to the Council. Upon receipt of the
certificate, the Council shall examine the same and, if found correct, shall
cause such cost to be charged to the owner or owners of the lands upon
which said building is situated. The amount so charged shall thereupon
become a lien and tax upon such lands and shall be added to and become
part of the taxes next to be levied and assessed upon such lands. Said
amount shall bear interest at the same rate and shall be collected and
enforced by the same officers and in the same manner as taxes.
Chapter 116
BUILDINGS, UNFIT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform Construction Codes — See Ch. 124.
Enforcement of Uniform Code — See Ch. 146,
Art. I.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 228.
§ 116-1. Findings and exercise of police power.
A. It is hereby found and declared that the existence or occupation of any
building or buildings, or parts thereof, in the Borough of Hillsdale which
are so old, dilapidated or have become so out of repair as to be
dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation,
or occupancy, or use, are inimical to the welfare and dangerous and
injurious to the health and safety of the people of the Borough, and that
a public necessity exists for the repair, closing or demolition of such
building or buildings, or parts thereof. Whenever there exists in the
Borough any building or buildings which are unfit for human habitation
or occupancy or use, power is hereby invoked by the Borough to
exercise its police powers to repair, close or demolish, or cause or
require the repairing, closing or demolition of such building or
buildings, or parts thereof, in the manner herein provided.
B. Any building or buildings, or parts thereof, which have come into a state
of disrepair through neglect, lack of maintenance or use, fire, accident
or other calamities, or through any other act rendering the building or
buildings, or parts thereof, in a state of disrepair, to the extent that the
building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use, shall be
deemed inimical to the welfare of the residents of the Borough.
§ 110-4 HILLSDALE CODE § 116-1
116:136
§ 116-2. Definitions.
The following terms, whenever used or referred to in this chapter, shall have
the following meanings:
BUILDING — Any building, or structure or part thereof, whether used
for human habitation or otherwise, and includes any outhouses and
appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith.
GOVERNING BODY — The Council of the Borough of Hillsdale.
OWNER — The holder or holders of the title in fee simple.
PARTIES IN INTEREST — All individuals, associations and corporations
who have interests of record in a building and any who are in actual
possession thereof.
PUBLIC AUTHORITY — Any officer who is in charge of any department
of the Borough relating to health, fire, building regulations or to other
activities concerning buildings in the Borough.
PUBLIC OFFICER — The officer, officers, board or body who is or are
authorized by the Borough to exercise the powers prescribed by this
chapter.
§ 116-3. Repair, closing or demolition; authorization for order of
public officer; summary proceedings to demolish unsafe building.
C. A public officer appointed pursuant to this chapter may exercise his
powers to repair, demolish or cause the repairing or demolition of the
building or buildings, or parts thereof, pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.
A. The governing body hereby appoints the Construction Code Official as
the public officer for the purpose of exercising the powers granted that
individual by this chapter.
B. Whenever a petition is filed with the public officer by a public authority
or by at least five residents of the Borough charging that any building is
unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use, or whenever it appears
to the public officer (on his or her own motion) that any building is unfit
for human habitation or occupancy or use, the public officer shall, if his
preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and
cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest in such
building a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing
a notice that a hearing will be held before the public officer (or his
designated agent) at a place therein fixed not less than seven days nor
more than 30 days after the serving of said complaint; that the owner
and parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the
complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at
the place and time fixed in the complaint; and that the rules of evidence
prevailing in the courts shall not be controlling in hearings before the
public officer.
§ 116-1 BUILDINGS, UNFIT § 116-3
116:137
C. If, after such notice and hearing, the public officer determines that the
building under consideration is unfit for human habitation or occupancy
or use, he shall state in writing the findings of fact in support of such
determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner
thereof and parties in interest an order:
(1) Requiring the repair, alteration or improvement of said building to
be made by the owner, within a reasonable time, which time shall
be set forth in the order or at the option of the owner to vacate or
have said building vacated and closed within the time set forth in
the order; and
(2) If the building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the
health and safety of persons on or near the premises, and the
owner fails to repair, alter or improve said building within the time
specified in the order, then the owner shall be required to remove
or demolish said building within a reasonable time as specified in
said order of removal.
D. If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve or,
at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building, the public
officer may cause such building to be repaired, altered or improved, or
to be vacated and closed, and the public officer may cause to be posted
on the main entrance of any building so closed a placard with the
following worth: “This building is unfit for human habitation or
occupancy or use; the use or occupancy of this building is prohibited
and unlawful.”
E. If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
building, the public officer may cause such buildings to be removed or
demolished or may contract for the removal or demolition thereof after
advertisement for, and receipt of, bids therefor.
F. The following costs are recoverable by the Borough:
(1) The cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witnesses’ fees, search
fees and advertising charges, incurred in the course of any
proceeding taken under this act determined in favor of the
Borough; and
(2) The cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements or vacating
and closing, or removal or demolition, if any, or the amount of the
balance thereof remaining after deduction of the sum, if any,
realized from the sale of materials derived from such building or
from any contract for removal or demolition thereof, shall be a
municipal lien against the real property upon which such cost was
incurred.
G. If the building is removed or demolished by the public officer, he shall
sell the materials of such building. There shall be credited against the
cost of the removal or demolition thereof, including the clearance and,
if necessary, leveling of the site, the proceeds of any sale of such
§ 116-3 HILLSDALE CODE § 116-3
116:138
§ 116-4. Financing of emergency demolition fund; powers of public
officer.
§ 116-5. Standards.
The public officer may determine that a building is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use if he finds that conditions exist in such
building which are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the
occupants of such building, the occupants of neighboring buildings or other
residents or the Borough. Such condition shall be deemed to include the
materials or any sum derived from any contract for the removal or
demolition of the building. If there are no such credits or if the sum
total of such costs exceeds the total of such credits, a detailed
statement of the aforesaid costs and the amount so due shall be filed
with the municipal tax assessor or other custodian of the records or tax
liens and a copy thereof shall be forthwith forwarded to the owner by
registered mail. If the total of the credits exceed such costs, the balance
remaining shall be deposited in the Superior Court by the public officer,
shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by such court, and
shall be disbursed according to the order or judgment of the court to
the person found to be entitled thereto by final order or judgment of
such court. Any owner or party in interest may, within 30 days from the
date of the filing of the lien certificate, proceed in a summary manner
in the Superior Court to contest the reasonableness of the amount or
the accuracy of the costs set forth in the municipal lien certificate.
H. If any actual and immediate danger to life is posed by the threatened
collapse of any fire-damaged or other structurally unsafe building, the
public officer may, after taking such measures as may be necessary to
make such building temporarily safe, seek a judgment in summary
proceedings for the demolition thereof.
I. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impair or limit in any way
the power of the Borough to define and declare nuisances and to cause
their removal or abatement, by summary proceedings or otherwise, nor
is anything in this chapter intended to limit the authority of the
Construction Official under the State Uniform Construction Code Act,
P.L. 175, c. 217 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.) or any rules or regulations
adopted thereunder.
A. The public officer, to finance the costs of accomplishing the purpose of
this chapter, shall have the power to accept gifts or grants from private
or public agencies.
B. All funds received pursuant to Subsection A of this section shall be
placed in a separate municipal fund designated as the “Emergency
Demolition Fund” to be used solely for demolition-related activities. The
public officer shall have the sole discretion in determining which funds
will be accepted and the time and manner of all expenditures necessary
to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
§ 116-3 BUILDINGS, UNFIT § 116-5
116:139
following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): defects therein
increasing the hazards of fire, accident, or other calamities; lack of
adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; dilapidation; disrepair,
structural defects; uncleanliness; failure to comply with the requirements of
the building code87 or the certificate of occupancy.
§ 116-6. Service of complaints and orders.
Complaints or orders issued by a public officer shall be served upon persons
either personally or by registered mail, but if the whereabouts of such
persons is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public
officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the public officer shall
make an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of such complaint or order
upon such persons may be made by publishing same once in a newspaper
printed and published in the Borough or, in the absence of such newspaper,
in one printed and published in the county and circulating in the Borough of
Hillsdale. A copy of such complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous
place on the premises affected by the complaint or order. A copy of such
complaint or order shall be duly recorded or lodged for recording with the
county recording officer of the office of the Bergen County Clerk.
§ 116-7. Additional powers of public officer.
A. The public officer is hereby authorized to exercise such powers as may
be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes of
this chapter, including the following powers in addition to others herein
granted:
(1) To investigate the building conditions in the Borough in order to
determine which buildings therein are unfit for human habitation
or occupancy or use;
(2) To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence;
(3) To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations,
provided that such entries shall be made in such manner as to
cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in
possession;
(4) To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees
as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter;
and
(5) To delegate any of his functions and powers under this chapter to
such officers and agents as he may designate.
B. Any action taken using local property tax revenues of the Borough shall
be taken only after advertisement for, and receipt of, bids pursuant to
the Local Public Contracts Law, P.L. 1971, C. 198 (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et
87.Editor’s Note: See Ch. 124, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 116-5 HILLSDALE CODE § 116-7
116:140
§ 116-8. Administration.
The governing body shall, as soon as possible following adoption of this
chapter, prepare an estimate of the annual expenses or cost to provide
the equipment, personnel and supplies necessary for periodic examinations
and investigations of the buildings in the Borough for the purpose of
determining the fitness of such buildings for human habitation or occupancy
or use, and for the enforcement and administration of this chapter. The
municipality is authorized to make such appropriations from its revenues as
it may deem necessary for this purpose and may accept and apply for grants
or donations to assist it in carrying out the provisions of this chapter.
Chapter 124
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 110.
Fees — See Ch. 138.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 146.
Flood hazard areas — See Ch. 154.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 188.
Penalties — See Ch. 226.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 228.
Sewers — See Ch. 240.
Soil movement — See Ch. 248.
Land use — See Ch. 310.
seq.), unless the action is necessary to prevent imminent danger to life,
limb or property.
§ 116-7 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 116-8
124:141

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 124-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the
"Hillsdale Construction Code Agency Ordinance."88
§ 124-2. Adoption of standards by reference.89
A certain code known as the "BOCA National Building Code," current
edition, and the whole thereof, of which code not fewer than three (3) copies
have been and are now filed in the office of the Clerk of the Borough of
Hillsdale, be and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully
as if set out at length herein, including any subsequent supplements and
addendums issued thereto.
§ 124-3. Other applicable state regulations.90
In addition to the provisions of this chapter and of the BOCA code referred
to above, state regulations on the topic of uniform construction codes can
be found in the State Uniform Construction Code Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119
et seq. (P.L. 1975, c.217), titled, "An act to authorize the Commissioner of
Community Affairs to adopt rules relating to the construction, alteration,
renovation, rehabilitation, maintenance, occupancy and use of buildings
and structures; to provide for Statewide approval of premanufactured
systems; to provide for the administration and enforcement of the act; and
to establish remedies and fix penalties for violation of the act."
88.Editor's Note: Original Sections 7A-2, Purpose, and 7A-3, Definitions, which sections
immediately followed this section, were deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II.
89.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
90.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 124-1 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 124-3
124:143

ARTICLE II
Enforcing Agency
§ 124-4. Establishment.
§ 124-5. Qualifications.
§ 124-6. Term of office. [Amended 6-9-1987 by Ord. No. 87-7]
The term of office of the Construction Code Official and of all subcode
officials shall be four (4) years.
§ 124-7. Organization.
A. There is hereby established in the Borough of Hillsdale a State Uniform
Construction Code enforcing agency to be known as the "Hillsdale Code
Compliance Office," hereinafter referred to as "the Agency."91
B. The Agency shall consist of a Construction Official, Building Subcode
Official, Plumbing Subcode Official, Electrical Subcode Official, Fire
Protection Subcode Official and such other subcode officials for such
additional subcodes as the Commissioner of the Department of
Community Affairs shall hereafter adopt as part of the code; provided,
however, that in lieu of any subcode official hereinbefore designated,
the Borough may, pursuant to the applicable sections of the Act and of
the Regulations, provide for inspections by approved inspection
authorities referred to in the Regulations as on-site inspection
agencies.
C. There may also be appointed such assistants and staff as the Borough
Council may hereafter by resolution determine to be necessary for the
efficient and comprehensive administration of the code.
A. All persons appointed to any of the positions described in § 124-4 shall
have the qualifications required by the Act and by the Regulations for
such positions.
B. All on-site inspection agencies shall have been duly approved in
accordance with the requirements of the Act and of the Regulations.
A. The Construction Code Official shall be the chief administrator of the
Agency. All subcode officials, assistants and staff serving the Agency
shall be subject to the procedures and policies of the Agency and shall
be primarily responsible to the Construction Code Official for the
performance of their duties in the administration of the code.
B. The Construction Code Official shall be responsible for so organizing
the operations of the Agency that the plan review of each properly filed
and complete application by all subcode officials shall be undertaken,
91.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 124-4 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 124-7
124:145
§ 124-8. Administrative procedures.
completed and acted upon in the manner and within the applicable time
limitations prescribed by the Act and by the Regulations.
C. Except in case of emergency or unforeseen or unavoidable
circumstances, all transactions between the Agency and the public shall
occur at the central permit office of the Agency at the Borough Hall,
380 Hillsdale Avenue, Hillsdale, New Jersey.
A. The administration and enforcement procedures of the Agency shall be
conducted in conformity with the directives of the Act and of the
Regulations.
B. In addition to furnishing in the application filed with the Agency the
information and exhibits required by the Agency, the applicant shall
also file as a condition precedent to the processing of any application,
an application for a zoning permit as defined by the Municipal Land Use
Law.92 No application shall be processed by the Agency if the subject
matter of the application fails to qualify for a zoning permit.93
92.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
93.Editor's Note: Original Article 3, Board of Appeals, which article immediately followed this
section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 124-7 HILLSDALE CODE § 124-8
124:146
ARTICLE III
Fees
§ 124-9. Fees established. [Amended 10-14-1980 by Ord. No. 80-14;
11-24-1981 by Ord. No. 81-18; 12-27-1983 by Ord. No. 83-23;
4-9-1985 by Ord. No. 85-4; 6-13-1989 by Ord. No. 89-16; 6-14-1994
by Ord. No. 94-994]
The fee for a construction permit shall be the sum of the subcode fees listed
in Chapter 138, Fees, and shall be paid before the permit is issued.
94.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 124-9 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 124-9
124:147

ARTICLE IV
Fire Limits
§ 124-10. Establishment.
§ 124-11. Review.
A. The existing fire limits established in and by the Code of the Borough of
Hillsdale be and the same are hereby established as fire limits
hereunder, pursuant to the provisions of Article 37 of the Regulations.
B. Said fire limits are as follows: The "SP" Semipublic, "OR" Office
Research, "C" Commercial and "I" Industrial Districts as shown and
designated in Chapter 310, Land Use.
A. The Construction Official shall prepare and submit to the Borough
Council, biannually, a report reevaluating the delineation of the fire
limits.
B. Said report shall indicate the adequacy and extent of said fire limit
delineations and shall include the recommendations, if any, of said
officials, for revision of the fire limits, together with the reasons for
such recommendations.
§ 124-10 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 124-11
124:149

ARTICLE V
Variances
§ 124-12. Required findings.
No variations from the requirements of any subcode shall be permitted
unless there shall have been made the following findings:
§ 124-13. Application.
An application for a variation pursuant to this Article shall be filed in writing
with the Construction Official and shall set forth specifically:
§ 124-14. Review.
Within twenty (20) business days next succeeding the receipt by the
Construction Official of the application, it shall be denied or granted by
written order stating the reasons therefor. The application shall be deemed
denied for purposes of appeal if no decision is forthcoming within such
twenty-day period. Records of all applications for variation and actions
taken thereon shall be available for public inspection at the enforcing
agency during normal business hours.
§ 124-15. Final decision.95
The appropriate subcode official shall make the final determination with
respect to matters within his or her jurisdiction. The Construction Official
shall notify the applicant of that determination. Whenever an application
for a variation shall result in contradictory or inconsistent determinations
by different subcode officials having jurisdiction, the Construction Official
shall rule as to which subcode official's determination shall be final, and
A. That strict compliance with any specific subcode provision, if required,
would result in practical difficulty to the applicant;
B. That the variation, if granted, will not jeopardize the health, safety and
welfare of intended occupants and the public generally.
A. A statement of the requirements of the subcode from which a variation
is sought;
B. A statement of the manner by which strict compliance with said
provisions would result in practical difficulties;
C. A statement of the nature and extent of such practical difficulties; and
D. A statement of feasible alternatives to the requirements of the subcode
which would adequately protect the health, safety and welfare of the
occupants or intended occupants and the public generally.
95.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 124-12 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 124-15
124:151
shall notify the applicant of that ruling. A Construction Official certified in a
particular subcode may modify the determination of the subcode official.
§ 124-15 HILLSDALE CODE § 124-15
124:152
ARTICLE VI
Interpretation
§ 124-16. Minimum standards.
All standards and restrictions set forth in this chapter shall be interpreted
and applied as minimum requirements. Nothing herein contained shall be
construed to prohibit or prevent the use of higher or more restrictive
standards or requirements that may appear in any other lawfully applicable
statutes, ordinances, regulations, rules, deed restrictions or covenants.
§ 124-17. Land use ordinance.
Whenever the clear context of this chapter does not require a contrary
interpretation, this chapter shall be read in pari materia with Chapter 310,
Land Use.
§ 124-16 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 124-17
124:153
Chapter 126
CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND CHECKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 63.
§ 126-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH-RELATED RECREATIONAL PROGRAMS INVOLVING MINORS
— Any programs so designated by the Recreation Commission of the
Borough of Hillsdale.
CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD BACKGROUND CHECK — A determination
of whether a person has a criminal record by cross-referencing that
person's name and fingerprints with those on file with the Federal Bureau
of Investigation, Identification Division, and/or the State Bureau of
Identification of the New Jersey State Police.
CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD INFORMATION or CHRI — Information
collected by criminal justice agencies concerning persons and stored in the
computerized databases of the New Jersey State Police SBI Criminal History
Information System, the National Law Enforcement Telecommunications
System or other states' computerized repositories containing criminal
history record information consisting of identifiable descriptions and
notations of arrests, indictments, or other formal criminal charges, and
any dispositions arising therefrom, including convictions, dismissals,
correctional supervision and release.
DEPARTMENT — The Borough of Hillsdale Police Department.
NONCRIMINAL JUSTICE PURPOSE — Any purpose, other than
administration of criminal justice or criminal justice purpose, including
employment and licensing, for which applicant fingerprints and search
requests are submitted by authorized requesters, as required or permitted
by a federal or state statute, rule or regulation, executive order,
administrative code provision, local ordinance, resolution or by this chapter,
to the State Bureau of Identification for the dissemination of criminal
history record information.
NONPROFIT YOUTH-SERVING ORGANIZATION or ORGANIZATION —
Any corporation, association or other organization established pursuant to
Title 15 of the Revised Statutes, Title 15A of the New Jersey Statutes, or
other law of this state, but excluding public and nonpublic schools, and
which provides recreational, cultural, charitable, social or other activities
or services for persons younger than 18 years of age, and is exempt from
federal income taxes.
§ 124-17 HILLSDALE CODE § 126-1
124:154
STATE BUREAU OF IDENTIFICATION or SBI — The New Jersey State
Bureau of Identification created by P.L. 1930, c. 65 (N.J.S.A. 53:1-12 et seq.).
§ 126-2. Request for criminal background checks; costs.
§ 126-3. Submissions; exchange of information.
A. The Borough requires that, as a condition of employment or
volunteerism with the Borough, all prospective or current employees
and volunteers, 18 years of age and older, involved with Boroughrelated
recreational programs involving minors in which they have
regular, unsupervised contact with minors, request and consent in
writing through the Hillsdale Recreation Department, that the State
Bureau of Identification conduct a criminal history background check of
their record pursuant to the New Jersey State Police Volunteer Review
Operation Program, before involvement in any Borough-related
program, and repeated every three years. Each employee or volunteer
under this section shall also have an ongoing duty to report to the
Borough any new information that would be revealed by such a search.
B. The Division of State Police shall inform the Department and the
individual whether the person's criminal history record background
check reveals a conviction of a disqualifying crime or offense set forth
in § 126-4 of this chapter.
C. The Recreation Department shall request a criminal history record
background check only upon receipt of the written consent to the check
from the prospective or current employee or volunteer.
D. The employee, volunteer or nonprofit youth-serving organization shall
bear the costs associated with conducting the background check, in
accordance with fees established by the State Bureau of Identification
and the Division of State Police and in accordance with N.J.S.A.
15A:3A-2(d). The employee, volunteer or nonprofit youth-serving
organization may inquire as to the possible availability of grant money
that may be applied to help offset this cost.
E. Criminal history background checks will be performed for individuals
over the age of 18 in accordance with N.J.A.C. 13:59-1.1 et seq. and with
the procedures and guidelines adopted by the State Bureau of
Identification, Volunteer Review Operation.
A. Prospective or current employees and volunteers, 18 years of age and
older, involved with Borough-related recreational programs involving
minors in which they have regular, unsupervised contact with minors
shall submit their name, address, fingerprints, other required
information and written consent to the Department-designated service
provider for the criminal history record background check to be
performed and comply with all service provider requirements for the
check to be completed.
§ 126-1 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 126-3
124:155
§ 126-4. Disqualification from service.
§ 126-5. Information access, use and accuracy.
B. The Recreation Department shall act as a clearinghouse for the
collection and dissemination of information obtained as a result of
conducting criminal history record background checks pursuant to this
chapter.
A. A person may be disqualified from serving as an employee or volunteer
of a nonprofit youth-serving organization if that person's criminal
history record background check reveals a record of conviction of any
of the following crimes or offenses:
(1) In New Jersey, any crime or disorderly persons offense:
(a) Involving danger to the person, meaning those crimes and
disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1 et seq.,
2C:12-1 et seq., 2C:13-1 et seq., 2C:14-1 et seq., or 2C:15-1 et
seq.
(b) Against the family, children or incompetents, meaning those
crimes and disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A.
2C:14-1 et seq.
(c) Involving theft as set forth in Chapter 20 of Title 2C of the New
Jersey Statutes.
(d) Involving any controlled dangerous substance or controlled
substance analog as set forth in Chapter 35 of Title 2C of the
New Jersey Statutes except Paragraph (4) of Subsection (a) of
N.J.S.A. 2C:35-10.
(2) In any other state or jurisdiction, conduct which, if committed in
New Jersey, would constitute any of the crimes or disorderly
persons offenses described in Subsection A(1) of this section.
B. For purposes of interpreting the information recorded in a criminal
history record to determine the qualifications of the employee or
volunteer of a nonprofit youth-servicing organization and/or the
employee or volunteer involved with Borough-related recreational
programs involving minors, the Borough shall presume that the
employee or volunteer is innocent of any charges or arrests for which
there are no final dispositions on the record.
C. The determination of whether the information contained in the criminal
history record is sufficient to disqualify an employee or volunteer shall
be made by the Volunteer Review Operation. Any employee or volunteer
dissatisfied with the determination shall be entitled to file an appeal
with the Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel created pursuant to
this chapter.
§ 126-3 HILLSDALE CODE § 126-5
124:156
§ 126-6. Appeals.
A. Access to criminal history record information for noncriminal justice
purposes, including licensing and employment, is restricted to the
Police Department and Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel, on a
need-to-know basis, as authorized by federal or state statute, rule or
regulation, executive order, administrative code, local ordinance or
resolution regarding obtaining and dissemination of criminal history
record information obtained under this chapter.
B. Such persons or organizations shall limit their use of criminal history
record information solely to the authorized purpose for which it was
obtained, and criminal history record information furnished shall not be
disseminated to persons or organizations not authorized to receive the
records for authorized purposes. Use of this record shall be limited
solely to the authorized purpose for which it was given, and it shall not
be disseminated to any unauthorized persons. This record shall be
destroyed immediately after it has served its intended and authorized
purpose. Any person violating federal or state regulations governing
access to criminal history record information may be subject to criminal
and/or civil penalties.
C. If this criminal history record may disqualify an applicant or existing
employee or volunteer for any purpose, the disqualified person shall
have an opportunity to complete and challenge the accuracy of the
information contained in the criminal history record or request an
exception. The disqualified person shall be afforded a reasonable period
of time to correct and complete this record. A person is not presumed
guilty of any charges or arrests for which there are no final dispositions
indicated on the record.
A. Criminal background check appeal process. If the State Police
disqualifies an employee or volunteer, the employee or volunteer may
appeal that disqualification by filing a written notice of appeal with the
Chief of Police no later than 20 days after receiving notice of the
disqualification from the State Police. Any appeal requested shall
proceed before the Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel.
B. Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel. In order to monitor and
supervise the enforcement of this chapter, the Borough of Hillsdale
hereby creates a Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel, which shall
consist of three members. The composition of the Criminal Background
Check Appeal Panel shall be as follows:
(1) One member of the Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel shall
be the Police Chief, or his designee.
(2) One member of the Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel shall
be the Director of the Hillsdale Recreation Commission.
§ 126-5 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 126-6
124:157
Chapter 130
(RESERVED)
Chapter 132
DRUNK DRIVING FREE SCHOOL ZONES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 88.
§ 132-1. Designation of school crossings.
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of P.L. 1999, Ch. 185,96
the following is a list of school crossings which have been designated by the
Borough of Hillsdale.97
§ 132-2. Adoption of map.
The Drunk Driving Free School Zone Map by the Borough Engineer is
hereby approved and adopted as an official finding and record of the
location and areas within the municipality of property which is used for
(3) One member of the Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel shall
be a person selected by the Chief of Police.
C. Powers. The Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel is granted and
shall have and exercise, in addition to other powers herein granted, all
the powers necessary and appropriate to carry out and execute the
purposes of this chapter, including but not limited to the following:
(1) To hold hearings and adjudicate appeals by employees and
volunteers dissatisfied with the disqualification.
(2) To hold hearings and adjudicate appeals by employees and
volunteers dissatisfied with the determination concerning the
accuracy of the criminal history record.
(3) To grant exceptions where appropriate.
D. Findings. Not later than 45 days after the conclusion of the hearing, the
Criminal Background Check Appeal Panel shall issue its findings of fact
and the Panel's decision to the employee/volunteer involved in the
appeal and to the Recreation Department, which shall act in
accordance with the Panel's decision.
96.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2C:11-5.
97.Editor's Note: Contact the Borough Police Chief for the designated areas.
§ 126-6 HILLSDALE CODE § 132-2
132:158
school purposes and which is owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school on school land and of the areas on or within 1,000 feet of
such school property.
§ 132-3. Map and list to constitute official findings.
The Drunk Driving Free School Zones Map approved and adopted pursuant
to this chapter shall continue to constitute an official finding and record as
to the location and boundaries of areas on or within 1,000 feet of property
owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board
which is used for school purposes until such time, if any, that this chapter
shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions with respect to
the location and boundaries of school property and drunk driving free
school zones. The list of school crossings designated above by the Borough
Committee shall continue to constitute an official finding and record of the
location of school crossing zones within the Borough of Hillsdale until such
time, if any, that this chapter shall be amended to reflect any additions or
deletions with respect to school crossing zones in the Borough of Hillsdale.
§ 132-4. Changes in locations or boundaries.
The School Board or the chief administrative officer in the case of any
private or parochial school is hereby directed and shall have the continuing
obligation to promptly notify the office of the Borough Engineer and the
Borough Attorney of any changes or contemplated changes in the location
and boundaries of any property owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or school board and which is used for school purposes or
of any additions or deletions to school crossings.
§ 132-5. Original map and list to be on file; copies.
The Borough Clerk is hereby directed to receive and to keep on file the
original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to this chapter and
the list of school crossings and to provide at a reasonable cost a true copy
thereof to any person, agency or court which may from time to time request
such a copy, along with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the
map approved and adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby further
directed that a true copy of such map and list and of this chapter shall be
provided without cost to the Bergen County Clerk and to the office of the
Bergen County Prosecutor.
§ 132-6. Map and list as evidence.
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
A. It is understood that the map and list approved and adopted pursuant to
this chapter was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence in
prosecutions arising under the criminal and traffic laws of this state and
that, pursuant to state law, such map and list shall constitute prima
facie evidence of the following:
§ 132-2 DRUNK DRIVING FREE SCHOOL ZONES § 132-6
132:159
Chapter 138
FEES
§ 138-1. Fees: Chapter 1, General Provisions. [Added 4-14-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-3; amended 11-12-2013 by Ord. No. 13-10]
Type of Use Fee
Sale of Borough of Hillsdale Code book $150
§ 138-2. Fees: Chapter 51, Article III, Public Defender. [Added
4-4-2007 by Ord. No. 07-14]
Type Fee
In the discretion of the Municipal Judge up to $200
§ 138-3. Fees: Chapter 71, Swimming Pool Commission. [Last
amended 3-3-2020 by Ord. No. 20-04]
The RATES FOR 2019 are included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 138-4. Fees: Chapter 84, Alarm Systems.
Type of Use Fee
Connection fee, maximum $50
§ 138-5. Fees: Chapter 88, Alcoholic Beverages.
Type of Use Fee
License fees:
Plenary retail consumption license
[Amended 8-10-2004 by Ord. No. 04-18]
$2,500
Plenary retail distribution licenses
[Amended 8-10-2004 by Ord. No. 04-18]
$2,500
(1) The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
municipality.
(2) The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
such schools or a School Board.
(3) That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes.
(4) The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000
feet of such school property.
(5) The location of all school crossings in the Borough of Hillsdale.
§ 132-6 HILLSDALE CODE § 138-5
132:160
Type of Use Fee
Club licenses $50
Application filing fee $50
§ 138-6. Fees: Chapter 92, Amusements.
Type of Use Fee
Article I, Amusement Businesses.
Each miscellaneous amusement business of
temporary character, per day
$25
Article II, Automatic Amusement Devices.
Application fee $50
Annual license fee, each automatic amusement
device
$300
License application, per month or any part of a
month
$25
§ 138-7. Fees: Chapter 96, Animals. [Amended 10-2-2001 by Ord.
No. 01-19; 8-10-2004 by Ord. No. 04-18; 10-7-2008 by Ord. No.
08-14; 10-4-2011 by Ord. No. 11-18; 10-8-2013 by Ord. No. 13-12]
Type of Use Fee
A. Article I, Dogs.
Borough registration license and tag $15
Non-spayed/non-neutered license $18
Late fee From $10 to $15
Animal population control $3
State registration fee $1
Pilot Clinic Fund $0.20
Potentially dangerous dogs $200
Annual license fee for kennels:
Where accommodations are provided for 10 dogs
or fewer
$10
Where accommodations are provided for more
than 10 dogs
$25
Annual license for pet shop $10
B. Article II, Cats.
License fees:
Borough registration, license and tag $15
§ 138-5 DRUNK DRIVING FREE SCHOOL ZONES § 138-7
132:161
Type of Use Fee
Late fee From $10 to $15
Nonspayed/nonneutered license fee $18
In the event that the Animal Control Officer
retrieves a lost dog or cat and holds the animal for
collection
$60
C. Emergency call.
(1) An animal owner may obtain the release of
his/her animal impounded due to an
emergency call by the payment of a recovery
fee in the amount of $75.00, which shall be
made payable to the Hillsdale Police
Department. No owner or person keeping or
harboring a dog/cat shall be permitted to
claim an impounded dog/cat, unless a license
and registration tag can be produced to the
Police Department showing dog/cat
ownership.
(2) A fee of $75 will be imposed on any and all
emergency calls out when the Borough incurs
a payment for an emergency call out from the
Borough's service provider for such. This
amount shall be due and payable by the
animal's owner or animal's responsible party
that caused that emergency call out to occur.
§ 138-8. Fees: Chapter 100, Auctions.
Type of Use Fee
License fee $150
§ 138-9. Fees: Chapter 124, Construction Codes, Uniform.
[Amended 4-14-1998 by Ord. No. 98-3; 5-11-1999 by Ord. No. 99-11;
8-8-2000 by Ord. No. 00-11; 3-6-2001 by Ord. No. 01-03; 3-6-2007
by Ord. No. 07-10; 4-5-2011 by Ord. No. 11-06; 2-10-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-02]
Construction permit fee (the fee for a construction permit shall be the sum
of the subcode fees listed herein and shall be paid before the permit is
issued).
The Borough of Hillsdale permit fees shall not at any time be less than
those provided in N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.20 of the New Jersey Uniform Construction
Code.
Plan review fee:
§ 138-7 HILLSDALE CODE § 138-9
132:162
New construction, additions or renovations. The plan review fee shall be
20% of the permit fee for proposed improvements and is included in the
building subcode fee.
Building subcode fees. The fee for work under the building subcode shall be
as follows:
New buildings and additions. Permit fees shall be based upon the volume
of the structure. Volume shall be computed in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:23-2.28. The building permit fee shall be $0.040 per cubic foot of volume
for residential buildings and structures and $0.050 for all other use groups;
State of New Jersey training fees shall be $0.00371 per cubic foot volume
of new construction and additions, the fee for all other construction shall
be $1.90 per $1,000 value of construction in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5.23-4.19(b).
Renovations, alterations, including but not limited to; decks, roofing, siding
and repairs.
The fee for residential work shall be $26 per $1,000 of the estimated
cost of the work, with a minimum fee of $75; the fee for all other use
groups shall be $30 per $1,000 of the estimated cost of the work with
a minimum fee of $150. For the purpose of determining estimated cost,
the applicant shall submit to the enforcing agency, if available, cost data
produced by the architect or engineer of record or by the contractor. A bona
fide contractor's bid, if available, shall be submitted. The enforcing agency
will make the final decision regarding estimated cost. The building subcode
permit includes a plan review fee which is 20% of the permit fee.
Reinstatement fees for lapsed construction permits shall be as follows:
Recalculation of the construction permit shall be based upon the current
fee schedule for all work to be performed. The fee shall be 25% of the
recalculated fees, with a minimum permit fee of $100 per subcode.
Permit Fee
Principal building $1,250
Additions less than 120 square feet of floor area $250
121 square feet of floor area and greater $500
Accessory building $250
Sheds greater than 100 square feet $100
Swimming pools:
Permit fees for in-ground pools, in addition to
electric, plumbing, fire and fence permits
$300
Aboveground pools shall require a permit fee of in
addition to electric, plumbing, fire and fence
permits
$75
§ 138-9 DRUNK DRIVING FREE SCHOOL ZONES § 138-9
132:163
Permit Fee
The fee for a swimming pool which requires subcode permits includes
plan review fees as part of the subcode permit, which is 20% of the
subcode fee
Retaining walls. The fee for a residential retaining wall with a surface
area greater than 550 square feet shall be $150. The fee for residential
retaining walls with a surface area of 550 square feet or less shall be $75.
The fee for a retaining wall of any other use group of any size shall be
based on the cost of the construction.
Tennis courts; fence installation $200
Asbestos hazard abatement permit $106
Certificate of occupancy for abatement $21
Plumbing subcode fees. The fees for installation of the following type of
fixtures under the plumbing subcode shall be as follows:
Type of Use Fee
Bathroom fixture, each $20
Floor drain $20
Sink $20
Residential dishwasher $20
Drinking fountain $20
Washing machine $20
Hose bib $20
Initial fuel piping (install or replace) $75
Additional gas piping connections, per $20
Extension of existing baseboard heating $25
Water heater (install or replace) $65
Boiler installation and replacement $80
Sewer pump or ejector $60
Interceptor/separator $50
Backflow preventer $35
Greasetrap $75
Water-cooled air-conditioning or refrigeration unit $75
Sewer connection $80
Water service connection (installation and
replacement)
$55
Gas service connection (installation and
replacement)
$50
§ 138-9 HILLSDALE CODE § 138-9
132:164
Type of Use Fee
Commercial dishwasher (installation and
replacement)
$75
Water cooler $20
Water softener $20
Reduced-pressure backflow device $35
Vent stack $25
Dry well $40
Minimum plumbing permit fee for residential $75
Minimum plumbing permit fee for commercial $150
A plan review fee of 20% is included in the plumbing subcode fees as
listed above.
Demolition permits. The fee for demolition permits shall be:
Type Fee
Principal building, residential $300
Principal building, all other use groups $750
Accessory building, all use groups $150
Relocation of building $26 per $1,000 of the
estimated cost of
moving, plus the
estimated cost of a
new foundation and
all work necessary to
place the building in
its completed
condition in the new
location
Permit Fee
Signs. This fee shall be in addition to any Planning
Board application fee which may be required
$2 per square foot of
surface area of the
sign, with a minimum
fee of $100
Fences (This fee shall be in addition to any
Planning Board application fees which may be
required
$75, which includes
the plan review fee
Certificate of occupancy fees shall be as follows:
Each new residential structure 10% of the total of
the permit fees, with
a minimum of $150
§ 138-9 DRUNK DRIVING FREE SCHOOL ZONES § 138-9
132:165
Permit Fee
Each new structure, all other use groups 10% of the total of
the permit fees, with
a minimum of $250
Each residential addition/alteration 10% of the total of
the permit fees, with
a minimum of $80
Each addition/alteration, all other use groups 10% of the total of
the permit fees, with
a minimum of $120
Each new business, industrial $120
Each unit or condominiums or townhouses $80
Each commercial tenant or change of use $80
Continued occupancy letter $80
Miscellaneous certifications, each request for
written clarification of any sort. This shall include
but not be limited to requests for floodplain
information, availability of sewers, or inquiries
into the requirement for certificates of code
compliance upon resale of residential property
and requests for zoning permits
$100
The fee for a temporary certificate of occupancy $35
The fee for a change of contractor $15
The fee for an application for a variation $65
Fire subcode fees. The fees under the fire subcode shall be as follows:
Type of Use Fee
Alarm systems (including alarm, supervisory and
signaling devices):
1 to 5 devices $75
Each additional over 5 $5
Exit signs and emergency lights $20
Signaling devices $100
Flammable liquid storage tanks $250
Combustible liquid storage tanks $150
Liquid gas storage tanks $100
Sprinkler system:
Wet or dry protection system
Up to 49 heads $200
§ 138-9 HILLSDALE CODE § 138-9
132:166
Type of Use Fee
50 to 99 heads $300
Over 99 heads $400
Kitchen hood exhaust systems, commercial $150
Kitchen fire protection system $100
Other fire protection system $125
Gas- or oil-fired appliance $65
Fireplace or woodburning stove $100
Gasoline pump $180
MPD (multiple product dispenser) $200
Residential storage tank installation, removal or
abandonment
$150
Commercial storage tank installation, removal or
abandonment
$250
Standpipes, per riser $200
Chimney liner $75
Smoke control system $100
Incinerator $260
Minimum fire subcode fee for residential $75
Minimum fire subcode fee for commercial $150
Plan review fee of 20% of the permit fee is included
in fire subcode fees as listed above
Electrical subcode fees. The fees for installation or replacement under the
electrical subcode shall be:
Type Fee
Fixtures, including lighting fixture, 1 to 35 fixtures $75
Additional receptacle, switch, smoke/heat detector,
alarm device/F.A.C. panel, signaling device,
thermostat, emergency and exit light,
communication point, motor or electrical device of
less than 1 horsepower or less than 1 kilowatt
$2 each
Steam unit $25
Light pole, each $20
Swimming pool, in-ground $125
Pool heater $25
Swimming pool, aboveground $75
Storable pool, spa or hot tub $75
§ 138-9 DRUNK DRIVING FREE SCHOOL ZONES § 138-9
132:167
Type Fee
Bonding or grounding $75
KW range $20
Surface cooktop $20
KW dryer $20
KW dishwasher $20
HP garbage disposal $20
KW central air-conditioning unit:
1 to 6 tons, up to 20 hp/kw $75
7 to 15 tons, to 40 hp/kw $100
16 to 30 tons, 41 to 75 hp/kw $150
Over 30 tons, over 76 hp/kw $200
Air handler $40
Baseboard heating:
1 to 6 kw $20
6 to 15 kw $40
HP motors:
1 to 10 hp motors, each $15
Over 10 hp motors, each $50
KW transformer/generator:
1 to 10 kw $65
11 to 20 kw $100
21 to 50 kw $150
51 to 100 kw $200
Over 100 kw $400
Transfer switch $40
AMP service:
Up to and including 200 AMP $100
201 to 800 AMP $175
Over 800 AMP $500
AMP motor-control center $75
Photovoltaic systems:
Panels up to 50 kw $100
Panels 51 to 100 kw $150
Panels over 100 kw $457
§ 138-9 HILLSDALE CODE § 138-9
132:168
Type Fee
Invertors 1 to 10 kw $25
Invertors 11 to 50 kw $50
Invertors 51 to 100 kw $125
Disconnects $25
Electric sign/outline light $40
Annual inspection of public swimming pools, spas
and/or hot tubs:
$50
Minimum fee for residential electrical permit $75
Minimum fee for commercial electrical permit $150
§ 138-10. Fees: Chapter 140, Filming, Commercial and Movie.
[Added 9-5-2007 by Ord. No. 07-24]
Type Fee
Basic fee (movies, commercials) for filming on
private property
$400 per day
minimum, plus $100
per vehicle
Additional fee (movies, commercials) for filming
on public land, streets, right-of-way, or public
buildings
$500 per day
Additional fee (use of public property for filming
or storage purposes)
**
Additional fee (Use of Borough vehicles) **
Escrow deposit fee as determined by
department heads, to
be returned 10 days
after completion of
filming; extension of
filming shall require
additional escrow
** as per estimate by department head(s)
§ 138-11. Fees: Chapter 146, Fire Prevention. [Amended 3-6-2001
by Ord. No. 01-03; 2-13-2007 by L.L. No. 07-04]
Article I, Enforcement of Uniform Code.
Business registration and late registration fees and reinspection fees. (Fees
apply to each business at each street address.)
§ 138-9 DRUNK DRIVING FREE SCHOOL ZONES § 138-11
132:169
Registration Reinspection Fees
Building
Size
Annual
Fee Late Fee First Second Third
Class A:
less than
2,000 sq.
ft
$75 $75 $0 $125 $200
Class B:
2,001 to
5,000 sq.
ft
$150 $150 $0 $150 $250
Class C:
5,001 to
10,000 sq.
ft
$250 $250 $0 $250 $300
Class D:
over
10,001 sq.
ft
$350 $350 $0 $350 $400
Multiple-family dwellings registration and late registration fees and
reinspection fees. (Fees apply to each street address.)
Registration Reinspection Fees
Building
Size
Annual
Fee Late Fee First Second Third
Class E:
minimum
fee for 1 to
4 units
$100 $100 $0 $100 $200
Class F:
per unit
over the
minimum
$20
§ 138-12. Fees: Chapter 192, Taxicabs. [Amended 11-12-2013 by
Ord. No. 13-10]
Type of Use Fee
Certificate, each taxicab $50
§ 138-11 HILLSDALE CODE § 138-13
132:170
§ 138-13. Fees: Chapter 208, Noise.
Type of Use Fee
Permit fee or variance application $100, unless waived by
the Borough Council for a
private, nonprofit agency
§ 138-14. Fees: Chapter 212, Outdoor Cafes. [Amended 6-4-2010 by
Ord. No. 12-11]
Type of Use Fee
Application fee $100
§ 138-15. Fees: Chapter 218, Parking Lots. [Added 10-8-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-11; amended 12-12-2006 by Ord. No. 06-16; 5-8-2007 by
Ord. No. 07-19; 10-4-2011 by Ord. No. 11-18; 11-12-2013 by Ord.
No. 13-10]
A. Hillsdale Railroad Station commuter parking:
Type Fee
Annual fee, January 1 through December 31 (an
annual 5% increase in said fee each year thereafter)
$405
July 1 through December 31, 75% of the annual
permit amount, rounded up to the nearest dollar
$304
Daily fee $5
All permits nonrefundable.
B. Parking regulations West Lot:
Type Fee
Annual cost of parking decal, January 1 through
December 31 (an annual 5% increase in said fee
each year thereafter)
$132
July 1 through December 31 (an annual 5% increase
in said fee each year thereafter), 75% of the annual
permit amount, rounded up to the nearest dollar
$99
One additional decal per household (an annual 5%
increase in said fee each year thereafter), 50% of the
annual permit amount, rounded up to the nearest
dollar.
$66
Daily parking $2
All permits nonrefundable.
For purposes of this section "household" shall be defined as those who
dwell under the same roof and compose a family.
§ 138-13 DRUNK DRIVING FREE SCHOOL ZONES § 138-16
132:171
§ 138-16. Fees: Chapter 224, Peddling and Soliciting. [Amended
4-14-1998 by Ord. No. 98-3; 12-8-1998 by Ord. No. 98-21; 10-7-2008
by Ord. No. 08-14;10-4-2011 by Ord. No. 11-18; 11-12-2013 by Ord.
No. 13-10]
Type of Use Fee
Each application; this is a nonrefundable fee $50
§ 138-17. Fees: Chapter 228, Property Maintenance. [Amended
2-13-2007 by Ord. No. 07-03; 4-5-2011 by Ord. No. 11-06]
Type of Use Fee
Article II, Residential Property.
Certificate of occupancy $100
Reinspection fee $50
§ 138-18. Fees: Chapter 230, Records. [Added 4-10-2007 by Ord. No.
07-17; amended 11-12-2013 by Ord. No. 13-10]
All copying cost shall be established in accordance with rates set by state
laws and regulations, supplemented as follows:
Type Fee
§ 138-19. Fees: Chapter 240, Sewers. [Amended 11-12-2013 by Ord.
No. 13-10]
Type of Use Fee
Application fee:
Minimum Borough fee $350
§ 138-20. Fees: Chapter 248, Soil Movement. [Amended 7-12-2011
by Ord. No. 11-12]
Volume of Soil
(cubic yards) Filing Fee
Escrow Deposit For
Costs
Up to 25 $25 0
Over 25 $75 $350
Over 50 $75 $800
Over 200 $75 $1,000
Over 500 $150 $2,000
Over 1,000 $300 $3,000
§ 138-16 HILLSDALE CODE § 138-20
132:172
Volume of Soil
(cubic yards) Filing Fee
Escrow Deposit For
Costs
Over 5,000 $600 $4,000
Over 10,000 $1,200 $5,000
* Soil volume based on the movement of all soil within the property, i.e.,
import, export as well as movement of any existing soil.
** Requires performance guarantee greater than 200 cubic yards, unless
waived by the Borough Engineer.
Topographic plan required for all volume greater than 50 cubic yards,
unless waived by the Borough Engineer.
Resubmission fee: $175 required when application is deemed incomplete
and requires additional review by Borough Engineer.
§ 138-21. Fees: Chapter 256, Stonybrook Swim Club.
Type of Use Fee
Temporary identification card $5
§ 138-22. Fees: Chapter 260, Streets and Sidewalks. [Amended
10-7-2008 by Ord. No. 08-14]
Type of Use Fee
Article I, Grading Construction, Paving and
Repairing.
For constructing, removing, repairing or replacing
sidewalks and occupying streets with construction
materials and equipment, for:
Less than 25 square feet of sidewalk:
Fee None
Deposit None
From 25 square feet to and including 249 square
feet of sidewalk:
Fee $25
Deposit $50
From 250 square feet to and including 499 square
feet of sidewalk:
Fee $25
Deposit $100
§ 138-20 DRUNK DRIVING FREE SCHOOL ZONES § 138-22
132:173
Type of Use Fee
From 500 square feet to and including 749 square
feet of sidewalk:
Fee $25
Deposit $150
From 750 square feet to and including 999 square
feet of sidewalk:
Fee $25
Deposit $200
Any curb reconstruction
Fee $25
Deposit $50
Deposit for permit to cross over or upon the curb
or paved sidewalk with any horse, cart, wagon,
truck or other vehicle
$25
Article II, Openings and Excavations.
Permit for public utility opening and inspection fee $50
Permit and inspection fee when Borough Engineer
makes inspection
$125
Deposit for pavement replacement $50 per square yard
Deposit for maintenance of trench:
All pavements (older than 3 years) $1.50 per square
yard, $10 minimum
All pavements (younger than 3 years) $7.50 per square yard
Dirt shoulders $0.50 per square yard
Deposit for Borough sidewalk replacement $12 per square yard
Winter period fees Add 50% to the above
fees
Reinspection fee $25
Street obstruction of any type container From $6 to $12
§ 138-23. Fees: Chapter 268, Target Ranges.
Type of Use Fee
Application fee $5
§ 138-22 HILLSDALE CODE § 138-24
132:174
§ 138-24. Fees: Chapter 272, Autocabs/limousines or livery service.
[Amended 11-12-2013 by Ord. No. 13-10]
Type of Use Fee
Limousine service
Taxi owner's license per year/service or portion
thereof
$50
Limousine driver
Taxi driver's license per year/vehicle $10
§ 138-25. Fees: Chapter 284, Traveling Shows, Carnivals and
Circuses.
Type of Use Fee
Annual license $1,000
Temporary license $500
§ 138-26. Fees: Chapter 288, Vehicles, Abandoned.
Type of Use Fee
Storage per vehicle $10 per day for the
first 30 days of
storage; $50 per day
for the 31st day of
storage and any day
thereafter
§ 138-27. Fees: Chapter 310, Land Use. [Amended 4-14-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-3; 10-2-2001 by Ord. No. 01-19; 8-10-2004 by Ord. No.
04-18; 2-10-2015 by Ord. No. 15-02]
Type of Use Fee
Minor subdivision:
Filing fee $500
Deposit for costs $2,000
Major subdivision without site plan approval or
conditional use approval:
Preliminary approval:
Filing fee $750 plus $150 per
lot
Deposit for costs $3,500 plus $250 per
lot
Final approval:
§ 138-24 DRUNK DRIVING FREE SCHOOL ZONES § 138-27
132:175
Type of Use Fee
Filing fee $750 plus $150 per
lot
Deposit for costs $1,500
Major subdivision requiring site plan approval or
conditional use approval:
Preliminary approval:
Filing fee $750 plus $150 per
lot
Deposit for costs $3,500 plus $250 per
lot
Final approval:
Filing fee $750 plus $150 per
lot
Deposit for costs $1,500
Soil removal, whether or not in connection with
subdivision or site plan approval:
Filing fee $50 plus $0.03 per
cubic yard of soil to
be moved
Deposit for costs yard of soil to be moved $500 plus $0.05 per
cubic
Conditional use approval:
Filing fee $250
Deposit for costs $1,000
Major site plan approval:
Preliminary approval:
Filing fee $500
Deposit for costs $3,500
Final approval:
Filing fee $500
Deposit for costs $1,500
Minor site plan approval:
Filing fee $500
Deposit for costs $2,000
Use variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(d):
Filing fee $250
Deposit for costs $1,000
§ 138-27 HILLSDALE CODE § 138-27
132:176
Type of Use Fee
Hardship or bulk variance pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D 70(c):
Filing fee $150
Deposit for costs $600
Applications for one single-family residence or a
one-single-family residential lot in a residential
zone
Deposit for costs $600
Any other application to the Planning Board:
Filing fee $250
Deposit for costs $600
Mailing copies of decisions (in addition to
photocopying charge)
$5
Furnishing list of owners entitled to $0.25 per name or
notice $10, whichever
is greater
Signs:
Temporary signs $24 per calendar year
regardless of the
number of signs and
their duration used
Permanent signs $50 per application
Initial deposit for engineering review and
inspection costs in connection with plot plan
approval
$350
Certificate as to approval of subdivision of land as
set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56 et seq.
$10
Deposit for transcription of appeals $50 or estimated cost
of transcription,
whichever is less
Signs [no fee shall be charged for any sign that
does not exceed three square feet in area, and
identifies the occupant of the premises on which it
is displayed (such as a professional announcement
sign) or advertises for sale or for rent the premises
on which it is displayed]
$0.25 per square foot;
minimum fee of $10
Appeal from Zoning Officer pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70a
$250
Deposit for costs $600
§ 138-27 DRUNK DRIVING FREE SCHOOL ZONES § 138-27
132:177
Type of Use Fee
Interpretation of ordinance pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70b
Filing fee $250
Deposit for costs $600
Sale of Land Use and Land Use Index booklet $20
Sale of Master Plan $50
Zoning permit application:
New structure, initial $150
New structure, (each) resubmission $100
Addition/alteration, initial $150
Addition/alteration, (each) resubmission $100
Decks, patios, retaining walls, walkways,
driveways, porticos, pergolas, A/C units,
generators, all fences, all sheds, hot tubs,
stanchions, initial review
$75
All listed above, resubmission $50
Trees removal/replacement review $75
Signs, temporary or permanent, initial $75
Signs, temporary or permanent, (each)
resubmission
$50
Pools, aboveground $75
Pools, In-ground, initial $100
Pools, In-ground, (each) resubmission $75
New business CO zoning review $80
General zoning review, not listed above, initial $75
General zoning review, resubmission $50
Miscellaneous certifications, each request for
written clarification of any sort
$100
§ 138-28. Fees: Miscellaneous Fees. [Added 11-12-2013 by Ord. No.
13-10]
A. Police personnel. [Added 10-11-2005 by Ord. No. 05-16; amended
10-7-2008 by Ord. No. 08-14; 10-4-2011 by Ord. No. 11-18;
11-12-2013 by Ord. No. 13-10]
§ 138-27 HILLSDALE CODE § 138-28
132:178
§ 138-29. Summer Camp and Recreation Program Fees. [Amended
4-3-2018 by Ord. No. 18-04; 4-2-2019 by Ord. No. 19-04]
The Hillsdale Summer Camp season for children of Hillsdale and River Vale
residents and for children attending Hillsdale schools (St. John's included)
shall operate camp for a maximum of 5 weeks.
Type of Use Fee
Administrative fee (to cover cost of payroll,
processing and vendor billing)
25% of officer's total
salary
Police vehicles $25 per hour
B. Garage sales; fee per permit: $101. [Added 11-12-2013 by Ord. No.
13-10[1]]
C. Tax Collector lienholder calculation fee: $50 (as per N.J.S.A. 54:5-97.1).
[Added 4-5-2011 by Ord. No. 11-06]
D. The Mayor may collect a fee for performing marriage and civil union
ceremonies as follows: [Added 4-5-2011 by Ord. No. 11-08]
(1) During Borough Hall business hours: $50.
(2) After Borough Hall business hours: $75.
(3) Outside of Hillsdale: $100.
E. Convenience fee of up to 3% for all credit card and debit card
transactions for the Borough.
A. The Summer Camp Fees per registrant for the year 2019 are as follows:
Hillsdale/ River
Vale Resident
St. John's
Student/ Non-
Resident
Camp Pascack,
Grades 1 — 4
$850 $900
Camp Adventure,
Grades 5 — 6
$900 $950
Field Trip Camp,
Grades 7 — 9
$950 $975
Late registration
fee after May 7,
2019
$50 $50
Before Camp
Program (8:00 —
9:00 am)
Pre-Registered (all weeks) $180 $185
§ 138-28 DRUNK DRIVING FREE SCHOOL ZONES § 138-29
132:179
Hillsdale/ River
Vale Resident
St. John's
Student/ Non-
Resident
Pre-Registered (per week) $60 $60
Pre-Registered (per day) $20 $20
No pre-registration (per day) $25 $25
After Camp
Program (3:00 p.m.
— 6:00 p.m.)
Pre-Registered (all weeks) $340 $345
Pre-Registered (per week) $100 $100
Pre-Registered (per day) $25 $25
No pre-registration (per day) $30 $30
Late pick-up (after 6:00 pm, $15 $15
Per 15-minute increment.)
NO REFUNDS
B. The Recreation Program Fees per registrant for the year 2019 are as
follows:
Hillsdale
Resident Non-Resident
Men's Basketball $70 $70
Duplicate Bridge $20 $35
Indoor Soccer $55 $60
Youth Basketball (1,2,3 clinic
Grade)
$60 $60
Youth Basketball (3rd to 8th
Grade,
$85, per child $85
Youth Basketball (9th to 12th
Grade, *RV) $85, each child
$85
Women's Volleyball $45 $45
Girls Instructional Volleyball $55 $55
Men's 18 & over Softball $400/per team N/A
Men's 35 & over Softball $50 $55
Women's 18 & over Softball $50 $55
Wrestling $140 $140
Rutgers Coaches Class $45 $45
§ 138-29 HILLSDALE CODE § 138-29
132:180
Hillsdale
Resident Non-Resident
Art Program, per class or
(session)
$95 - $100 N/A
Cooking per class or (session) $5-100 N/A
PGA Golf Program $100 N/A
Tennis Program $100 N/A
Ski Program $50-$100 $50-$100
First Friends (per child) $5-10 $5-10
Ice Skating $125-130 $125-130
Returned Check Fee $20 $20
Car show participant's $20-30 $20-30
Vendors (car show) $30-$50 $30-$50
5k run (rover clover) $5-$75 $5-$75
Late Fee $25 $25
Credit Card Convenience Fee 3% 3%
Use of Beechwood Park rental
Band
Shell & picnic area ** $35 $250
Use of Beechwood Park —
Field Use
$40 $60
Field rental* non-Hillsdale
Team
$60 per practice
(max 3 hours)
Field rental *non-Hillsdale
Team
$60 per game
(max 3 hours)
Field rental *non-Hillsdale
Team
$150 per game
with lights (max 3
hours)
• Beechwood, Memorial,
Stonybrook and Centennial
Fields.
All programs and field rentals
are NON-REFUNDABLE.
** No Organized Sport or
teams.
*Grades 9-12 includes Pascack
Valley High School Students
(River Vale) including all girls
3rd to 9th grade.
§ 138-29 DRUNK DRIVING FREE SCHOOL ZONES § 138-29
132:181
Chapter 140
FILMING, COMMERCIAL AND MOVIE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 138.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 188.
Noise — See Ch. 208.
§ 140-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FILMING — The taking of still or motion pictures, either on film, video tape,
or similar recording medium, intended for commercial use for viewing on
television, in the theaters or for advertising purposes.
NEWS STORIES — The reporting or summarizing of information concerning
something that has either recently taken place or of current events of
general interest and includes such features commonly known as newscasts,
news bulletins and news anthology programs.
NOT FOR PROFIT — Charitable, religious and other organizations
qualifying pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code or its
successor.
§ 140-2. Permit required; issuance.
A. No person shall film or permit filming within the Borough of Hillsdale
without first obtaining a permit, which permit shall set forth the
location of such filming and the date or dates when filming shall take
place.
B. Permits shall be obtained in the office of the Borough Clerk, and the
application permit shall be in a form approved by the Borough Clerk
and shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth herein,98 or as may
hereafter be established by ordinance. Permits shall be issued in
accordance with the procedures governing the issuance of licenses and
permits, generally appearing as Chapter 188 hereof.99
C. A permit shall be sufficient to authorize outdoor or indoor filming and
outdoor filming within a defined period of time. If the filming does not
take place on the dates specified in the permit due to inclement
weather or other good cause, the Borough Clerk may issue a new
permit at no additional fee.
98.Editor's Note: See Ch. 138 fees.
99.Editor's Note: See Ch. 188 Licenses and Permits.
§ 138-29 HILLSDALE CODE § 140-2
140:182
§ 140-3. Conditions for issuance of permit.
No permit shall be issued for filming within the Borough of Hillsdale unless
the applicant for such permit:
D. The Borough reserves the right to limit the number of permits for any
location within any calendar year unless a waiver is obtained.
A. Provides liability insurance coverage for bodily injury of not less than
$1,000,000 per person and $2,000,000 aggregate coverage; property
damage of not less than $500,000 per incident and $1,000,000
aggregate.
B. Specifies in writing that the Borough of Hillsdale will be indemnified
and saved harmless from any and all liability or damages.
C. Obtains the permission of the owners where the filming takes place on
private property.
D. Agrees to comply with all lawful directives issued by the Hillsdale Police
Department, Fire Department and other departments where deemed
necessary and to reimburse the Borough of Hillsdale for any police, fire
or other Borough personnel.
E. Delivers to the Borough an escrow deposit in an amount equal to 125%
of the amount of estimated expenses for personnel and equipment in
accordance with fees established by the head of Police, DPW and Fire
Code Departments. Such escrow shall be held by the Borough escrow
account pending completion of the filming or the expiration of the
permit. The escrow may be used by the Borough to reimburse the
Borough for any costs required to be paid by the applicant hereunder or
for additional expense incurred by the Borough in conjunction with the
filming.
F. Provides notice to property owners of properties located, and residents
residing, within 750 feet of the property lines of the premises for which
the permit is requested, as measured along public streets. Such notice
shall be in writing and shall advise the property owner or resident of the
date or dates upon which filming is to take place and the location of the
premises where the filming is to take place. Such notice shall either be
personally served or served by certified mail/return receipt requested
upon the property owners or residents entitled to receive notice at least
seven days prior to the commencement of filming. Service by certified
mail shall be complete upon the receipt of such mail by the residents
and property owners. Upon the written request of the applicant, the
Borough shall, within 72 hours, make and certify a list from the current
tax duplicates of the addresses of property located within the Borough
of Hillsdale within 400 feet of the property lines of the premises for
which the permit is requested, together with the names and addresses
of the record owners thereof. Notice to owners and residents of
properties in adjoining municipalities shall be given by personal service
§ 140-2 FILMING, COMMERCIAL AND MOVIE § 140-3
140:183
§ 140-4. Regulations.
or by certified mail to the clerk of such adjoining municipality. Failure
to give notice to a resident or property owner of premises not shown
on the list shall not invalidate the permit. Prior to commencing filming,
the applicant shall file an affidavit of proof of service with the Borough
Clerk.
A. In residential zones, all activity including filming shall be permitted
only Monday through Friday between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00
p.m. or sundown, whichever is earlier. Filming shall not take place on
those days on which municipal activities and sporting events are not
permitted.
B. The holder of a permit shall conduct filming in such a manner as to
minimize the inconvenience or discomfort to adjoining property owners
attributable to such filming. The holder shall avoid any interference
with previously scheduled activities upon public lands and limit, to the
extent possible, any interference with normal public activity on such
public lands.
C. The holder of a permit shall take all reasonable steps to minimize the
creation and spread of debris and rubbish during filming and shall be
responsible for removing all equipment, debris and other rubbish from
the filming location daily and upon completion of filming or the
expiration of the permit, whichever comes first. Should the holder of
the permit fail to remove all equipment, debris and other rubbish within
the time period specified, the Borough may remove same at the expense
of the applicant and the applicant shall reimburse the Borough for the
cost thereof.
D. The applicant shall notify the Borough Clerk at least 72 hours before
filming in order to give the Borough Clerk sufficient opportunity to
notify the affected departments so that they may have an authorized
representative inspect the site and take such other measures as may be
necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare.
E. The holder of the permit shall comply with all lawful directives issued
by the Hillsdale Public Safety Department and comply with all other
applicable laws. When, in the judgment of the Director of Public Safety,
or his designee, the presence of police, fire or code enforcement
personnel are required in connection with the filming, the applicant
shall reimburse the Borough for the cost of such personnel.
F. The holder of the permit shall not conduct filming in such a manner as
to preclude access to adjoining properties from the public street or to
encroach upon adjoining property without the express written consent
from the owner and occupant thereof.
G. Vehicles used in connection with the filming, including vehicles of
personnel associated with such filming, shall be parked off the public
§ 140-3 HILLSDALE CODE § 140-4
140:184
§ 140-5. Denials and revocation of permits.
In accordance with the procedures governing the denial and revocation of
permits appearing in hereof, the Borough Clerk may refuse to issue a permit
or revoke a permit, whenever he determines, on the basis of objective
facts and after a review of the application and a report thereon by the
Police Department and by other agencies involved with the proposed filming
site, that filming at the location and/or time set forth in the application
would violate any law or ordinance or would unreasonably interfere with
the public's use of public lands, unreasonably interfere with the use and
enjoyment of adjoining properties, unreasonably impede the free flow of
vehicular or pedestrian traffic or otherwise endanger the public's health,
safety or welfare.
§ 140-6. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Borough Clerk granting, denying
or revoking a permit may appeal to the Borough Council with 10 days of the
denial.
§ 140-7. Waivers.
The Borough Administrator may authorize a waiver of any of the
requirements or limitations of this chapter if he determines that strict
compliance with such limitations will impose an unreasonable burden upon
the applicant and that such a permit may be issued without endangering
the public's health, safety and welfare; providing, however, the Borough
Administrator shall report any such waiver to the Borough Council at its
next meeting giving the reasons for the waiver.
right-of-way to the maximum extent permitted. Vehicles should not
be parked so as to encroach on private property without the express
written consent from the owner/occupant thereof. Vehicles parked in
the public right-of-way shall comply with all applicable parking and
traffic regulations. Vehicles parked or located in violation hereof may
be towed by the Borough of Hillsdale, and the cost thereof shall be
reimbursed to the Borough by the applicant.
H. The holder of the permit shall not suffer or permit any lights used in
connection with the filming to shine directly into any windows upon any
other property nor suffer or permit any noise, in excess of the limitation
specified in the Borough's noise ordinances,100 to extend across
property lines. In the event of a violation hereof, the Borough may abate
such violation and charge the cost thereof to the applicant who shall
reimburse the Borough for such cost.
100. Editor's Note: See Ch. 208, Noise.
§ 140-4 FILMING, COMMERCIAL AND MOVIE § 140-8
140:185
§ 140-8. Fees.
The fee schedule for permits authorized under this chapter shall be as
follows in accordance with the application annexed as may be amended
from time to time by the Borough Council.101
§ 140-9. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter relating to the requirement for and the
issuance of permits shall not apply to the filming of news stories and notfor-
profit organizations; provided, however, that such filming shall comply
with the following restrictions:
A. In residential zones, such filming shall, to the extent possible, occur
only Monday through Friday between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00
p.m. or sundown, whichever is earlier.
B. Such filming shall be conducted in such a manner as to minimize the
inconvenience or discomfort to adjoining property owners or the
interference with previously scheduled activities or normal public
activities upon public lands.
C. Such filming shall be conducted so as to minimize the creation and
spread of debris and rubbish during filming and, upon the completion of
the filming, those conducting the filming shall remove all equipment,
debris and other rubbish from the filming location.
D. To the extent practical, advance notification shall be furnished to the
Borough Clerk of such filming.
E. Such filming shall comply with all lawful directives issued by the
Hillsdale Police, Fire and Code Enforcement officers and officials.
F. Such filming shall be conducted in such a manner as not to preclude
access to adjoining properties from the public street or to encroach
upon adjoining property without the express written permission from
the owner and occupant thereof.
G. Vehicles used in connection with the filming, including vehicles of
personnel associated with such filming, shall be parked off the public
right-of-way to the maximum extent permitted. Vehicles should not be
parked as to encroach upon private property without the express
written consent from the owner or occupant thereof. Vehicles parked in
the public right-of-way shall comply with all applicable parking and
traffic regulations. Vehicles parked or located in violation hereof may be
towed by the Borough of Hillsdale and the cost thereof shall be
reimbursed to the Borough by the owner thereof.
H. Lights used in connection with the filming shall not shine directly into
any window upon other property nor shall any noise from the filming
101. Editor's Note: See Ch. 138, Fees.
§ 140-8 HILLSDALE CODE § 140-9
140:186
§ 140-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any part of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not to
exceed $2,500 or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both.
Chapter 142
FIREARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 208. Penalties — See Ch. 226.
§ 142-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIREARM — Includes any pistol, revolver, rifle, shotgun, machine gun,
automatic and semiautomatic rifle or other firearm as the term is commonly
used, or any gun, device or instrument in the nature of a weapon from
which may be fired or ejected any solid projectile, ball, slug, pellet, missile
or bullet, or any gas, vapor or other noxious thing, by means of a cartridge
or shell or by the action of an explosive or the igniting of flammable or
explosive substances. "Firearm" shall also include, without limitation, any
firearm which is in the nature of any air gun, spring gun or pistol, carbon
dioxide or compressed air gun or pistol or other weapon of a similar nature
in which the propelling force is a spring, elastic band, carbon dioxide,
compressed or other gas, or vapor, air or compressed air, or is ignited by
compressed air, and ejecting a bullet or missile smaller than 3/8 of an inch
in diameter, with sufficient force to injure the person.
§ 142-2. Discharge of firearms prohibited; exception.
No person shall discharge any firearm within the Borough, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter.
§ 142-3. Persons exempted.
The provisions of section § 142-2 of this chapter shall not apply to any
person:
extend across property lines in excess of the limitation specified in the
Borough's noise ordinance.102
A. Who is within the limits of a Borough target range duly approved by the
Borough Council.103
102. Editor's Note: See Ch. 208, Noise.
103. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 140-9 FIREARMS § 142-3
142:187
§ 142-4. Violations and penalties.105
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the provisions of Chapter 226, Penalties.
Chapter 146
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 29.
Alarm systems — See Ch. 84.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 124.
Fees — See Ch. 138.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 146.
Penalties — See Ch. 226.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 228.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 292.
Land use — See Ch. 310.
B. Who is authorized to discharge firearms in accordance with and in the
time and manner provided by law.104
C. Who is actually engaged in the defense of life, person or property.
104. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 23:1-1 et seq., as amended, for state regulation of hunting.
105. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 142-3 HILLSDALE CODE § 142-4
142:188
ARTICLE I
Enforcement of Uniform Code
[Adopted 4-11-1990 as part of Ord. No. 90-5 (Ch. 10, Art. 2, of the
Revised Ordinances of 1972)]
§ 146-1. Local enforcement.
Pursuant to Section II of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P. L. 1983, c. 383
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.), the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code shall be
locally enforced in the Borough of Hillsdale.
§ 146-2. Enforcing agency designated.
The local enforcing agency shall be the Bureau of Fire Prevention which is
hereby created in the Hillsdale Fire Department.
§ 146-3. Duties. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
The Hillsdale Fire Prevention Board shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety
Act and the codes and regulations adopted under it in all buildings,
structures and premises within the geographical boundaries of the Borough
of Hillsdale, other than owner-occupied one- and two-family dwellings
(unless so invited by the owner), and shall faithfully comply with the
requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the Uniform Fire Code.
§ 146-4. Life hazard uses.
The local enforcing agency established by § 146-2 shall carry out the
periodic inspections of life hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire Code
on behalf of the Commissioner of Community Affairs.
§ 146-5. Organization. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
The local enforcing agency established by § 146-2 of this Article shall be
under the supervision of the Fire Official of the Bureau of Fire Prevention
who shall report to the Chief of the Fire Department.
§ 146-6. Appointments; term of office; removal.
A. Fire Official. The local enforcing agency shall be under the direct
supervision of the Fire Official of the Bureau of Fire Prevention. The
Fire Official shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council upon
recommendation of the Chief of the Fire Department and the Board of
Fire Officers.
B. Term of office. The Fire Official shall serve for a term of one year. Any
vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term. [Amended 5-13-1997
by Ord. No. 97-8]
C. Inspectors and employees. Such inspectors and employees as may be
necessary in the local enforcing agency shall be appointed by the Mayor
§ 146-1 FIREARMS § 146-6
142:189
§ 146-7. Board of Appeals.
Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-206 and 52:27D-208), any person aggrieved by any order of the
local enforcement agency shall have the right to appeal to the Construction
Board of Appeals of the County of Bergen.
§ 146-8. Additional required inspections and fees.
§ 146-9. Permit application fee.
The application fee for a permit shall be as established by N.J.A.C.
5:18-2.8(c).
§ 146-10. Nonprofit corporations.
All nonprofit corporations, including churches, schools, fraternal
organizations and other corporations which are classified as nonprofit
corporations under Title 15A of the New Jersey Nonprofit Act, shall not be
required to pay any of the inspection fees and permit fees set forth above.
This exemption shall also apply to all buildings owned by the Borough of
Hillsdale. This exemption shall only extend to inspection and permit fees,
and Council upon recommendation of the Chief of the Fire Department
and the Board of Fire Officers.
D. Removal from office. The Mayor and Council, upon recommendation
from the Board of Fire Officers, may remove the Fire Official and any
inspectors and other employees for inefficiency, misconduct or other
just cause. The Fire Official and each inspector or employee so removed
shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard by the appointing
authority.
A. Inspections. In addition to the inspections required pursuant to the
Uniform Fire Safety Act and the regulations adopted thereunder, all
buildings, structures and uses within the Borough of Hillsdale, except
for owner-occupied one- and two-family dwelling units and dwelling
units within two-family and multifamily dwellings, shall be inspected for
compliance with the Uniform Fire Code not less than once per year.
B. Fees. The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall enforce those fees required to
be charged pursuant to the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the regulations
adopted thereunder. The fees to be charged for those inspections and
reinspections (as required) conducted pursuant to Subsection A of this
section shall be as provided in Chapter 138, Fees, and shall be paid on
an annual basis within 60 days of notification, with a late charge penalty
equal to the annual fee (N.J.A.C. 5:70-2 et seq.) A separate fee applies to
each business (income-producing properties) at each street address.
[Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8; 3-6-2001 by Ord. No.
01-03; 5-13-2003 by Ord. No. 03-10]
§ 146-6 HILLSDALE CODE § 146-10
142:190
and the activities of the nonprofit corporations shall not be exempt from any
other aspect of the Fire Code, including registration and compliance.
§ 146-11. Smoke detectors.
Smoke detectors shall be required in all buildings of mixed use where
residential use is included. The regulations for maintenance of hotels and
multiple dwellings concerning smoke detectors and smoke alarms is hereby
incorporated by reference to determine the type of equipment and
placement requirements.
§ 146-12. Violations and penalties. [Added 5-13-1997 by Ord. No.
97-8]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this article shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 226, Penalties.
§ 146-10 FIREARMS § 146-12
142:191

ARTICLE II
Fire Zones
[Adopted 4-11-1990 as part of Ord. No. 90-5 (Ch. 22, Art. 15, of the
Revised Ordinances of 1972)]
§ 146-13. Scope.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any vehicle or
place any obstruction on lands in the Borough of Hillsdale, whether publicly
or privately owned, after notice has been posted as hereinafter provided by
the owner, occupant, lessee or licensee prohibiting such parking.
§ 146-14. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIRE LANE/ZONE — Areas designated by the Fire Official and properly
posted and marked in accordance with this article. The terms "fire zone"
and "fire lane" shall be interchangeable.
FIRE OFFICIAL — The Borough of Hillsdale Official or their designated
representative, as defined N.J.A.C. 5:18 Uniform Fire Code.
§ 146-15. General regulations.
A. Enforcement. This article shall be enforced by the Police Department of
the Borough of Hillsdale.
B. Fire lanes on private property.
(1) Designation. The Fire Official, with the approval of the Fire Chief
and Chief Law Enforcement Officer, may designate fire lanes on
private property to which the public is invited or which is devoted
to public use, if it is necessary to provide safety for the public or to
provide proper access for Fire Department operations in the event
of an emergency. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
(2) Notification. Whenever a determination has been made for the fire
lane designation, pursuant to subsection B(1), the Fire Official shall
notify the owner of the property, in writing, by registered or
certified mail, or by hand-delivering such notice, specifically
describing the area designated and the reason for making the
designation.
C. The marking of fire zones shall be the responsibility of, and at the
expense of, the owner and shall be accomplished within 30 days of the
receipt of the notification. Suitable signs and/or markings bearing the
words "No Parking Fire Zone" shall be posted and marked and striped
in accordance with standards established by the Fire Prevention
Bureau and shall be properly maintained on said lands by the owner,
occupant, lessee or licensee thereof where this Article is effective and
§ 146-13 FIREARMS § 146-15
142:193
§ 146-16. Standards for delineation of fire zones.
All fire zones shall be striped and signs posted in the following manner:
as are approved by the Fire Official. Defacing, tampering with,
damaging such signs or allowing them to deteriorate so as to reduce
their effectiveness to notify when posted shall constitute a violation of
this Article.
D. Removal of obstructions. A police officer shall remove or have removed
such obstructions or vehicles as may violate this Article at the expense
of the owner of the premises, in the case of obstructions, or at the
expense of the owner of the vehicle.
A. Signs:
(1) All signs shall be twelve by eighteen (12 x 18) inches in size.
(2) Light-reflective material shall be used for the sign background and
lettering.
(3) All signs, shall be placed not more than 100 feet center-to-center.
Whenever the fire zone changes angle or direction more than 60º, a
sign is to be placed at the point of change, and a sign is required at
the beginning and end of the zone. In all circumstances, a sign shall
be visible from another sign. Additional signs may be required at
the discretion of the Fire Prevention Bureau, the Municipal Code
Official or the Hillsdale Police Department. [Amended 5-13-1997
by Ord. No. 97-8]
(4) The sign shall be placed at a height of seven feet as measured from
the ground surface to the bottom of the sign at a forty-five-degree
angle facing the direction of flow.
(5) The fire sign shall state "NO PARKING FIRE ZONE."
B. Striping: stripe shall be four inches wide:
(1) All fire zones shall be striped at a width of four feet as specified by
the Fire Prevention Bureau.
(2) The lettering "NO PARKING FIRE ZONE" shall be placed within the
striped outer boundary lines of zone at a minimum of one-hundredfoot
intervals.
(3) The lettering shall be 18 inches in height and shall be placed within
the center of the fire zone.
(4) Paint for all lettering and striping shall be yellow in color. Striping
and lettering must be reflectorized.
§ 146-15 HILLSDALE CODE § 146-17
142:194
§ 146-17. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No.
97-8]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this Article shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 226, Penalties.
§ 146-17 FIREARMS § 146-17
142:195

ARTICLE III
Key Boxes
[Adopted 9-14-1993 as Ord. No. 93-13]
§ 146-18. Purpose.
The purpose of this Article is to ensure that Fire Department personnel gain
immediate and reliable access to structures within the Borough in order to
facilitate proper lifesaving and other firefighting purposes, where access to
structures is unduly difficult because of secured openings or other hazards.
§ 146-19. Key boxes required. [Amended 8-11-2015 by Ord. No.
15-16]
§ 146-20. Type; contents; installation. [Amended 8-11-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-16]
The key box shall be of a type approved by the Fire Official, shall contain
keys to gain necessary access as required by the Fire Official, and shall
be installed in a manner approved by the Fire Official. The Fire Official
shall require a key box tamper switch connected to the building's fire alarm
system.
§ 146-20.1. FDC caps required. [Added 8-11-2015 by Ord. No.
15-16]
FDC caps shall be required to be installed on all Fire Department sprinkler
connections and Fire Department stand pipes.
A. The Fire Official shall require a "key box rapid entry system" ("Knox" or
similar), to be installed in all nonresidential zones in an accessible
location where immediate access is necessary to verify the existence of
a fire or other emergency in these buildings equipped with or required
to be equipped with, fire detection or fire suppression systems or
equipment.
B. All new commercial and/or manufacturing buildings constructed after
the effective date of this section, all existing commercial and/or
manufacturing buildings which undergo remodeling in excess of $1,000
after the effective date of this section, and all existing commercial and/
or manufacturing buildings, when requested by the Borough Fire
Official, shall be provided with a key box rapid entry system at a
location approved by the Fire Prevention Bureau. Such box shall be
provided with master keys necessary for access to all portions of the
premises. Such box and keys shall be provided prior to occupancy and/
or final inspection.
C. All buildings equipped with elevators shall be provided with a key box
rapid entry system as in the preceding subsection.
§ 146-18 FIREARMS § 146-21
142:197
§ 146-21. Enforcement.
The Fire Official and Fire Subcode Official shall enforce the provisions of
this Article.
§ 146-22. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No.
97-8; 8-11-2015 by Ord. No. 15-16]
Any building owner violating the requirements of this article, after receiving
due notice by the Fire Official, shall be subject to a fine up to $500.
§ 146-21 HILLSDALE CODE § 146-22
142:198
ARTICLE IV
Fire Hydrants
[Adopted 8-11-2015 by Ord. No. 15-16]
§ 146-23. Access required.
To insure access to fire hydrants in all nonresidential zones in the Borough
of Hillsdale for the safety and welfare of the public, a clear area of three
feet must be maintained in all directions from the fire hydrant as well as
meeting the road side parking requirements.
§ 146-24. Responsibility for clear space; time limit.
The owner or lessee of any property within three feet of a fire hydrant
shall be responsible to see that a three-foot clear space is provided in all
directions from the fire hydrant. The requirements of this section shall be
completed by the responsible party not later that 24 hours after any natural
obstruction such as snow shall prevent access to the fire hydrant and within
12 hours of any other type of obstruction.
§ 146-25. Violations and penalties.
Failure of any person in maintaining the open space for all fire hydrants, in
accordance with this section, shall be deemed a violation of the Fire Safety
Code.
§ 146-23 FIREARMS § 146-25
142:199
Chapter 154
FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 124.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 146.
Penalties — See Ch. 226.
Sewers — See Ch. 240.
Soil movement — See Ch. 248.
Land use — See Ch. 310.
§ 146-25 HILLSDALE CODE § 146-25
142:200
ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization; Findings of Fact; Purpose and Objectives
§ 154-1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq.
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry. Therefore, the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Hillsdale
of Bergen County, New Jersey does ordain as follows:
§ 154-2. Findings of fact.
§ 154-3. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
A. The flood hazard areas of the Borough of Hillsdale are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, causes damage in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
A. Protect human life and health;
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
§ 154-1 FIREARMS § 154-3
142:201
§ 154-4. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 154-3 HILLSDALE CODE § 154-4
142:202
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 154-5. Terms defined.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
AH ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by one-percent-annual-chance
shallow flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are
between one and three feet. Base flood elevations (BFEs) derived from
detailed hydraulic analyses are shown in this zone.
AO ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by one-percent-annual-chance
shallow flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average
depths are between one and three feet.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Construction Official's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO or AH Zone on a
community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a one-percentannual
or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding
is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year. It is shown on the FIRM as Zone V, VE, V1-30, A, AO, A1-A30,
AE, A99, or AH.
BASE FLOOD — A flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The flood elevation shown on a
published Flood Insurance Study (FIS) including the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM). For Zones AE, AH, AO, and A1-30 the elevation represents
the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
CUMULATIVE SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure that equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure at the time of the
improvement or repair when counted cumulatively for 10 years.
§ 154-5 FIREARMS § 154-5
142:203
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood
hazard.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A non-basement building i) built, in the case of a
building in an area of special flood hazard, to have the top of the elevated
floor elevated above the base flood elevation plus freeboard by means of
piling, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of
the water, and ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural
integrity of the building during a flood up to the magnitude of the base
flood. In an area of special flood hazard, "elevated building" also includes a
building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with
openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
EROSION — The process of gradual wearing a way of land masses.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report in which the
Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the
Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
§ 154-5 HILLSDALE CODE § 154-5
142:204
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 0.2
foot.
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and
floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the
hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed or existing walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for the
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor provided that such
enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable non-elevation design requirements of 44 CFR 60.3.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 154-5 FIREARMS § 154-5
142:205
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
— A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation adopted
by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is i] built on a single chassis;
ii] 400 square feet or less when measured at the longest horizontal
projections; iii] designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
a light duty truck; and iv] designed primarily not for use as a permanent
dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel,
or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — [For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
No. 97-348)] includes substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such as
the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of pilings, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings or piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual "start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a
gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
§ 154-5 HILLSDALE CODE § 154-5
142:206
damage occurred. "Substantial damage" also means flood-related damages
sustained by a structure on two or more separate occasions during a tenyear
period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood
event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25% of the market value of the
structure before the damages occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure during a ten-year period the
cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure
before the start of construction of the improvement. Substantial
improvement also means "cumulative substantial improvement." This term
includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of
the actual repair work performed or repetitive loss. The term does not,
however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter that
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A new or substantially improved structure or
other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or
other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10),
(e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
B.
§ 154-5 FIREARMS § 154-5
142:207

ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 154-6. Lands to which this chapter applies.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Borough of Hillsdale of Bergen County, New Jersey.
§ 154-7. Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
§ 154-8. Penalties for noncompliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, relocated to, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails
to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof, be
punishable as provided in Chapter 226, Penalties, and in addition shall pay
all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall
prevent the Borough of Hillsdale from taking such other lawful action as is
necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
§ 154-9. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 154-10. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Borough of Hillsdale,
Community No. 340043 are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study, Bergen
County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)" dated August 28, 2019.
(2) "Flood Insurance Rate Map for Bergen County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions)" as shown on Index and panels 34003C0089H,
34003C0093H, 34003C0094H, 34003C0181H, 34003C0182H,
whose effective date is August 28, 2019.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and maps are on file at 380
Hillsdale Avenue, Hillsdale, New Jersey.
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
§ 154-6 FIREARMS § 154-10
142:209
§ 154-11. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
A. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special
flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of
Hillsdale, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 154-10 HILLSDALE CODE § 154-11
142:210
ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 154-12. Establishment of development permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins, including placement of manufactured homes, within any area of
special flood hazard established in § 154-7. Application for a development
permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Construction Official and
may include, but not be limited to; plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing
the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question;
existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities;
and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is
required:
§ 154-13. Designation of the local administrator.
The Construction Official is hereby appointed to administer and implement
this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in
accordance with its provisions.
§ 154-14. Duties and responsibilities of the administrator.
Duties of the Construction Official shall include, but not be limited to:
A. Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
B. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been
floodproofed;
C. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 154-17B; and
D. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
A. Permit review.
(1) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway,
assure that the encroachment provisions of § 154-18A are met.
B. Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood elevation
and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with section
§ 154-12 FIREARMS § 154-14
142:211
§ 154-7, Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard, the
Construction Official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any
base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state
or other source, in order to administer § 154-17A, Specific standards,
residential construction, and B, Specific standards, nonresidential
construction.
C. Information to be obtained and maintained.
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
(2) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
§ 154-12C.
(3) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Alteration of watercourses.
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Flood Control and the Land
Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the
Federal Insurance Administration.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood-carrying capacity
is not diminished.
E. Substantial damage review.
(1) After an event resulting in building damages, assess the damage to
structures due to flood and nonflood causes.
(2) Record and maintain the flood and nonflood damage of substantial
damage structures and provide a letter of substantial damage
determination to the owner and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Flood Control.
(3) Ensure substantial improvements meet the requirements of
§ 154-17A, Specific standards, residential construction, B, Specific
standards, nonresidential construction and C, Specific standards,
manufactured homes.
F. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. Make interpretations where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
§ 154-14 HILLSDALE CODE § 154-14
142:212
§ 154-15. Variance procedure.
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict
between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in § 154-15.
A. Appeal Board.
(1) The Planning Board as established by Borough Council shall hear
and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
(2) The Planning Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Construction Official in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Planning Board, or any
taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Superior Court, Law
Division, as provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Planning Board shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
§ 154-14 FIREARMS § 154-15
142:213
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of § 154-15A(4) and the purposes
of this chapter, the Planning Board may attach such conditions to
the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the
purposes of this chapter.
(6) The Construction Official shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any variances
to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
B. Conditions for variances.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items
in § 154-15A(4) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases
beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for
issuing the variance increases.
(2) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as an historic structure and the variance is the
minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design
of the structure.
(3) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
§ 154-15 HILLSDALE CODE § 154-15
142:214
or victimization of the public as identified in § 154-15A(4), or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(6) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
§ 154-15 FIREARMS § 154-15
142:215

ARTICLE V
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
§ 154-16. General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards, compliance with the applicable
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23) and the
following standards, whichever is more restrictive, is required:
A. Anchoring.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
C. Utilities.
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters;
(3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
(4) For all new construction and substantial improvements, the
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
D. Subdivision proposals.
§ 154-16 FIREARMS § 154-16
142:217
§ 154-17. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in § 154-7, Basis for establishing the areas of
special flood hazard or in § 154-14B, Use of other base flood data, the
following standards are required:
(1) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(2) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize
flood damage;
(3) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage; and
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed new development which contain at
least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
E. Enclosure openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings in at least two exterior
walls of each enclosed area, having a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than
one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
or other covering or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Residential construction.
(1) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure located in an A or AE Zone shall have the lowest floor,
including basement together with the attendant utilities (including
all electrical, heating, ventilating, air-conditioning and other
service equipment) and sanitary facilities, elevated at or above the
more restrictive, base flood elevation plus one foot, or as required
by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1;
(2) Require within any AO or AH Zone on the municipality's DFIRM
that all new construction and substantial improvement of any
residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including
§ 154-16 HILLSDALE CODE § 154-17
142:218
basement together with the attendant utilities and sanitary
facilities, elevated above the depth number specified in feet plus
one foot above the highest adjacent grade (at least three feet if no
depth number is specified), and require adequate drainage paths
around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away
from proposed structures.
B. Nonresidential construction. In an area of special flood hazard, all new
construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure located in an A or AE Zone
shall have the lowest floor, including basement together with the
attendant utilities and sanitary facilities as well as all electrical,
heating, ventilating, air-conditioning and other service equipment:
(1) Either:
(a) Elevated at or above the more restrictive, base flood elevation
plus one foot, or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1; and
(b) Require within any AO or AH Zone on the municipality's FIRM
to elevate above the depth number specified in feet plus one
foot above the highest adjacent grade (at least three feet if no
depth number is specified), and require adequate drainage
paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around
and away from proposed structures;
(2) Or:
(a) Be floodproofed so that below the more restrictive, base flood
elevation plus one foot, or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14,
Table 6-1, the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water;
(b) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
(c) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth in § 154-14C(2)(b).
C. Manufactured homes.
(1) Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
§ 154-16A(2).
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall:
(a) Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(b) Be constructed to minimize flood damage;
§ 154-17 FIREARMS § 154-17
142:219
§ 154-18. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 154-7 are areas
designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area
due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles,
and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
(c) Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage;
(d) Be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the top of the
lowest floor is at or above the more restrictive, base flood
elevation plus one foot, or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14,
Table 2-1.
(e) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced
piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent
strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade
and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement.
A. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
B. If § 154-18A is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements must comply with Article V, Provisions For Flood Hazard
Reduction.
C. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
accumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than two-tenths foot at
any point.
§ 154-17 HILLSDALE CODE § 154-18
142:220
ARTICLE VI
Severability
§ 154-19. Provisions severable.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter, which shall remain in
full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this chapter are
hereby declared to be severable.
§ 154-19 FIREARMS § 154-19
142:221

ARTICLE VII
Enactment
§ 154-20. Adoption.
This chapter shall be effective on July 16, 2019, and shall remain in force
until modified, amended or rescinded by Borough of Hillsdale, Bergen
County, New Jersey.
§ 154-20 FIREARMS § 154-20
142:223
Chapter 158
GAMES OF CHANCE
§ 158-1. Sunday bingo and raffles.
Games of chance, as defined in the Bingo Licensing Law (N.J.S.A. 5:8-24 et
seq.), in the Raffles Licensing Law (N.J.S.A. 5:8-50 et seq.) and in Chapter
47 of Title 13 of the New Jersey Administrative Code, may hereafter be
conducted in the Borough of Hillsdale on Sunday by any person holding a
valid license to do so duly issued by the Borough of Hillsdale pursuant to
and in compliance with said statutes and code.
Chapter 162
GARAGE SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auctions — See Ch. 100.
Fees — See Ch. 138.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 188.
Penalties — See Ch. 226.
Land use — See Ch. 310.
§ 162-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARAGE SALE — Includes every general sale that —
TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY — Property previously purchased,
owned, utilized or otherwise in the lawful possession of a resident occupant
of the residence at which the garage sale occurs. It does not include goods,
merchandise or property purchased for resale or obtained on consignment,
or any exemptions set forth under § 162-12 of this chapter.106
Is conducted from or on premises in any residential district as defined
and delineated by Chapter 310, Land Use.
A.
B. Is open to the general public.
C. Is conducted for the purpose of selling tangible personal property.
Is a sale commonly referred to as a "garage," "attic," "basement,"
"porch," "lawn," "barn," "yard," "flea market," "rummage" or similar
sale.
D.
106. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 154-20 HILLSDALE CODE § 162-2
158:224
§ 162-2. Property permitted to be sold.
No person shall sell or offer for sale from or on premises in any residential
district any tangible personal property other than pursuant to a permit
lawfully procured under this chapter.
§ 162-3. Permit required.
No person shall conduct or participate in the conduct of a garage sale
unless a permit for such sale shall have lawfully been issued pursuant
hereto.
§ 162-4. Permit application.107
Application for a garage sale permit shall be made on forms prescribed by
the Borough Clerk and shall be filed with the Borough Clerk not less than
three (3) days prior to the date of the proposed garage sale. No fee shall be
charged for the issuance of the permit.
§ 162-5. Information required.
The application shall include the following information:
§ 162-6. Permit conditions.
No permit shall be issued:
A. The full name and address of the applicant.
B. The full name and address of the premises on which the proposed
garage sale is to be conducted.
C. The full name and address of the owner or lessee of the premises.
D. The date or dates upon which the sale is to be held.
E. The date or dates upon which all previous garage sales on the premises
were held within the preceding twelve-month period.
F. An affirmative certification that the applicant has read and understands
the provisions of this chapter and that all statements made and
information given by the applicant are true.
G. The signature of the applicant.
H. The signature of the owner of the premises.
A. For a garage sale that will be of more than three (3) consecutive days'
duration; or
B. For a garage sale on premises on which a garage sale has been held
twice during the twelve-month period next preceding the date of the
107. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 162-2 GARAGE SALES § 162-6
162:225
§ 162-7. Display of permit.
The person to whom the permit is issued shall cause the permit to be posted
at a place on the premises so as to be visible from the street and to be
maintained at such place throughout the entire period of the sale.
§ 162-8. Advertising signs.
No person shall display or cause or permit to be displayed signs relating to
a proposed garage sale other than as follows:
§ 162-9. Hours of sale.
No person shall conduct or participate in the conduct of a garage sale other
than between the hours of 9 a.m. and 6 p.m.
§ 162-10. Parking.
All parking of vehicles shall be conducted in compliance with all applicable
laws and ordinances. Further, the Police Department may enforce
proposed garage sale; provided, however, that if a garage sale is not
held on the dates for which the permit is issued or is terminated during
the first day of the sale because of inclement weather conditions and
an affidavit to this effect is submitted by the permit holder, the Borough
Clerk may issue another permit to the applicant for a garage sale to be
conducted at the same location within thirty (30) days from the date
when the first sale was to be held.
A. Two (2) signs permitted. Two (2) signs of not more than four (4) square
feet shall be permitted to be displayed on the property of the residence
where the garage sale is to be conducted.
B. Directional signs. Two (2) signs of not more than two (2) square feet
each shall be permitted, provided that written permission to erect said
signs is received from the property owner upon whose property such
signs are to be placed.
C. Time limitations. No sign shall be exhibited for more than two (2) days
prior to the day such sale is to commence.
D. Removal of signs. Signs must be removed each day at the close of the
garage sale activities or by the end of daylight, whichever first occurs.
In the event that a sign is not removed within the required time, the
Police Department of the Borough of Hillsdale is empowered to remove
the sign.108
E. Fee. No further permit for the signs shall be required, nor shall any fee
be charged therefor.
108. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 162-6 HILLSDALE CODE § 162-10
162:226
temporary controls to alleviate any special hazards and/or congestion
created by any garage sale.
§ 162-11. Orderly conduct.109
The person to whom such permit is issued and the owner or tenant of the
premises on which such sale is conducted shall be jointly and severally
responsible for the maintenance of good order and decorum on the
premises during all hours of such sale. Such persons shall not permit any
loud or boisterous conduct on said premises. All such persons shall obey
the reasonable orders of any member of the Police or Fire Department of
the Borough of Hillsdale in order to maintain the public health, safety and
welfare. The premises shall at all times be subject to such reasonable rules
as may be made from time to time by the Borough Council of the Borough
of Hillsdale and shall be subject to inspection at all times by the Land Use
Officer, Chief Law Enforcement Officer and Fire Chief, or any of their agents
or any other duly authorized representatives of the Borough of Hillsdale.
§ 162-12. Persons and sales exempt.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply or to affect the following
persons or sales:
§ 162-13. Enforcement.110
This chapter shall be enforced by the Land Use Officer or the Police
Department of the Borough.
§ 162-14. Violations and penalties.
The provisions of Chapter 226, Penalties, of the Code of the Borough of
Hillsdale shall be applicable to the enforcement and administration of this
chapter.
A. Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
B. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
C. Persons selling or advertising for sale an item or items of personal
property which are specifically named or described in the
advertisement, and which separate items do not exceed five (5) in
number.
D. Sales conducted by mercantile or other business establishment from or
at a place of business wherein such sale would be permitted by Chapter
310, Land Use, by virtue of a variance or by virtue of its status as a
nonconforming use.
109. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
110. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 162-10 GARAGE SALES § 162-14
162:227
Chapter 166
GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS
§ 166-1. Hours of operation.111
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to conduct a business
of a gasoline service station in the Borough of Hillsdale before 5:00 a.m.
and after 12:00 a.m. midnight. The hours referred to in this chapter shall be
either Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Saving Time, whichever
is in effect in the Borough of Hillsdale.
§ 166-2. Violations and penalties.112
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 226, Penalties.
Chapter 171
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Commission — See Ch. 25.
Fire Department — See Ch. 29.
Police Department — See Ch. 63.
Solid waste — See Ch. 252.
Solid waste management — See Ch. 358.
§ 171-1. Purpose.
A. This chapter provides for the reimbursement for, or the replacement of,
any and all equipment utilized by the Borough of Hillsdale, for costs
expended, without regard to ownership, for the purpose of mitigating,
controlling, or containing any incident in which a hazardous material is
involved in a fire, leak, release or spill, or where the potential thereof
exists, or for the prevention of same.
B. This chapter also provides for the reimbursement for the expenses
incurred by the Borough for the overtime wages paid to its employees,
agents or servants and the costs of medical or hospital treatment for
injuries sustained by any employee, agent or servant of the Borough
resulting from an incident involving a hazardous material and any
miscellaneous expenses incurred by the Borough from an incident
involving a hazardous material.
111. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
112. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 162-14 HILLSDALE CODE § 171-1
166:228
§ 171-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EXPENDABLE ITEMS — Any items used to extinguish any fire and/or stop
or control or contain any leak or spill involving any hazardous material
which cannot be reused or cannot be replenished without cost after that
particular fire, leak or spill. These include but are not restricted to firefighting
foam, chemical extinguishing agents, absorbent material, sand,
recovery drums, and specialized protective equipment to include, but not be
restricted to, acid suits, acid gloves, goggles and protective clothing.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, solid, liquid or gas, listed as a
hazardous substance or material, including, but not necessarily limited to,
such substances and materials listed under the N.F.P.A. Guide of Hazardous
Material, the Department of Transportation Guide Book, and the list of
Hazardous Substances and Toxic Pollutants designated by the Federal
Environmental Protection Agency and the New Jersey State Department of
Environmental Protection.
PERSON/RESPONSIBLE PARTY — Any natural person or individual of any
firm, partnership, association, limited partnership, proprietorship,
corporation, on any other business entity or any government agency or
entity.
VEHICLE — Any motorized equipment registered or unregistered,
including, but not limited to, a passenger car, motorcycle, truck, tractor,
trailer, construction equipment, farm machinery, watercraft, aircraft and
train.
VESSEL — Any container, drum, box, cylinder, bottle, or tank used to hold,
contain, carry or store any hazardous material.
§ 171-3. Discharge prohibited.
C. This chapter mandates, in the discretion of the Borough, the
reimbursement to the Borough of Hillsdale for any expendable items
used by the Borough or any of its employees, agents, servants, officers,
or officials, in extinguishing any hazardous material fire, stopping or
containing or controlling, or mitigating any spill, release, or leak of any
hazardous material.
A. The discharge of hazardous materials is prohibited, unless the
responsible party is in compliance with the conditions of a federal or
state permit.
B. Any person who may be subject to liability for a discharge, or becomes
aware of a discharge which has occurred, shall immediately notify the
Borough of Hillsdale Police Department.
§ 171-1 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 171-3
171:229
§ 171-4. Reimbursable items.
Costs incurred by the Borough of Hillsdale and/or other mutual aid
responding units for the following items in connection with the suppressing,
control or cleanup of a fire, leakage or spillage involving any hazardous
substance or hazardous material shall, in the discretion of the Borough,
be reimbursed to the aforesaid respective organizations by the responsible
parties as set forth in § 171-5 below;
§ 171-5. Parties responsible for reimbursement.
In the discretion of the Borough, reimbursement to the Borough of Hillsdale
for any reimbursable item, as set forth above, shall be made by the following
parties:
C. Whenever a hazardous material is discharged, the Borough of Hillsdale
may, in its discretion, act to remove or arrange for the removal of such
discharge.
D. Any person who has discharged a hazardous material which has been or
shall be removed by the Borough of Hillsdale may, in the discretion of
the Borough, be liable, jointly and severally, without regard to fault, for
all cleanup and removal costs.
A. The cost of replacement of expendable items.
B. The expenses incurred by the Borough for the wages (regular and/or
overtime) paid to its employees/agents as a result of a hazardous
material incident.
C. Any and all medical costs incurred by responding personnel.
D. Any and all environmental tests required to insure a hazard-free
environment (soil-water-air).
E. A fixed hourly rate for the use of apparatus at incidents computed at the
rate of $200 per hour for the use of specialized and $150 per hour for
the use of any other vehicles to the Borough of Hillsdale.
F. All expenses incurred by other mutual aid responding units.
G. Services rendered by any recovery company, towing company or other
technical assistance called for by the Fire Department or Emergency
Management Coordinator to handle such Incidents.
A. The owner or operator of any vehicle responsible for any fire, leak or
spill or hazardous material, whether accidental or through negligence.
B. The owner or person responsible for any vessel containing hazardous
material involved in any fire, leak or spill on public or private property,
whether stationary or in transit, whether accidental or through
negligence.
§ 171-3 HILLSDALE CODE § 171-5
171:230
§ 171-6. Period of payment.
In the discretion of the Borough, any responsible party, as set forth in
§ 171-5 hereof, shall reimburse the Borough of Hillsdale for the full price of
any reimbursable items used to extinguish such a fire, stop or contain such
a leak or control and clean up such a spill within 45 days after receipt of
a bill for such items from the Borough of Hillsdale. Billing is to include a
twenty-percent administrative fee.
§ 171-7. Violations and penalties.
Any responsible party, as set forth in § 171-5 hereof, who fails to reimburse
the Borough of Hillsdale for reimbursable items within the time limit set
forth in § 171-6 hereof shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor
more than $500 or imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days,
or both. Upon the failure to reimburse the Borough of Hillsdale for the
cost of such items within said forty-five-day period, and in addition to any
penalty provided for in this section hereof, the Borough of Hillsdale may
take such action, as may be provided by law, to recover such costs from the
responsible party.
Chapter 175
HYDRAULIC FRACTURING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Soil movement — See Ch. 248.
§ 175-1. Prohibited activities.
Drilling for natural gas using the drilling technique of hydraulic fracturing
and exploring for natural gas beyond the reconnaissance phase is
prohibited within Hillsdale, New Jersey.
§ 175-2. Distribution.
A copy of this adopted chapter shall be sent to District 39 State Legislators;
District 5 Congressional; Chairman of Bergen County Freeholders;
Governor Christie; Senator Menendez; New Jersey Sierra Club; Delaware
Riverkeeper Network; and Food and Water Watch.
C. The owner or person responsible for any property from which any leak
or spill of hazardous material emanates, whether accidental or through
negligence.
D. Any person responsible for any fire, leak or spill of hazardous material
on public or private property, whether accidental or through
negligence.
§ 171-5 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 175-2
171:231
Chapter 184
LIBRARY
§ 184-1. Overdue materials; notice.
No person shall detain or fail to return any book, periodical, pamphlet,
artistic reproduction, phonograph recording, audiovisual material or any
other article borrowed from the Hillsdale Free Public Library or any library
affiliated with the Hillsdale Public Library after thirty (30) days have
elapsed from the date of the posting by certified mail, return receipt
requested, of a notice demanding return thereof, addressed to said person
at the last address furnished.
§ 184-2. Damaging library materials.
No person shall cut, tear, deface, disfigure, damage or destroy any book,
periodical, pamphlet, artistic reproduction, phonograph recording,
audiovisual material or other article, or any part thereof, which is borrowed
from, owned by or is in the custody of said library.
§ 184-3. Compliance with rules and regulations.
No person shall remove any book, periodical, pamphlet, artistic
reproduction, phonograph recording, audiovisual material or any other item
or article from the Hillsdale Free Public Library without complying with the
rules, regulations and procedures of the Library for borrowing such items
or articles.
§ 184-4. Complaint in Municipal Court; filing.
The Library Director, with the approval of the Library Board, is authorized
to file a complaint in the Municipal Court under the following conditions:
§ 184-5. False identification.
No person with intent to defraud shall register or furnish a false name or
address, or use any card other than the one issued to said person for the
purpose of borrowing any book or other article from the library.
§ 184-6. Minors.
In the case of a minor, any letter or summons issued pursuant to this
chapter shall be sent to the parent or guardian of the minor involved. No
summons or letter shall be sent to the parent or guardian of a minor unless
A. A certified letter, return receipt requested, shall be sent by the library
after six (6) months informing the person that the book or material is
overdue and that he is subject to prosecution pursuant to this chapter.
B. The book or material shall be overdue at least six (6) months.
§ 175-2 HILLSDALE CODE § 184-6
184:232
said parent or guardian is a cosigner of the library registration card held by
said minor. No summons or letter shall issue pursuant to this chapter unless
it has first been determined whether the offender is a minor or adult.
§ 184-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 226, Penalties.
Chapter 188
LICENSES AND PERMITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 84.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 88.
Amusements — See Ch. 92.
Animals — See Ch. 96.
Auctions — See Ch. 100.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 124.
Games of chance — See Ch. 158.
Garage sales — See Ch. 162.
Gasoline service stations — See Ch. 166.
Limousines — See Ch. 192.
Outdoor cafes — See Ch. 212.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 224.
Penalties — See Ch. 226.
Target ranges — See Ch. 268.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 272.
Trailers and camp cars — See Ch. 276.
Traveling shows, carnivals and circuses — See
Ch. 284.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 288.
Land use — See Ch. 310.
§ 188-1. Applicability.113
Unless otherwise provided in this Code, the general regulations governing
licenses and permits as provided for in this chapter shall apply to and be
required for all businesses, occupations and activities referred to in this
chapter.
§ 188-2. Application for license or permit; contents; fee.
A. Any person desiring a license or permit under this chapter shall file
with the Borough Clerk an application, in writing, in the form
prescribed by the Borough Clerk.
B. The application shall set forth the following information:
113. Editor's Note: For state laws authorizing municipalities to adopt ordinances to license and
regulate amusement places and businesses, other businesses and occupations, and other
activities; to fix the fees therefor; and to impose penalties for violations, see N.J.S.A.
40:48-1, 40:48-2 and 40:52-2.
§ 184-6 LIBRARY § 188-2
184:233
§ 188-3. Classes of licenses.
§ 188-4. Investigations.
The Borough Clerk shall refer the license or permit application to the
investigating official or officials referred to in the chapter pertaining to the
licensing or permitting of the specific business, occupation or activity. Each
such official shall make an investigation and inspection and submit a report
thereof to the Borough Clerk.
§ 188-5. Issuance of license or permit; form; reasons for denial;
issuing authority.
(1) The name, residence and age of the applicant if an individual, or
the names, residences and ages of all partners or principal officers
if the applicant is a partnership, association or corporation.
(2) Whether the individual applicant, or any of the partners or
principal officers of a partnership, association or corporation, has
ever been convicted of a crime or of an offense under the disorderly
persons law (see N.J.S.A. 2C:104-1 et seq.), and if so, what crime or
offense, when convicted and in what court. [Amended 5-13-1997
by Ord. No. 97-8]
(3) The length of time for which the license or permit is desired.
(4) A description of the place of business for which the license or
permit is desired, where applicable.
(5) Such additional information as the Borough Clerk may require.
C. The prescribed license or permit fee shall be submitted with the
application for the license or permit.
A. The licenses issued hereunder shall be of two (2) kinds:
(1) Annual licenses.
(2) Temporary licenses.
B. The annual license is a license which will remain in force continuously
from the date of its issue until the last day of December next succeeding
its issue unless previously suspended or revoked as herein provided.
The annual license shall bear, in addition to the serial number, the letter
"A." [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
C. The temporary license is a license granted for a single act or permitting
the carrying on of business or occupation for a limited time, not
exceeding three (3) consecutive days. The temporary license shall bear,
in addition to its serial number, the letter "T."
A. If the reports referred to in § 188-4 and such other information as the
Borough Clerk may have concerning the application or applicant shall
§ 188-2 HILLSDALE CODE § 188-5
184:234
§ 188-6. Appeal upon denial of license or permit.
§ 188-7. Records and reports of Borough Clerk. [Amended
5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
disclose no reason why the license or permit should not be issued, the
Borough Clerk shall issue the license or permit, in a form prescribed by
the Clerk, unless the prior approval of the Borough Council is required.
B. If it shall appear that the applicant is not qualified, by reason of age,
prior criminal record or otherwise, or by reason of failure of the
proposed business, occupation or activity to be pursued to comply with
any applicable ordinance, regulation or law, the Borough Clerk shall
deny the license or permit, stating in writing the reasons therefor.
[Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
C. The Borough Clerk of the Borough of Hillsdale is hereby designated as
the issuing authority pursuant to N.J.A.C. 13:47-1.1 and is authorized
and directed to issue licenses as permitted by law and the regulations
adopted thereunder. [Added 7-7-2015 by Ord. No. 15-14]
A. Any person aggrieved by the action of the Borough Clerk in the denial
of a license or permit as provided within this chapter shall have the
right of appeal from such action to the Borough Council.
B. Such appeal shall be taken by filing, within fourteen (14) days after
notice of the action complained of, a written statement setting forth
fully the grounds for the appeal with the Borough Council.
C. The Borough Council shall set a time and place for hearing on such
appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant.
D. After such hearing, the Borough Council may affirm, reverse or modify
the action from which the appeal is taken.114
A. The Borough Clerk shall keep a record of each license or permit issued
or denied, showing the dates of issuance and expiration of the license or
permit, or date of denial; the number of the license or permit; the
character of the license or permit; the name and address of the licensee
or permittee; the amount of the fee paid; and the amount of the fee
refunded, if any.
B. Within ten (10) days after denial of the license or permit, the Borough
Clerk shall set forth, in writing, the date of denial and the reason
therefor.
114. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 7-7, Term of license or permit, which immediately followed
this section, was repealed 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8.
§ 188-5 LIBRARY § 188-8
184:235
§ 188-8. Display of license or permit. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-8]
The licensee or permittee shall, at all times when engaged in the business,
occupation or activity licensed or permitted under this chapter, have such
license or permit upon his or her person or conspicuously displayed upon
the premises which he or she may use in connection with said business,
occupation or activity. He or she shall also exhibit such license or permit at
any time upon the request of any person.
§ 188-9. Rights created by license or permit.
No license or permit issued under this chapter shall:
§ 188-10. Suspension or revocation of license or permit.
Any license or permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended
or revoked by the Borough Council, after due notice and hearing, for
misrepresentation in any statement contained in the application, or for
violation of any applicable provision of this chapter, or of any other
applicable ordinance of the Borough or of an applicable state law or federal
law.
§ 188-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No.
97-8]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the provisions of Chapter 226, Penalties.
Chapter 190
LIEN SEARCHES, MUNICIPAL
§ 190-1. Authorization.
The Borough Search Officer is authorized upon payment of the fee
hereinafter established to make a search of municipal lien records and
provide information by way of a printout of information requested.
A. Be valid as to any person other than the licensee or permittee named
therein, unless otherwise provided.
B. Be transferable, unless otherwise provided.
C. Create any vested rights or grant any privileges other than the privilege
of conducting the licensed or permitted business, occupation or activity
in accordance with the statutes of this state, the provisions of this
chapter and the provisions of all other applicable ordinances of the
Borough.
§ 188-8 HILLSDALE CODE § 190-2
190:236
§ 190-2. Fee.
A fee of $3.00 is hereby established for search and services provided in
§ 190-1.
Chapter 192
LIMOUSINES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 138.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 188.
Penalties — See Ch. 226.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 272.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 292.
§ 192-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LIMOUSINE SERVICE — Includes any automobile or motor car service with
a carrying capacity of not more than nine (9) passengers, not including the
driver, for carrying passengers for hire which is held out, announced or
advertised to operate or run or which is operated or run over any of the
streets or public highways of this state, and which is hired by charter or
for a particular contract, or by the day or hour or other fixed period, or to
transport passengers to a specified place or places, or which charges a fare
or price agreed upon in advance between the operator and the passenger.
Nothing in this chapter contained shall be construed to include taxicabs,
hotel buses or buses employed solely in transporting school children or
teachers or autobuses.
§ 192-2. Municipal consent required.
No limousine service, the owner of which has his or her principal place of
business in the Borough of Hillsdale, shall be operated along any street in
the Borough until the owner thereof shall have obtained the consent of the
Borough Council.
§ 192-3. Insurance requirement. [Amended 12-23-1986 by Ord. No.
86-18; 4-11-1989 by Ord. No. 89-9]
No consent by the Borough Council to the owner of a limousine to operate
on the streets of the Borough shall become effective until the owner of such
limousine shall have filed with the Borough Clerk an insurance policy of a
company duly licensed to transact business under the insurance laws of the
state, conditioned for the payment of the sum not less than five hundred
thousand dollars ($500,000.) to satisfy any and all claims for damages by
§ 190-2 LIEN SEARCHES, MUNICIPAL § 192-3
190:237
reason of bodily injury to or the death of any person or persons resulting
from an accident or to satisfy any claim or damages to property of any and
all persons on account of such use of such limousine upon the public streets
of the Borough of Hillsdale. The Borough of Hillsdale shall be named as
an additional insured on the policy of insurance. Any consent to operate
a limousine which has been granted by the Borough Council shall become
void and of no effect in the event that the aforementioned insurance policies
are canceled or for any reason become ineffective.
§ 192-4. Power of attorney.
The owner of each limousine service shall execute and deliver to the
Borough Clerk, concurrently with the filing of the insurance policies herein
required, a power of attorney, wherein and whereby the owner shall appoint
the Borough Treasurer his or her true and lawful attorney for the purpose
of acknowledging service of any process of a court of competent jurisdiction
to be served against the insured by virtue of the indemnity granted under
the insurance policies required hereunder.
§ 192-5. Certificates.
No limousine service which has its principal place of business within the
Borough of Hillsdale shall be operated along any street in the Borough
until the owner or operator of said limousine service shall have obtained a
limousine certificate for each limousine so operated.
A. Written application for such certificate shall be made to the Borough
Clerk on forms furnished by the Borough Clerk. Each application shall
be accompanied by the requisite fees as herein fixed for the certificate
applied for. Each application shall set forth under oath or affirmation:
(1) The type, maker's name, seating capacity, weight, year of
manufacture, factory number and engine number of each vehicle.
(2) The principal location of each vehicle when not being operated
upon the streets as a limousine.
(3) The home and business address of the owner of the vehicle.
(4) A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of
a crime, and if the applicant has been convicted of a crime, a
complete statement concerning dates and disposition thereof. In
case of a corporate applicant, the statement shall be completed as
to each officer, director and owner of more than ten percent (10%)
of the stock of the corporation.
B. Based on a review of the information obtained in the application in
Subsection A above, the Borough Clerk may deny the applicant a
certificate.
§ 192-3 HILLSDALE CODE § 192-6
190:238
§ 192-6. Duration of certificate; fee. [Amended 4-11-1989 by Ord.
No. 89-9; 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
All certificates issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire on
March 31 of the year for which they are issued and shall be nontransferable.
The fee for a certificate for each limousine shall be fifty dollars ($50.).
§ 192-7. Revocation or suspension of certificates.
Any certificate issued pursuant to the provisions of this code may be
revoked or suspended (without refund of fees) by the Borough Clerk for
any violation hereof or of any rules or regulations adopted hereunder or
for other good cause shown. The person or corporation affected by such
revocation or suspension shall have the opportunity for a public hearing
before the Borough Administrator in a summary manner in order to contest
the suspension or revocation. Pending hearing and decision by the Borough
Administrator, the revocation or suspension shall remain in effect. In order
to obtain a hearing from a summary revocation or suspension of a
certificate, the holder of the certificate shall be required to request the
hearing in writing within ten (10) business days of the effective date of the
suspension or revocation imposed by the Borough Clerk.
§ 192-8. Filing of registration with Borough Clerk.
The owner of each limousine licensed pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall provide a copy of the vehicle's registration to the Borough
Clerk within three (3) business days from the issuance of a certificate
pursuant to § 192-5.
§ 192-9. Violations and penalties. [Added 5-13-1997 by Ord. No.
97-8]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 226, Penalties.
Chapter 196
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties — See Ch. 226.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 228.
Recycling — See Ch. 232.
Solid waste — See Ch. 252.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 260.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 288.
Land use — See Ch. 310.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 345.
§ 192-6 LITTERING § 196-1
196:239
§ 196-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Hillsdale Anti-Litter
Ordinance."
§ 196-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER — Garbage, refuse and rubbish as such are defined herein and
any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which has been
discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber, paper, or
other natural or synthetic material, or any combination thereof, including,
but not limited to, any bottle, jar or can, or any top, cap or detachable
tab of any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar, match or any
flaming or glowing material or any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish,
grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspapers, magazines,
glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging or construction
material, but does not include the waste of the primary processes of mining
or other extraction processes, logging, sawmilling, farming or
manufacturing.[Amended 10-10-2006 by Ord. No. 06-10]
LITTER RECEPTACLE — A container suitable for the depositing of
litter.[Added 10-10-2006 by Ord. No. 06-10]
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.[Added 10-10-2006 by Ord. No. 06-10]
PUBLIC PLACE — Includes all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or
other public ways and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and
buildings.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, except body
wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes,
cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery
and similar materials.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a highway.
§ 196-3. Litter in public and private property prohibited. [Amended
4-11-1989 by Ord. No. 89-6; 10-10-2006 by Ord. No. 06-10]
§ 196-1 HILLSDALE CODE § 196-3
196:240
§ 196-4. Sweeping litter into gutters prohibited. [Amended
4-11-1989 by Ord. No. 89-6]
No person shall sweep or otherwise deposit in any gutter, street, catch
basin or other public place any accumulation of litter from a public or
private sidewalk, driveway or lawn. Any such sweepings shall be properly
containerized for disposal.
§ 196-5. Sidewalks to be kept free of litter.
The owner of any vacant lot or building abutting a sidewalk, and the
occupant of any such premises abutting a sidewalk, shall keep such
sidewalk free of litter.
§ 196-6. Litter thrown from vehicles and boats. [Amended
10-10-2006 by Ord. No. 06-10]
Whenever any litter is thrown or discarded or allowed to fall from a vehicle
or boat in violation of this chapter, the operator or owner, or both, of the
motor vehicle or boat shall also be deemed to have violated this chapter.
§ 196-7. Truck loads not to cause litter.115 [Amended 4-11-1989 by
Ord. No. 89-6]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard or otherwise
place any litter of any nature upon public or private property other than
in a litter receptacle, or having done so, to allow such litter to remain.
B. Litter receptacles shall be placed in the following public places within
the Borough of Hillsdale:
(1) In all commercially zoned areas, such that there shall be a litter
receptacle in each linear quarter mile;
(2) At all buildings held out for use by the public, including schools,
government buildings and railroad stations and bus shelters;
(3) In all parks;
(4) At all construction sites;
(5) At all service station islands;
(6) At any special events to which the public is invited.
C. The proprietors of those places listed in Subsection B or the sponsors of
events listed therein shall be responsible for providing and servicing
such receptacles to ensure that adequate containerization is provided.
A. No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the
Borough unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent
115. Editor's Note: For state statute prohibiting load spillage, see N.J.S.A. 39:4-77.
§ 196-3 LITTERING § 196-7
196:241
§ 196-8. Collection of garbage, refuse, rubbish and recyclables.
[Amended 10-10-1972 by Ord. No. 72-14; 4-11-1989 by Ord. No.
89-6; 12-8-1998 by Ord. No. 98-21]
§ 196-9. Enforcement. [Added 10-10-2006 by Ord. No. 06-10]
This chapter shall be enforced by the Borough of Hillsdale Police
Department.
§ 196-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-10-2006 by Ord.
No. 06-10]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000 or the maximum permitted by
law.
§ 196-11. Severability. [Added 10-10-2006 by Ord. No. 06-10]
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this chapter is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this chapter to be
any load, contents or litter thereon from being blown or deposited upon
any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property in
the Borough.
B. All vehicles transporting materials shall be covered to prevent the
transported material from dropping, leaking or otherwise escaping.
A. Bulky materials, such as furniture, appliances and mattresses, and tires
shall be stored in enclosures, except on days designated for collection.
B. Debris shall not be stored or allowed to accumulate on or around
construction sites in such a manner that it is likely to be moved from the
site by natural forces.
C. No person shall maintain any private receptacle for litter unless such
receptacle is so constructed or covered as to prevent the contents
thereof from being blown, scattered or deposited upon any street,
sidewalk or other public place or upon private property.
D. No person shall cause or permit any garbage, refuse or rubbish to be
placed on any street, sidewalk, at the curb or in any other public place
for collection by the Department of Public Works or by others sooner
than 7:00 p.m. of the day preceding the day on which said collection is
scheduled.
E. No person shall cause or permit any receptacle for garbage, refuse,
rubbish or recyclables to remain at the curb or in any other public place
after collection by the Department of Public Works or by others any
later than 7:00 p.m. of the day said collection is scheduled.
§ 196-7 HILLSDALE CODE § 196-11
196:242
unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause or reason shall not affect
any other portion of this chapter.
Chapter 200
MAILBOXES
§ 200-1. Mailbox or mailslot required.
Every house, store, office or place of business in the Borough, where carrier
mail delivery is provided, shall be provided with either a mailbox at the
front entrance thereof, or shall have a slot in the door thereof so that the
mail carrier may make delivery of mail, even though no individual may be
present at such house, store, office or place of business.
Chapter 204
MOBILE TELEPHONES
§ 204-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ENGAGE IN A CALL — Talking into or listening on a hand-held mobile
telephone, but shall not include holding a mobile telephone to deactivate or
initiate a function of such telephone.
HAND-HELD MOBILE TELEPHONE — A mobile telephone with which a
user engages in a call using at least one hand.
HANDS-FREE MOBILE TELEPHONE — A mobile telephone that has an
internal feature or function, or that is equipped with an attachment or
addition, whether or not permanently part of such mobile telephone, by
which a user engages in a call without the use of either hand, whether or
not the use of either hand is necessary to activate, deactivate or initiate a
function of such telephone.
IMMEDIATE PROXIMITY — The distance that permits the operator of a
mobile telephone to hear telecommunications transmitted over such mobile
telephone, but shall not require physical contact with such operator’s ear.
MOBILE TELEPHONE — The device used by subscribers and other users of
wireless telephone service to access such service.
USING — Holding a mobile telephone to, or in the immediate proximity of,
the user’s ear.
WIRELESS TELEPHONE SERVICE — Two-way real-time voice
telecommunications service that is interconnected to a public switched
telephone network and is provided by a commercial mobile radio service.
§ 204-2. Prohibited uses.
§ 196-11 MAILBOXES § 204-2
200:243
§ 204-3. Exceptions.
Section 204-2 of this chapter shall not apply to:
§ 204-4. Violations and penalties.
A violation of § 204-2 of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to
exceed $250.
Chapter 208
NOISE CONTROL
§ 208-1. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this Chapter, shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Terms
not defined in this Chapter have the same meaning as those defined in
N.J.A.C. 7:29.
CONSTRUCTION — Means any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair,
alteration or similar action of buildings or structures.
DBC — Means the sound level as measured using the "C" weighting network
with a sound level meter meeting the standards set forth in ANSI S1.4-1983
A. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall operate a
motor vehicle upon a public street or highway while using a mobile
telephone to engage in a call while such vehicle is in motion.
B. An operator of a motor vehicle who holds a mobile telephone to or in the
immediate proximity of his or her ear while such vehicle is in motion is
presumed to be engaging in a call within the meaning of this chapter.
The presumption established by this subsection is rebutable by
evidence tending to show that the operator was not engaged in a call.
C. The provisions of this section shall not be construed as authorizing the
seizure or forfeiture of a mobile telephone, unless otherwise provided
by law.
A. The use of a mobile telephone for the sole purpose of communicating
with any of the following regarding an emergency situation: an
emergency response operator; a hospital, physician’s office or health
clinic; an ambulance company or corps; a fire department, district or
company; or a police department.
B. Any of the following persons while in the performance of their official
duties: a police officer or peace officer; a member of a fire department,
district or company; or the operator of an authorized emergency
vehicle.
C. The use of a hands-free mobile telephone.
§ 204-2 HILLSDALE CODE § 208-1
204:244
or its successors. The unit of reporting is dB(C). The "C" weighting network
is more sensitive to low frequencies than is the "A" weighting network.
DEMOLITION — Means any dismantling, destruction or removal of
buildings, structures, or roadways.
DEPARTMENT — Means the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
EMERGENCY WORK — Means any work or action necessary at the site
of an emergency to restore or deliver essential services including, but
not limited to, repairing water, gas, electricity, telephone, sewer facilities,
or public transportation facilities, removing fallen trees on public rightsof-
way, dredging navigational waterways, or abating life-threatening
conditions or a state of emergency declared by a governing agency.
IMPULSIVE SOUND — Means either a single pressure peak or a single
burst (multiple pressure peaks) that has a duration of less than one second.
MINOR VIOLATION — Means a violation that is not the result of the
purposeful, reckless or criminally negligent conduct of the alleged violator;
and/or the activity or condition constituting the violation has not been the
subject of an enforcement action by any authorized local, county or state
enforcement agency against the violator within the immediately preceding
12 months for the same or substantially similar violation.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Means any vehicle that is propelled other than by
human or animal power on land.
MUFFLER — Means a properly functioning sound dissipative device or
system for abating the sound on engines or equipment where such device is
part of the normal configuration of the equipment.
MULTI-DWELLING UNIT BUILDING — Means any building comprising
two or more dwelling units, including, but not limited to, apartments,
condominiums, co-ops, multiple family houses, townhouses, and attached
residences.
MULTI-USE PROPERTY — Means any distinct parcel of land that is used for
more than one category of activity. Examples include, but are not limited to:
NOISE CONTROL INVESTIGATOR (NCI) — Means an employee of a
municipality, county or regional health commission that has a Departmentapproved
model noise control ordinance and the employee has not received
A commercial, residential, industrial or public service property having
boilers, incinerators, elevators, automatic garage doors, air
conditioners, laundry rooms, utility provisions, or health and
recreational facilities, or other similar devices or areas, either in the
interior or on the exterior of the building, which may be a source of
elevated sound levels at another category on the same distinct parcel
of land; or
1.
A building, which is both commercial (usually on the ground floor) and
residential property, located above, below or otherwise adjacent to.
2.
§ 208-1 MOBILE TELEPHONES § 208-1
204:245
noise enforcement training as specified by the Department in N.J.A.C. 7:29.
However, they are knowledgeable about their model noise ordinance and
enforcement procedures. A Noise Control Investigator may only enforce
sections of the ordinance that do not require the use of a sound level meter.
The employee must be acting within his or her designated jurisdiction and
must be authorized to issue a summons.
NOISE CONTROL OFFICER (NCO) — Means an employee of a local, county
or regional health agency which is certified pursuant to the County
Environmental Health Act (N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-21 et seq.) to perform noise
enforcement activities or an employee of a municipality with a Departmentapproved
model noise control ordinance. All NCOs must receive noise
enforcement training as specified by the Department in N.J.A.C. 7:29 and
is currently certified in noise enforcement. The employee must be acting
within his or her designated jurisdiction and must be authorized to issue a
summons.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE — Means any sound that can be detected by a NCO or
an NCI using his or her unaided hearing faculties of normal acuity. As an
example, if the sound source under investigation is a portable or vehicular
sound amplification or reproduction device, the detection of the rhythmic
bass component of the music is sufficient to verify plainly audible sound.
The NCO or NCI need not determine the title, specific words, or the artist
performing the song.
PRIVATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — Means any street, avenue, boulevard, road,
highway, sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased, or controlled by
a non-governmental entity.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Means any street, avenue, boulevard, road,
highway, sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased, or controlled by
a governmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE — Means any real property or structures thereon that are
owned, leased, or controlled by a governmental entity.
REAL PROPERTY LINE — Means either (a) the vertical boundary that
separates one parcel of property (i.e., lot and block) from another
residential or commercial property; (b) the vertical and horizontal
boundaries of a dwelling unit that is part of a multi-dwelling unit building;
or (c) on a multi-use property as defined herein, the vertical or horizontal
boundaries between the two portions of the property on which different
categories of activity are being performed (e.g., if the multi-use property
is a building which is residential upstairs and commercial downstairs, then
the real property line would be the interface between the residential area
and the commercial area, or if there is an outdoor sound source such as
an HVAC unit on the same parcel of property, the boundary line is the
exterior wall of the receiving unit). Note- this definition shall not apply to
a commercial source and a commercial receptor which are both located on
the same parcel of property (e.g., a strip mall).
SOUND PRODUCTION DEVICE — Means any device whose primary
function is the production of sound, including, but not limited to any,
§ 208-1 HILLSDALE CODE § 208-1
204:246
musical instrument, loudspeaker, radio, television, digital or analog music
player, public address system or sound-amplifying equipment.
SOUND REDUCTION DEVICE — Means any device, such as a muffler,
baffle, shroud, jacket, enclosure, isolator, or dampener provided by the
manufacturer with the equipment, or that is otherwise required, that
mitigates the sound emissions of the equipment.
WEEKDAY — Means any day that is not a federal holiday, and beginning on
Monday at 7:00 a.m. and ending on the following Friday at 6:00 p.m.
WEEKENDS — Means beginning on Friday at 6:00 p.m. and ending on the
following Monday at 7:00 a.m.
§ 208-2. Applicability.
A. This model noise ordinance applies to sound from the following
property categories:
(1) Industrial facilities;
(2) Commercial facilities;
(3) Public service facilities;
(4) Community service facilities;
(5) Residential properties;
(6) Multi-use properties;
(7) Public and private right-of-ways;
(8) Public spaces; and
(9) Multi-dwelling unit buildings.
B. This model noise ordinance applies to sound received at the following
property categories:
(1) Commercial facilities;
(2) Public service facilities;
(3) Community service facilities (i.e. non-profits and/or religious
facilities)
(4) Residential properties;
(5) Multi-use properties;
(6) Multi-dwelling unit buildings.
C. Sound from stationary emergency signaling devices shall be regulated
in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.4, except that the testing of the
§ 208-1 MOBILE TELEPHONES § 208-2
204:247
§ 208-3. Exemptions.
§ 208-4. Enforcement Officers.
§ 208-5. Measurement protocols.
electromechanical functioning of a stationary emergency signaling
device shall not meet or exceed 10 seconds.
A. Except as provided in Section 208-8 and 208-9 below, the provisions of
this Chapter shall not apply to the exceptions listed at N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.5.
B. Sound production devices required or sanctioned under the Americans
with Disabilities Act (ADA), FEMA or other government agencies to the
extent that they comply with the noise requirement of the enabling
legislation or regulation. Devices which are exempted under N.J.A.C.
7:29-1.5 shall continue to be exempted.
C. Construction and demolition activities are exempt from the sound level
limits set forth in Tables I and II and III except as provided for in
Section 208-8 below.
A. Noise Control Officers shall have the authority within their designated
jurisdiction to investigate suspected violations of any section of this
Chapter and pursue enforcement activities.
B. Noise Control Investigators shall have the authority within their
designated jurisdiction to investigate suspected violations of any
section of this Chapter that do not require the use of a sound level
meter (i.e., plainly audible, times of day and/or distance
determinations) and pursue enforcement activities.
C. Noise Control Officers and Investigators may cooperate with NCOs and
NCIs of an adjacent municipality in enforcing one another's municipal
noise ordinances.
A. Sound measurements made by a Noise Control Officer shall conform to
the procedures set forth at N.J.A.C. 7:29-2, except that interior sound
level measurements shall also conform with the procedures set forth in
Section 208-6B and with the definition of "real property line" as
contained herein.
B. When conducting indoor sound level measurements across a real
property line the measurements shall be taken at least three feet from
any wall, floor or ceiling and all exterior doors and windows may, at the
discretion of the investigator, be closed. The neighborhood residual
sound level shall be measured in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:29-2.9(b)2.
When measuring total sound level, the configuration of the windows
and doors shall be the same and all sound sources within the dwelling
unit must be shut off (e.g., television, stereo). Measurements shall not
be taken in areas which receive only casual use such as hallways,
closets and bathrooms.
§ 208-2 HILLSDALE CODE § 208-6
204:248
§ 208-6. Maximum permissible sound levels.
§ 208-7. Sound production devices.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any sound
production device in such a manner that the sound crosses a property line
and raises the total sound levels above the neighborhood residual sound
level by more than the permissible sound level limits set forth in Table IV
117when measured within the residence of a complainant according to the
measurement protocol in Section 208-5B. These sound level measurements
shall be conducted with the sound level meter set for "C" weighting, "fast"
response.
§ 208-8. Restricted uses and activities.
The following standards shall apply to the activities or sources of sound set
forth below:
A. No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any
source of sound on any source property listed in Section 208-2A above
in such a manner as to create a sound level that equals or exceeds the
sound level limits set forth in Tables I, II or III 116when measured at or
within the real property line of any of the receiving properties listed in
Tables I, II or III except as specified in Section 208-5B.
B. Impulsive Sound.
Between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., impulsive sound shall not equal or
exceed 80 decibels.
Between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., impulsive sound which occurs less
than four times in any hour shall not equal or exceed 80 decibels.
A. Excluding emergency work, power tools, home maintenance tools,
landscaping and/or yard maintenance equipment used by a residential
property owner or tenant shall not be operated between the hours of
8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., unless such activities can meet the applicable
limits set forth in Tables I, II or III. At all other times the limits set forth
in Tables I, II or III do not apply. All motorized equipment used in these
activities shall be operated with a muffler and/or sound reduction
device.
B. Excluding emergency work, power tools, landscaping and/or yard
maintenance equipment used by nonresidential operators (e.g.
commercial operators, public employees) shall not be operated on a
residential, commercial, industrial or public (e.g. golf course, parks,
athletic fields) property between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
on weekdays, or between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on
weekends or federal holidays, unless such activities can meet the limits
116. Tables I , II and III are included as attachments to this chapter.
117. Table IV is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 208-6 MOBILE TELEPHONES § 208-8
204:249
set forth in Tables I, II or III. At all other times the limits set forth
in Tables I, II or III do not apply. All motorized equipment used in
these activities shall be operated with a muffler and/or sound reduction
device.
C. All construction and demolition activity, excluding emergency work,
shall not be performed between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on
weekdays, or between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on
weekends and federal holidays, unless such activities can meet the
limits set forth in Tables I, II or III. At all other times the limits set forth
in Tables I, II or III do not apply. All motorized equipment used in
construction and demolition activity shall be operated with a muffler
and/or sound reduction device.
D. Motorized snow removal equipment shall be operated with a muffler
and/or a sound reduction device when being used for snow removal. At
all other times the limits set forth in Tables I, II or III do not apply.
E. All interior and exterior burglar alarms of a building or motor vehicle
must be activated in such a manner that the burglar alarm terminates
its operation within five minutes for continuous airborne sound and 15
minutes for intermittent sound after it has been activated. At all other
times the limits set forth in Tables I, II or III do not apply.
F. Self-contained, portable, non-vehicular music or sound production
devices shall not be operated on a public space or public right-of-way in
such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet in any
direction from the operator between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00
p.m. Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., sound, operated on
a public space or public right-of-way, from such equipment shall not be
plainly audible at a distance of 25 feet in any direction from the
operator.
G. It shall be unlawful for any property owner or tenant to allow any
domesticated or caged animal to create a sound across a real property
line which unreasonably disturbs or interferes with the peace, comfort,
and repose of any resident, or to refuse or intentionally fail to cease the
unreasonable noise when ordered to do so by a Noise Control Officer or
Noise Control Investigator. Prima facie evidence of a violation of this
section shall include but not be limited to:
(1) Vocalizing (howling, yelping, barking, squawking etc.) for five
minutes without interruption, defined as an average of four or more
vocalizations per minute in that period; or,
(2) Vocalizing for 20 minutes intermittently, defined as an average of
two vocalizations or more per minute in that period.
It is an affirmative defense under this subsection that the dog or
other animal was intentionally provoked to bark or make any other
noise.
§ 208-8 HILLSDALE CODE § 208-9
204:250
§ 208-9. Motor vehicles.
Violations of each paragraph of this section shall be considered purposeful
and therefore non-minor violations.
§ 208-10. Enforcement.
A. No person shall remove or render inoperative, or cause to be removed
or rendered inoperative or less effective than originally equipped, other
than for the purposes of maintenance, repair, or replacement, of any
device or element of design incorporated in any motor vehicle for the
purpose of noise control. No person shall operate a motor vehicle or
motorcycle which has been so modified. A vehicle not meeting these
requirements shall be deemed in violation of this provision if it is
operated stationary or in motion in any public space or public right-ofway.
B. No motorcycle shall be operated stationary or in motion unless it has a
muffler that complies with and is labeled in accordance with the
Federal Noise Regulations under 40 CFR Part 205.
C. Personal or commercial vehicular music amplification or reproduction
equipment shall not be operated in such a manner that it is plainly
audible at distance of 25 feet in any direction from the operator
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
D. Personal or commercial vehicular music amplification or reproduction
equipment shall not be operated in such a manner that is plainly
audible at a distance of 50 feet in any direction from the operator
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
A. Violation of any provision of this Chapter shall be cause for a Notice of
Violation (NOV) or a Notice of Penalty Assessment (NOPA) document to
be issued to the violator by the Noise Control Officer or Noise Control
Investigator.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter shall be subject
to a civil penalty for each offense of not more than the maximum
penalty pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-5 of $2,000. If the violation is of a
continuing nature, each day during which it occurs shall constitute an
additional, separate, and distinct offense.
C. Upon identification of a violation of this Chapter the Noise Control
Officer or Noise Control Investigator shall issue an enforcement
document to the violator. The enforcement document shall identify the
condition or activity that constitutes the violation and the specific
provision of this Chapter that has been violated. It shall also indicate
whether the violator has a period of time to correct the violation before
a penalty is sought.
§ 208-9 MOBILE TELEPHONES § 208-10
204:251
D. If the violation is deemed by the Noise Control Officer or Noise Control
Investigator to be a minor violation (as defined in Section 208-2) a NOV
shall be issued to the violator.
(1) The document shall indicate that the purpose of the NOV is
intended to serve as a notice to warn the responsible party/violator
of the violation conditions in order to provide them with an
opportunity to voluntarily investigate the matter and voluntarily
take corrective action to address the identified violation.
(2) The NOV shall identify the time period (up to 90 days), pursuant to
the Grace Period Law, N.J.S.A. 13:1D-125 et seq. where the
responsible party's/violator's voluntary action can prevent a formal
enforcement action with penalties issued by the Noise Control
Officer, Noise Control Investigator, or other designated official. It
shall be noted that the NOV does not constitute a formal
enforcement action, a final agency action or a final legal
determination that a violation has occurred. Therefore, the NOV
may not be appealed or contested.
E. If the violation is deemed by the Noise Control Officer or Noise Control
Investigator to be a non-minor violation, the violator shall be notified
that if the violation is not immediately corrected, a NOPA with a civil
penalty of not more than the maximum penalty allowed pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:49-5 of $2,000, will be issued. If a non-minor violation is
immediately corrected, a NOV without a civil penalty shall still be
issued to document the violation. If the violation occurs again (within
12 months of the initial violation) a NOPA shall be issued regardless of
whether the violation is immediately corrected or not.
F. The violator may request from the Noise Control Officer or Noise
Control Investigator, an extension of the compliance deadline in the
enforcement action. The Noise Control Officer or Noise Control
Investigator shall have the option to approve any reasonable request for
an extension (not to exceed 180 days) if the violator can demonstrate
that a good faith effort has been made to achieve compliance. If an
extension is not granted and the violation continues to exist after the
grace period ends, a NOPA shall be issued.
G. The recipient of a NOPA shall be entitled to a hearing in a municipal
court having jurisdiction to contest such action.
H. The Noise Control Officer or Noise Control Investigator may seek
injunctive relief if the responsible party does not remediate the
violation within the period of time specified in the NOPA issued.
I. Any claim for a civil penalty may be compromised and settled based on
the following factors:
(1) Mitigating or any other extenuating circumstances;
§ 208-10 HILLSDALE CODE § 208-10
204:252
Chapter 212
OUTDOOR CAFES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 88.
Fees — See Ch. 138.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 188.
Noise — See Ch. 208.
Penalties — See Ch. 226.
Land use — See Ch. 310.
Food establishments — See Ch. 339.
§ 212-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a procedure and authorize
rules and regulations thereunder for the licensing of outdoor cafes in the
Commercial Zone of the Borough of Hillsdale.
§ 212-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed in this section.
OUTDOOR CAFE — Any eating establishment where food and other
refreshments are served upon the public right-of-way, namely the sidewalks
immediately in front of any restaurant, cafe, cafeteria or place of business
where food and/or other refreshments are served which has received
approval for on-site consumption of food and complies with all applicable
codes.
SIDEWALK — That area of the public right-of-way reserved for pedestrian
traffic from the curb to the front line of the building housing an eating
establishment.
§ 212-3. License required. [Amended 6-4-2012 by Ord. No. 12-11]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, corporation,
association or organization of any kind (hereinafter collectively referred to
as "person") to create, establish, operate, maintain or otherwise be engaged
in the business of conducting an outdoor cafe upon the sidewalks of the
Borough of Hillsdale without a Hillsdale Borough license.
(2) The timely implementation by the violator of measures which lead
to compliance;
(3) The conduct of the violator; and
(4) The compliance history of the violator.
§ 208-10 MOBILE TELEPHONES § 212-4
204:253
§ 212-4. License requirements.
No license shall be issued hereunder unless the licensee shall demonstrate
that a minimum of five feet of contiguous unobstructed paved surface will
be available for pedestrian traffic around or through such outdoor cafe
and that such outdoor cafe will be directly in front of or contiguous to
an eating establishment as hereinabove defined. The front unobstructed
paved surface shall be established between the table and the curb. No food
or drinks served at such outdoor cafe shall be prepared or stored other
than in the interior of the eating establishment. The term "directly in front
of" shall confine the cafe to the area represented by an extension of each
side of the store occupied by the eating establishment projected directly
to the curbline immediately in front thereof. Any table used for sidewalk
dining may not result in an increase in the total number of tables allowed
in a restaurant cafe, cafeteria or place of business approved for on-site
consumption of food.
§ 212-5. License application.
Application for the license required hereunder shall be made to the
Construction Code Official and shall be signed by the applicant. The
application shall contain the following information:
A. The name, residence address and telephone number of each individual,
owner, partner or, if a domestic corporation, the names, residence
addresses and telephone numbers of the directors and officers owning a
10% or greater interest in the corporation and chief operating
executive of the corporation and, if a nondomestic corporation, the
name, residence address and telephone number of the managing officer
for service of process within the State of New Jersey and a copy of the
qualification of said nondomestic corporation to conduct business in the
State of New Jersey.
B. A copy of the trade, corporate, business or fictitious name upon which
the applicant intends to do business pursuant to this chapter.
C. The address and description of each place where the occupant intends
to establish or operate an outdoor cafe.
D. The name and address of the person owning the premises, if other than
the applicant, and the consent of the owner of the premises to the
application.
E. Three sets of a proposed layout plan containing scaled drawings clearly
illustrating the number, type of materials, color and location of all
tables, chairs, umbrellas or other furnishings or fixtures intended to be
located in the outdoor cafe, and where the corresponding indoor tables
will be removed. Umbrellas extending over the dining area are
permitted. The scaled drawings shall also illustrate the following:
(1) The location of any doors leading from the eating establishment to
the outdoor cafe. No such doors may be obstructed in any manner.
§ 212-4 HILLSDALE CODE § 212-5
204:254
§ 212-6. Review of application.
The Construction Code Official will review the application for completeness
and compliance with the terms of this chapter. If the application is
complete, the Construction Code Official will act upon the same within 10
business days of the submittal of the application or within 10 business days
after the application becomes complete. If the application is not complete,
the Construction Code Official will so notify the applicant within the 10
business days of the submissions and specifically detail the areas in which
the application lacks compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
§ 212-7. License issuance.
If the application complies with this chapter, the Construction Code Official
shall issue a license strictly subject to the terms and conditions of this
chapter.
§ 212-8. License nontransferable.
The license is personal to the applicant, and any change or transfer of
ownership of the outdoor cafe shall terminate the license and shall require
new application and a new license in conformance with all of the
requirements of this chapter.
§ 212-9. Consent to inspections.
Acceptance to the license by the applicant shall operate as a consent to
the health, fire, police and building officials of the Borough to inspect the
outdoor cafe for continued compliance with the terms and conditions of this
chapter and any federal, state, county or local law, ordinance or regulation
affecting the same.
§ 212-10. Indemnification of Borough.
No license required by this chapter shall be granted to any person to
operate an outdoor cafe until such person shall have filed with the
(2) All trees and the location of unobstructed space permitting free
passage of pedestrian traffic around or through each outdoor cafe.
(3) The location where any food or drink is intended to be prepared.
(4) The location of all fire hydrants, parking meters, utility poles,
benches, handicap ramps, street furniture, trees, cellar doors and
any other fixtures permanently located on the sidewalk in front of
the eating establishment or within 10 feet thereof on either or any
side.
(5) The type and location of any proposed outdoor lighting fixtures.
(6) An application fee as provided in Chapter 138, Fees. [Amended
5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
§ 212-5 MOBILE TELEPHONES § 212-10
204:255
Construction Code Official a statement agreeing to indemnify and hold
harmless the Borough of Hillsdale, its agents servants, representatives or
employees from any or all claims, damages, judgment costs or expenses,
including attorney's fees, which they or any of then may incur or be required
to pay because of any personal injury, including death, or property damage
suffered by any person or persons as a result or or related in any way to
the operation and maintenance of the outdoor cafe for which the license is
issued.
§ 212-11. Insurance requirements.
A. No license required by this chapter shall be granted to any person to
operate an outdoor cafe until such person shall have first filed with the
Construction Code Official a comprehensive general liability policy
issued to such person by a public liability insurance company
authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey affording the
coverages set forth below in the amounts specified. Such insurance
policy shall name the Borough of Hillsdale, 380 Hillsdale Avenue,
Hillsdale, New Jersey 07642, its agents, officers, servants,
representatives and employees as additional insured with respect to the
operation and maintenance of the outdoor cafe in the following
amounts:
Bodily injury
Each person $300,000.
Each accident $1,000,000.
Property damage
Each person $300,000.
Each accident $1,000,000.
B. The insurance coverage required by this section shall at all times be
maintained for the full amount. The policy of insurance required by this
section to be filed with the Construction Code Official shall contain a
clause obligating the company issuing the same to give not less than
thirty (30) days' written notice to the Borough Clerk before cancellation
for amendments of any of the terms thereof. Notice of cancellation shall
not relieve the company issuing such policy of liability or claim arising
before the cancellation becomes effective. The cancellation of any such
policy shall have the immediate effect of suspending the license of such
person to operate the outdoor cafe covered thereby until a new policy
complying with the provisions of this section is filed with the
Construction Code Official and a letter, in writing, confirming the new
effective date of the license is issued by the Construction Code Official.
C. Every insurance policy required hereunder shall contain a provision for
continuing liability thereunder to the full amount thereof,
notwithstanding any recovery therein, that the liability of the insured
shall not be affected by the insolvency or the bankruptcy of the insured,
and that until the policy is canceled the insurance company will not be
§ 212-10 HILLSDALE CODE § 212-11
204:256
§ 212-12. Revocation or suspension of license.
Any license issued hereunder is issued solely as a revocable license, which
shall be subject to revocation or suspension by the Borough for failure
of any licensees to comply with this chapter or for violation of any other
applicable federal, state, county or municipal law, regulation or ordinance.
Any license issued hereunder is issued upon the express understanding
that the licensees obtains no property right thereunder, nor any interest
in the continuation of said license. Upon the first violation, the eating
establishment shall receive a written warning. Upon the second violation,
the license shall be revoked for the remainder of the license year.
§ 212-13. Suspension or termination of license.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an outdoor cafe after the
suspension or termination of the applicable license.
§ 212-14. Cleaning of areas. [Amended 6-4-2012 by Ord. No. 12-11]
relieved from liability on account of nonpayment of such premium or
of any act of omission by the named insured. Such policy of insurance
shall be further conditioned for the payment of any and all judgments
up to the limits of such policy.
A. Each licensee is responsible for keeping the area of the outdoor cafe
and the adjacent walks and streets free and clear of any debris or litter
occasioned by the cafe. Tables must be bussed and reset immediately
upon departure of the patron. Areas must be cleaned as needed and at
the time that business is closed and at the beginning of each business
day, but not later than 9:00 a.m.
B. All garbage generated and left within 20 feet of an outdoor cafe or
mobile retail establishment must be removed from the sidewalk and
adjoining gutter daily.
C. Sidewalks shall be steam cleaned whenever necessary, and at a
minimum frequency of once every three months, with a cleaning agent
and disinfectant.
D. Garbage and recycling must be removed from the sidewalk prior to
opening the outdoor cafe or mobile retail establishment daily and must
be kept clear from the sidewalk while food is present outside the
establishment. Borough garbage cans must be emptied by the licensee
on days that the Borough garbage cans are not picked up or at any time
conditions require them to be emptied.
E. Violation of any of the above cleaning requirements constitutes grounds
for revocation or suspension of a license to operate within the Borough
of Hillsdale, with the penalty pursuant to § 212-12 of this chapter.
F. The cleaning requirements and penalties in this Code section are also
specifically applicable and enforceable within the Borough of Hillsdale
§ 212-11 MOBILE TELEPHONES § 212-14
204:257
§ 212-15. Exterior vending machines prohibited.
No vending machines of any kind are permitted on the exterior of any
building operating an outdoor cafe.
§ 212-16. Signs.
No additional signs shall be permitted in the area of the outdoor cafe other
than those permitted by ordinance.
§ 212-17. Impeding pedestrian traffic; emergencies.
In addition to the powers of suspension or revocation as set forth above, the
Borough reserves the right to modify, suspend or revoke any license on ten
(10) days' written notice if the Borough determines that pedestrian traffic
is, in fact, impeded or made unsafe because of the operation of the outdoor
cafe or because of any other safety issue which the Borough determines
adversely affects the Borough because of such operation. The license may
also be suspended or revoked on ten (10) days' written notice, in the event
the Borough determines that it is necessary to utilize the area or any
part hereof for the maintenance or installation of underground utilities. In
the event of an emergency, which emergency is certified by the Borough
Administrator, the license may be suspended or revoked without notice.
§ 212-18. Serving alcoholic beverages.
If the applicant is the holder of an alcoholic beverage control license
pursuant to the laws of the State of New Jersey, it shall be the applicant's
responsibility to cause the alcoholic beverage control license to be amended
to include the premises utilized for outdoor cafe purposes in order to serve
alcoholic beverages therein. Alcohol is only to be served in conjunction with
food service.
§ 212-19. Days of operation.
Outdoor cafes shall be permitted to operate from April 1 or October 31
in any calendar year. The license, when issued, shall be valid for one (1)
season.
§ 212-20. Attachment of equipment unlawful.
No tables, chairs or other equipment used in the outdoor cafe shall be
attached, chained or in any manner affixed to any tree, post, sign, curb or
sidewalk or property of the Borough of Hillsdale within or near the licensed
area.
as to any mobile retail establishments, as defined in § 339-1,
Definitions, of the Hillsdale Borough Code.
§ 212-14 HILLSDALE CODE § 212-21
204:258
§ 212-21. Vacation of sidewalk ; removal of property.
The licensee agrees at the end of the license period, or in the event that
the license is temporarily or permanently suspended or revoked, that the
licensee will at his or her own cost and expense vacate the sidewalk space
and promptly remove any property placed thereon. Failure to do so on five
(5) days' written notice shall grant to the Borough the right to remove any
property on the sidewalk and the licensees agree to reimburse the Borough
for the cost of removing and storing the same.
§ 212-22. Noise-making devices.
The licensees shall not direct or permit to be directed to or from the area
occupied by the outdoor cafe any bell, chime, siren, whistle, loudspeaker,
public address system, radio, sound amplifier or similar device.
§ 212-23. Hours of operation.
No outdoor cafe shall remain open for business prior to 7:00 a.m. nor serve
customers after 10:00 p.m. All persons occupying the outdoor cafe shall
vacate the same no later than 10:30 p.m.
§ 212-24. Violations and penalties. [Added 5-13-1997 by Ord. No.
97-8]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 226, Penalties.
Chapter 216
PARADES AND STREET MEETINGS
§ 216-1. Definitions.
As used in this c118hapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARADE — Any parade, march, pageant or procession of any kind, moving
in or upon any street, park or other place in the Borough.
STREET MEETING — A gathering, demonstration or neighborhood block
party or other same or similar event which is not a procession and is on
or between not more than two contiguous streets in the Borough, and
which requires the temporary closing of vehicular traffic on those streets to
accommodate the event.[Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
118. Editor's Note: For power of a municipality to enact ordinances to regulate processions and
parades through its streets and highways, see N.J.S.A. 40:67-1. See also N.J.S.A. 39:4-93
for traffic regulations affecting processions.END FNOTE
§ 212-21 PARADES AND STREET MEETINGS § 216-2
216:259
§ 216-2. Permit required.
No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade
or street meeting unless a permit therefor shall have been issued by the
Borough Clerk after approval thereof in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 216-3. Application for permit; no fee required; forwarding of
application to Council and/or Borough Clerk for action. [Amended
10-2-2001 by Ord. No. 01-19]
§ 216-4. Time for filing application for permit.
An application for a permit shall be filed with the Borough Clerk not less
than 21 days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade
or hold the street meeting.
§ 216-5. Standards for approval of issuance of permit. [Amended
5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8; 10-2-2001 by Ord. No. 01-19]
A. A person seeking issuance of a permit under this chapter shall file a
written application therefor with the Borough Clerk, setting forth:
(1) The time and place where the street meeting is to be held;
(2) The time and place or route of the proposed parade.
B. No payment of a fee for the permit shall be required.
C. The Borough Clerk shall immediately after the filing for a parade permit
forward the application to the Council for action thereon.
A. The Borough Clerk is hereby authorized to grant permission for a street
meeting/block party when, after consultation and approval by the Chief
Law Enforcement Officer or his/her designated law enforcement officer:
(1) The conduct of the street meeting/block party will not substantially
interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous
to the place of the street meeting/block party.
(2) The street meeting/block party will not be held for the sole purpose
of advertising any commercial products, goods or events and is not
designed for private profit.
(3) The Department of Public Works shall be notified three days in
advance of the event and appropriate Borough-owned barricades
will be provided to the place of the street meeting/block party on
the day before the event.
(4) The Mayor and Council shall be notified by the Borough Clerk prior
to all scheduled street meeting/block parties.
§ 216-2 HILLSDALE CODE § 216-5
216:260
§ 216-6. Time limit for approval or denial by Council of issuance of
permit.
At the next meeting of the Council after the filing of an application for a
permit, the Council shall act upon the application by approving or denying
the issuance of a permit. Upon approval of the application, the Borough
Clerk shall issue the permit. If the application is not approved, the Council
shall forthwith notify the applicant and provide him or her with reasons for
denial.
§ 216-7. Approval of alternate permit; notice by applicant of
acceptance required.
(5) For said event a hold-harmless agreement and insurance shall not
be required. Exception: When any mechanical, stationary or live
form of entertainment is rented, leased or owned by a resident for
the purpose of holding a street meeting/block party and said
mechanical, stationary or live form of entertainment is utilized,
placed and/or located on a public street, borough property and/or
borough right-of-way, a hold-harmless agreement in favor of the
Borough of Hillsdale and an insurance certificate naming the
Borough of Hillsdale as additional insured from said rented, leased,
or owned form of entertainment shall then be required.
B. The Council shall approve the issuance by the Borough Clerk of a
permit for a parade when, from consideration of the application and
from such other information as may be obtained, the Council finds that:
(1) The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe
and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route.
(2) It will not require the diversion of Borough employees so as to
prevent the furnishing of essential police, fire and health services
in the Borough.
(3) The parade will not be held for the sole purpose of advertising any
commercial products, goods or events and is not designed to be
held purely for private profit.
(4) For said event a hold-harmless agreement and insurance shall be
required by the Mayor and Council.
A. In denying an application for permit, the Council is empowered and
authorized to approve the issuance, by the Borough Clerk, of a permit,
hereinafter referred to as the "alternate permit," for the conduct of the
parade on a date, at a time and place or over a route different from that
named by the applicant. If the applicant files, within three days after
the notice of such action, a written notice of acceptance of such
proposed alternate permit, the Borough Clerk shall issue such alternate
permit. [Amended 10-2-2001 by Ord. No. 01-19]
§ 216-5 PARADES AND STREET MEETINGS § 216-7
216:261
§ 216-8. Contents of permit.
§ 216-9. Term of permit.
Every permit issued under this chapter shall terminate at the finishing time
set forth in the permit as required by § 216-8, unless sooner revoked or
suspended for cause.
§ 216-10. Permit not transferable.
Each permit issued under this chapter shall be valid only for the place or
route designated therein and to the person whose name is set forth in the
permit. No permit shall be transferable except by consent of the Council.
§ 216-11. Duties of permittee.
The holder of a permit under this chapter shall comply with all permit
directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances.
§ 216-12. Possession of permit required.
The chairman of the parade or street meeting or other person heading or
leading the same shall carry the permit upon his or her person during the
conduct of the parade or street meeting.
§ 216-13. Suspension or revocation of permit; grounds. [Amended
5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
Permits issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the
Borough Council or the Chief Law Enforcement Officer upon any of the
following grounds:
B. Such alternate permit shall conform to all the requirements of, and
have the same effect as, and be deemed to be, a permit issued pursuant
to this chapter.
A. Each permit issued under this chapter shall state the following
information:
(1) The name of the person to whom the permit was issued.
(2) The starting and finishing time.
(3) Portions of the streets to be traversed and occupied by the parade
and street meeting.
(4) Such other information as the Borough Clerk may require.
B. The Borough Clerk shall keep a record of every permit issued under this
chapter.
A. Violation of the directions or conditions of the permit;
§ 216-7 HILLSDALE CODE § 216-13
216:262
§ 216-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the provisions of Chapter 226, Penalties.
Chapter 218
PARKING LOTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 292.
B. Making false statements or giving false information in the application;
C. Violation of any provisions of this chapter;
D. Violation of any applicable statute of this state or ordinance of the
Borough.
§ 216-13 PARKING LOTS § 216-14
218:263

ARTICLE I
Nonprofit Use of Municipal West Parking Lot
[Adopted 10-8-2002 by Ord. No. 02-13]
§ 218-1. Use limited.
The Municipal West Lot (hereinafter referred to as the "lot") may be used
by a not-for-profit organization not more than three times per calendar
year for weekday events of no longer than one week in duration during a
Monday through Sunday period, limited to one event per year per not-forprofit
organization.
§ 218-2. Weekend use.
Additionally, the lot may be used for weekend-only events for no more
than four times per calendar year to include only two Saturdays and two
Sundays; but in no event not on consecutive weekends.
§ 218-3. Applicability.
Use of the lot pursuant to these rules and regulations is limited to those tax
exempt not-for-profit organizations whose roots are in Hillsdale. That is, the
organization may be physically located in another municipality so long as at
least 25% of the organization's members are Hillsdale residents.
§ 218-4. Lottery system; prioritized uses.
Usage of the lot will be decided by a lottery system. The Hillsdale Volunteer
Fire Department and the Hillsdale Volunteer Ambulance Corps shall be
exempt from the lottery and each shall be given priority on the use of the
lot (second only to municipal uses) for one event per year. In the event both
of these organizations request use of the lot during the same calendar year,
the flip of a coin shall determine the priority for choosing dates between
them. The flip of the coin shall be conducted by the Borough Clerk on a day
and at a time designated by him or her.
§ 218-5. Lottery for remaining organizations.
The lottery for all remaining qualified organizations shall be held on the
second Tuesday of September for the following calendar year. All requests
for the use of the lot must be received by the Borough Clerk's office by 4:00
p.m. of the last business day in August.
§ 218-6. Requests for use.
All requests for use of the lot must be in writing and signed by an authorized
representative of the requesting organization. Submission of a request shall
constitute an agreement of the applicant to be bound by and comply with
these rules and regulations.
§ 218-1 PARKING LOTS § 218-7
218:265
§ 218-7. Offer of slot to other organization prohibited.
In the event an applicant is chosen, it may not offer its slot to another
organization or it will forfeit its right to use the lot for that year.
§ 218-8. Commuter parking spaces to be provided.
All successful applicants must provide commuters a parking space, at no
charge, during the period the lot is unavailable to any party with proper
parking identification in an alternative parking area convenient to the
commuters using the lot.
§ 218-9. Alternative parking.
All successful applicants must, at least one month prior to their event,
provide the Borough of Hillsdale a map of showing where alternative
parking will be provided and at the same time provide the Borough of
Hillsdale with a written confirmation of the availability of alternative
parking during the event.
§ 218-10. Direction of traffic.
All successful applicants will be responsible for directing all commuters
to their assigned alternative parking areas. All designees for directing
traffic shall be so identified in a manner approved by the Hillsdale Police
Department.
§ 218-11. Kings Supermarket Parking Lot.
All successful applicants using the Kings Supermarket Parking Lot for
alternative commuter parking must provide personnel in the Kings Parking
Lot, on the business day the event takes place, prior to the first departure
of the train in the morning, insuring commuters are parking in the proper
locations as agreed upon by Kings Supermarket and their representative.
§ 218-12. Notice for alternative parking required.
All successful applicants must provide notice on the lot vehicles, twice prior
to their event, informing the commuters of the event and the alternative
parking locations. This notice shall be given on different days; one posting
per week for two weeks prior to the event.
§ 218-13. Cleanliness of site.
All successful applicants will be responsible for cleaning the site daily
during the term of' the event and providing adequate dumpsters, pickup and
cartage of trash.
§ 218-7 HILLSDALE CODE § 218-14
218:266
§ 218-14. Portable toilet facilities.
All successful applicants will be responsible for providing what the Borough
determines as adequate portable toilet facilities during the term of the
event with cleaning of said facilities as recommended by the Board of
Health officer of the Borough.
§ 218-15. Electrical service.
All successful applicants will be responsible for providing or reimbursing
the Borough for electrical service to the site during the term of the event.
§ 218-16. Security.
All successful applicants will be responsible for providing security at the
site during the term of the event to a degree and in a manner approved by
the Hillsdale Police Department.
§ 218-17. New Jersey Transit parking areas.
Under no circumstances shall the New Jersey Transit parking areas be used
for lot commuter parking until all of the spaces required for the commuters
who paid for parking are provided alternative parking.
§ 218-18. Carnivals and similar events.
Carnivals and similar events run by successful applicants must utilize the
successful applicants' own people to run all games of chance and the selling
of ride tickets.
§ 218-18.1. Fees for carnivals and other events. [Added 4-4-2007 by
Ord. No. 07-12]
§ 218-18.2. Deposit for carnivals and other events. [Added 4-4-2007
by Ord. No. 07-12]
In addition to the fee, a refundable deposit of $500 is payable by the
permit holder for a carnival or other event at least one month prior to the
A. A nonrefundable fee of $1,250 shall be payable by the permit holder for
a carnival at least one month prior to the commencement date of the
event. This fee shall reimburse the Borough for costs including but not
limited to electric power for lighting, but not for rides or special
machinery, and for the cleaning of the lot after, but not during, the
carnival.
B. Applicants obtaining permits for events other than carnivals on the
West Lot must pay a nonrefundable fee of $250 per day at least one
month prior to the event. This fee includes electric power for lighting,
but not for rides or special machinery, and for the cleaning of the lot
after, but not during, the event.
§ 218-14 PARKING LOTS § 218-18.2
218:267
commencement date of the event. This deposit will be held in escrow and
only be used to pay for damage or additional expenses incurred by the
Borough in conjunction with the event.
§ 218-18.3. Damage to paved surfaces. [Added 4-4-2007 by Ord. No.
07-12]
No penetration, marring or disturbance shall be made to any paved surface.
The permit holder shall be responsible for any damage to the paved surface.
§ 218-19. Insurance.
All successful applicants must, one month prior to the scheduled event,
provide the Borough of Hillsdale proof of insurance naming the Borough,
its elected officials and employees as additional insureds on an insurance
policy. The insurance policy must be in an amount or with a minimum of
limits as required by law.
§ 218-20. Hold-harmless agreement.
All successful applicants must, one month prior to the scheduled event,
deliver to the Borough of Hillsdale an executed hold-harmless agreement in
a form acceptable to the Borough Attorney.
§ 218-21. Other rules and regulations.
All successful applicants must adhere to these and all other Borough
regulations, rules and ordinances as they may be adopted from time to time,
including but not limited to all rules, regulations and resolutions relating to
the prohibition of the use of municipal property during religious holidays.
§ 218-22. Amendment of rules.
Said rules may be amended from time to time by the Mayor and Council.
§ 218-18.2 HILLSDALE CODE § 218-22
218:268
ARTICLE II
Hillsdale Railroad Station
[Adopted 10-8-1996 by Ord. No. 96-11; amended in its entirety
12-12-2006 by Ord. No. 06-16]
§ 218-23. Station parking lots permits.
An annual parking fee of $360 and a daily parking fee of $3 is hereby
established for the Hillsdale Railroad Station parking lots, located adjacent
to the railroad tracks, on the west side, between Park Avenue on the north,
and the Hillsdale Public Works yard on the south. Said annual permit shall
be for the period January 1 through December 31. Permits, if available, shall
be sold for less than an annual period, but no less than a calendar month at
the rate of $30.
§ 218-24. Stickers required; spaces marked.
Persons possessing annual parking stickers may only park in spaces
designated for annual parking.
§ 218-25. Deposit of daily fee.
Any persons using the Hillsdale Railroad Station parking lots on a daily
basis may only park in designated parking spaces and shall deposit the daily
fee in the parking fee collection box or machine upon entering the parking
space.
§ 218-26. Procedure for allocation of spaces.
The Borough Council shall adopt, by resolution, the procedures for
allocation of parking spaces among interested parties, shall designate
which Borough employees shall issue parking permits, and may provide a
procedure for refund of unused portion of permit fee.
§ 218-27. Availability of lots.
The Hillsdale Railroad Station parking lots shall be reserved for use by
persons possessing the necessary parking stickers or paying the daily fee
between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m., Monday through Friday,
except on legal holidays. Parking is not permitted in the Hillsdale Railroad
Station parking lots between the hours-of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., or when
otherwise prohibited for snow removal purposes.
§ 218-23 PARKING LOTS § 218-27
218:269
Chapter 220
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
§ 220-1. Hours of operation; exceptions. [Amended 5-8-1979 by
Ord. No. 79-9]
§ 220-2. Unauthorized use of areas.
At all times other than those specified in § 220-1 hereof, no person other
than a law enforcement officer or a person duly authorized by the Borough
of Hillsdale or any of its duly authorized boards, bodies, departments,
commissions or agencies, shall:
§ 220-3. Unlawful acts. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8;
3-6-2001 by Ord. No. 01-04]
At no time shall any person in or upon any park, playground or open space:
A. Except for duly proclaimed emergencies, the public parks, playgrounds
and open spaces of the Borough of Hillsdale shall be open for:
(1) Use at will by the general public at all times between dawn and 1/2
hour after sunset.
(2) Organized use with the supervision or permission of the Recreation
Commission, of such times and during such hours as the
Commission shall prescribe.
B. There is hereby excepted from said time period the area known as
Veterans Memorial Park.
C. For the purposes of this section, the activation of the Hillsdale
Lightning Detection System constitutes a duly proclaimed emergency.
Upon such activation, all public parks, playgrounds and open spaces of
the Borough of Hillsdale are immediately closed and remain closed
through the entire duration of the system's activation. All groups and
individuals using these areas must immediately stop their activities and
exit for the purpose of seeking shelter. It is prohibited and unlawful to
violate this section, and punishable under Chapter 226 of the Borough
Code. [Added 5-13-2008 by Ord. No. 08-08]
A. Be in or upon any portion of any public park, playground or open space.
B. Cause or permit any motor driven vehicle, attended or unattended, to
be in or upon any portion of any pubic park, playground or open space.
A. Operate any motor-driven vehicle anywhere other than on a roadway
designated as being open to such traffic.
B. Park or leave standing a motor-driven vehicle other than of a place
designated for parking purposes.
§ 218-27 HILLSDALE CODE § 220-3
218:270
§ 220-4. Rules and regulations.
Copies of the rules and regulations hereby enacted shall be conspicuously
posted in all places to and at which this chapter shall be applicable.
§ 220-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No.
97-8]
Every person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction of such violation, be punishable as provided in Chapter 226,
Penalties.
Chapter 224
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auctions — See Ch. 100.
Fees — See Ch. 138.
Garage sales — See Ch. 162.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 188.
Noise — See Ch. 208.
Penalties — See Ch. 226.
Land use — See Ch. 310.
§ 224-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
C. Operate a motor-driven vehicle at a speed in excess of 10 miles per
hour.
D. Possess or consume any alcoholic beverage.
E. Use any abusive, indecent, foul or profane language.
F. Litter.
G. Intentionally cut, mark, deface, write or draw upon, disfigure, injure,
tamper with, displace or remove any portion of any building, bridge,
table, bench, fireplace, railing, utility line, sign, notice, placard, gate,
cable, monument, stake, sidewalk, pavement or like appurtenances.
H. Intentionally cut, transplant, remove or damage any trees, shrubbery,
lawn or any of their supportive equipment such as wires, guys, supports
and like appurtenances.
I. Smoke any tobacco products.
J. Perform or engage in any other conduct prohibited by law.
§ 220-3 PARKING LOTS § 224-1
218:271
CANVASSER — A solicitor.
DISTRIBUTOR — A person who goes from house to house on public
thoroughfares or in public places disseminating or otherwise disposing of
printed material or other articles designed directly or indirectly to advertise
or promote a commercial purpose, including, by way of example and not by
way of limitation, circulars, handbills, posters, pamphlets, newspapers and
other matter of an advertising or other commercial promotional nature.
HAWKER — Includes a person who, in a public street or place, cries forth
the goods, wares and merchandise which he or she has to sell.
NON-PROFIT-MAKING VENDOR — A person who sells or collects goods,
the proceeds of which are devoted exclusively to the purpose of a
philanthropic, charitable or religious society on whose behalf he or she acts
as agent.
PEDDLER — Includes any person traveling by foot, wagon, motor vehicle or
in or upon any other type of vehicle or conveyance, from house to house,
store to store or street to street, carrying with him or her any wares,
merchandise or goods for the purpose of: offering and exposing the same for
sale; or making sales and delivering any of the said articles to purchasers. A
"peddler" shall also mean and include a person who, without traveling from
place to place, sells or offers for sale wares, merchandise or goods from a
wagon, motor vehicle or any other type of vehicle or conveyance. The word
"peddler" shall include the words huckster and vendor. Any person who
solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers
as a part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this chapter shall
be deemed a "peddler."
SOLICITOR — A person who goes from house to house to from place to
place selling merchandise by sample or by taking orders for future delivery,
with or without accepting advance payments for the goods, regardless of
whether the solicitation is made by mail, telephone or personal contact. The
provisions of this chapter shall apply to the person who comes in personal
contact with the buyer, whether he obtains the order, delivers the goods or
accepts money in payment for them. Solicitor shall also mean any person
who goes from house-to-house or from place-to-place for the purpose of
offering services, makes inquiries concerning real estate, obtaining alms,
contributions or subscriptions or who does research analyses, makes
surveys or opinion polls, obtains rating data or similar information or who
engages in any similar work which involves a door-to-door or place-to-place
activity.[Amended 10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 16-13]
§ 224-1 HILLSDALE CODE § 224-2
218:272
§ 224-2. Purpose.119
The purpose of this chapter is to prevent crime and dishonest business
practices by the regulation of the conduct of persons seeking a permit under
the provisions of this chapter. The permit fee hereinafter set forth in this
chapter is estimated to cover the expense involved and is not imposed for
revenue purposes.
§ 224-3. Permit required.
§ 224-4. Scope; exemptions.
The requirements of § 224-3A, insofar as they apply to fees, shall be held
not to include the following persons, who are expressly exempt from its
application:
A. No person shall engage in or carry on the business of a peddler or
hawker without first obtaining a permit as provided in this chapter and
in Chapter 188, Licenses and Permits.
B. No non-profit-making vendor or solicitor shall sell, buy, collect or
dispose of or offer to sell, buy, collect or dispose of any goods, wares,
merchandise or services to be delivered or rendered in the future, or to
take orders for any goods, wares, merchandise or services to be
delivered or rendered in the future, within the Borough, without first
obtaining a permit therefor in the manner as is provided in this chapter
and in Chapter 188, Licenses and Permits.
C. No distributor shall distribute or cause to be distributed to the
occupant of any house unless the same has been previously ordered, or
place or cause to be placed in or on any premises, or in any automobile,
or hand to any person on the street, or attach to any tree, pole, sign,
billboard, fence or building except where located on the premises of the
distributor or issue any printed material or other articles of the kind
described in the definition of "distributor" in § 224-1, unless said
distributor shall first have obtained a permit therefor in the manner as
provided in this chapter and in Chapter 188, Licenses and Permits.
A. Any person selling fruits, vegetables and farm products grown by
himself, with or without the help of others.
B. Any person honorably discharged from the military, naval, marine or air
forces of the United States who possesses a peddler's license issued in
conformity with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 45:24-10.
C. Any non-profit-making vendor.
119. Editor's Note: For state statute authorizing a municipality to license and regulate peddlers
and hawkers or to prescribe and regulate the place of vending or exposing for sale articles
and merchandise from vehicles, see N.J.S.A. 40:52-1, Subdivision c. See also Tagmire v.
Atlantic City, 35 N.J. Super. 11, 113 A. 2d (App. Div. 1955), holding that exempt firemen
and honorably discharged military personnel holding a special license to hawk and peddle
issued by the County Clerk pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 et seq. are exempt from the
municipal licensing requirement.
§ 224-2 PARKING LOTS § 224-4
218:273
§ 224-5. Remaining in one location.
No permittee shall remain in any one place for more than 15 minutes at
any one time for the purpose of conducting the business or occupation
permitted.120
§ 224-6. Application for permit; fee.
§ 224-7. Issuance of permit; form.
§ 224-8. Appeal to Council.
In case of disapproval of an application for a permit under this chapter by
the Borough Clerk, the applicant may appeal to the Borough Council in the
manner prescribed by Chapter 188, Licenses and Permits, § 188-6.
D. Any person who conducts a sale pursuant to statute or court order.
E. Any person who is an exempt member of a volunteer fire department as
defined by N.J.S.A. 45:24-9b and who possesses a license issued in
conformity therewith.
F. Any person who possesses a permit or license issued under any other
article of this chapter.
A. The application for a permit under this chapter shall be made in writing
to the Borough Clerk, on a form to be supplied by and filed with him or
her.
B. The fees for permits issued under this chapter shall be as provided in
Chapter 138, Fees. The permit fee shall be paid by the applicant to the
Borough Treasurer when the application is presented.
A. It shall be the duty of the Borough Clerk to issue a permit under this
chapter where the provisions thereof have been complied with.
B. The permit shall be in the form of a card bearing the name of the
permittee, the purpose for which the permit is issued, the date of
expiration, and the signature of the Borough Clerk. The permit shall
also bear a passport-type photo of the permittee.
C. The Borough Clerk shall issue a permit about three inches by four
inches, numbered and bearing the name of the Borough and the type of
permit. Upon the issuing of the permit, a deposit as provided in Chapter
138, Fees, shall be collected from the permittee as security for the
return of the permit at the expiration of the same.
D. All permits shall be consecutively numbered.
120. Editor's Note: For statute providing for flashing signals so long as a peddler's vehicle
remains stopped or parked for transacting business, see N.J.S.A. 39:3-64.3.
§ 224-4 HILLSDALE CODE § 224-9
218:274
§ 224-9. Display of permit.
Every permittee shall be required to carry his or her permit with him or
her and shall display such permit while acting under the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 224-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 226, Penalties.
§ 224-11. Entering on posted property prohibited. [Added
10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 16-13]
No trade solicitor or canvasser shall enter onto any property on which is
located a sign or signs stating "no solicitors" or carrying a similar message
forbidding the entry of any persons onto the property.
§ 224-12. Collection, preparation and maintenance of a
nonsolicitation list. [Added 10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 16-13]
Chapter 226
A. Collection, preparation and maintenance of a nonsolicitation list. The
Office of the Borough Administrator/Clerk shall collect, prepare and
maintain a list of addresses of those premises where the owner and/or
occupant has notified the Clerk that soliciting and canvassing is not
permitted on his/her premises. To be included on the nonsolicitation
list, residents shall complete a form supplied and maintained by the
Borough, without cost to the resident. With the adoption of this section,
the Office of the Clerk shall make the form available to all residential
property owners or occupants and may distribute same thereafter in
any manner directed by the Governing Body.
B. The Borough Administrator/Clerk, or their designees, shall submit the
nonsolicitation list to the Chief of Police on a quarterly basis, which
nonsolicitation listing shall be distributed to applicants seeking a
license to solicit or canvass pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
The applicant shall acknowledge, in writing, receipt of this list as part
of the application process. The licensee shall not solicit or canvass at
any address on the nonsolicitation list.
C. On or about January 1, April 1, July 1 and October 1 of each year, the
Office of the Clerk shall update the list. The updated list shall then be
forwarded to the Chief of Police for distribution to solicitors and/or
canvassers. Nothing herein shall prohibit the more frequent updating of
the list by the appropriate Borough Official.
D. Any solicitor or canvasser violating the provisions of this section as
described above shall be punishable by a fine and/or imprisonment as
prescribed in Chapter 226.
§ 224-9 PARKING LOTS § 224-12
218:275
PENALTIES
§ 226-1. Provisions applicable to all ordinances.
§ 226-2. Standard maximum penalty; nonstandard penalties.
A. When the maximum penalty fixed by the applicable state statute varies
from any penalty fixed by this chapter or any ordinance of the Borough,
the limitations of such state statute shall be applicable.
B. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation of this Code of any ordinance of the Borough occurs or
continues, punishable by fine or imprisonment or community service, or
any combination thereof.
C. The imposition of a fine or imprisonment or community service as
punishment for a violation of this Code or of any other ordinance of the
Borough shall not be deemed to be in lieu of any other provision therein
providing for the revocation or suspension of any license or permit
issued thereunder.
A. For violation of any chapter or article not listed in Subsection B below
and whenever no specific penalty is provided in this Code or in any
other ordinance of the Borough for the punishment of an act which is
prohibited or which is declared to be unlawful or any offense, or for the
nonperformance of any act which is required to be done, the violation of
any such provisions shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000, or
by imprisonment in the county or Borough jail for a term not exceeding
90 days, or both; provided, however, that in lieu of a sentence of
imprisonment, the Court may, in its discretion, impose a sentence of
community service for a term not exceeding 90 days. [Amended
4-4-2007 by Ord. No. 07-13]
B. Nonstandard penalties. The standard maximum penalty provided in
Subsection A of this section shall not apply to the following chapters
and/or articles:
(1) Chapter 84, Alarm Systems.
(a) If any dial alarm shall hereafter be found to be dialing the
general Police Headquarters number rather than the special
telephone number reserved for dial alarms, the occupant of the
building or other person in whose name the telephone is listed
shall be sent a notice, in writing, by the Chief Law Enforcement
Officer requiring compliance with the terms of Chapter 84,
Alarm Systems. If the occupant or telephone subscriber shall
fail within 30 days after receipt of said notice to comply, he or
she shall be liable to a penalty payable to the Borough of
Hillsdale in the amount of $50.
§ 224-12 HILLSDALE CODE § 226-2
218:276
(b) In the case of a false alarm, the Chief Law Enforcement Officer
shall cause an investigation to be made and shall keep a record
of said alarm on file. For the first and second false alarm in any
given calendar year, a warning shall be issued; for the third
false alarm in the calendar year, a fine of $25 shall be paid to
the Borough of Hillsdale. For the fourth alarm a fine of $40
shall be paid to the Borough of Hillsdale. [Added 4-14-1998
by Ord. No. 98-3]
(2) Chapter 96, Animals.
(a) Article I, Dogs. Any person who violates or fails or refuses to
comply with Article I, Dogs, of Chapter 96, Animals, or with the
rules and regulations promulgated by the State Department of
Health governing the sanitary conduct and operation of
kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds, to preserve sanitation
therein and to prevent the spread of rabies and other diseases
of dogs within and from such establishments, shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined not less than $5 nor more than $50
for each offense, to be recovered by and in the name of the
Borough, except that for the first offense in case of violations of
§ 96-2, 96-4 or 96-6, the penalty shall not be less than $1 nor
more than $50, to be recovered in the same manner. A person
who refuses or neglects to pay forthwith the amount of a
judgment rendered against him or her and the costs and
charges incident thereto shall be committed by the Judge for a
period not exceeding 10 days in the case of a first conviction
and, in the case of a second, subsequent or continuing
violation, for a term not exceeding 30 days. In case of violation
of § 96-17, Running at large prohibited, and § 96-19, Habitual
barking, howling or crying prohibited, the first offense in any
given calendar year, a fine of $15 shall be issued; for the
second offense in any calendar year, a fine of $20 shall be
issued, and neither shall exceed $50. For the third offense in
the same calendar year, a fine of $25 shall be paid to the
Borough of Hillsdale. For the fourth offense, a fine of $40 shall
be paid to the Borough of Hillsdale, and neither shall exceed
$75. [Amended 4-14-1998 by Ord. No. 98-3]
(b) Article II, Cats. Any person who violates or fails or refuses to
comply with Article II, Cats, of Chapter 96, Animals, or with the
rules and regulations promulgated by the State Department of
Health governing the sanitary conduct and operation of
kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds, to preserve sanitation
therein and to prevent the spread of rabies and other diseases
of cats within and from such establishments, shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined not less than $5 nor more than $50
for each offense, to be recovered by and in the name of the
Borough. A person who refuses or neglects to pay forthwith the
amount of a judgment rendered against him or her and the
§ 226-2 PARKING LOTS § 226-2
218:277
costs and charges incident thereto shall be committed by the
Judge for a period not exceeding 10 days in the case of a
first conviction and, in the case of a second, subsequent or
continuing violation, for a term not exceeding 30 days.
(3) Chapter 146, Fire Prevention.
(a) Article II, Fire Zones.
[1] Any person who violates Article II, Fire Zones, of Chapter
146, Fire Prevention, shall, upon conviction in Municipal
Court thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than $100.
Each violation shall constitute a separate offense.
[2] An owner who fails to comply with the regulations
specified in § 146-15C shall result in a penalty of $500.
Penalties shall be assessed by the Fire Official in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:18, Uniform Fire Code.
(4) Chapter 196, Littering. Any person who violates any provisions of
Chapter 196, Littering, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.42, shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $1,000 for each
offense.
(5) Chapter 208, Noise.
(a) Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of Chapter
208, Noise, or who shall fail to comply therewith or with any of
the requirements thereof, shall be punishable by a penalty as
set forth below.
(b) Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense, punishable by the imposition of additional
penalties as are set forth below.
(c) For penalty determination purposes, any prior violation of the
same provision having occurred within the five years
immediately preceding the current violation shall be
considered in determining the rank of the current violation.
(d) The violation of any section or subsection of Chapter 208,
Noise, shall constitute a separate and distinct offense
independent of the violation of any other section or subsection
or of any order issued pursuant to Chapter 208, Noise.
§ 226-2 HILLSDALE CODE § 226-2
218:278
Maximum Permissible Sound Levels
Offense
Sound
Source
Receiving
Property
Category 1st 2nd 3rd
4th and
Each
Subsequent
Any
location
within
multidwellingunit
building
Any dwelling
within multidwelling-
unit
building
$ 50. $100. $150. $200.
Residential Residential,
commercial
or industrial
$ 50. $100. $150. $200.
Commercial Residential $125. $250. $400. $500.
Commercial Commercial
or industrial
$100. $200. $350. $500.
Industrial Residential $125. $250. $400. $500.
Industrial Commercial
or industrial
$200. $200. $350. $500.
NOTE: These penalties are for violations ranging from zero
to five dBA above the maximum permissible sound levels by
receiving property category. For violations in excess of five
dBA above the maximum permissible sound level, double the
appropriate penalty per offense, up to a maximum amount of
$500.
Offense
1st 2nd 3rd
4th and
Each
Subsequent
Noise
disturbance
$100. $200. $400. $500.
Soundreproducing
systems
$ 50. $ 75. $100. $200.
Loudspeakers
and P.A. systems
$100. $200. $400. $500.
§ 226-2 PARKING LOTS § 226-2
218:279
Chapter 228
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 116.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 124.
Fees — See Ch. 138.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 146.
Flood hazard areas — See Ch. 154.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 188.
Solid waste — See Ch. 252.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 288.
Offense
1st 2nd 3rd
4th and
Each
Subsequent
Animals and
birds
$ 50. $ 75. $100. $200.
Loading and
unloading
$200. $350. $450. $500.
Standing motor
vehicles
$100. $200. $400. $500.
Construction
and demolition
$200. $350. $450. $500.
(6) Chapter 260, Streets and Sidewalks. [Added 5-14-2002 by Ord.
No. 02-07]
(a) Any person who fails to remove indelible paint markouts on
public sidewalks and curbs within the time proscribed shall be
subject to a penalty of $500 for each offense, plus the cost to
the Borough for the restoration or repair of said sidewalks.
Each offense shall consist of responding to a request for the
marking-out of underground utilities.
§ 226-2 HILLSDALE CODE § 226-2
218:280
ARTICLE I
Adoption of International Code
[Adopted 4-6-2010 by Ord. No. 10-06]
§ 228-1. Adoption of standards.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the Borough Administrator of the Borough of Hillsdale, being marked and
designated as the International Property Maintenance Code, 2009 edition,
as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted
as the Property Maintenance Code of the Borough of Hillsdale in the State
of New Jersey for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance
of all property, buildings, and structures; by providing the standard for
supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions
essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation
and use; and the condemnation of such existing structures as herein
provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance Code on file in the office
of the Borough of Hillsdale are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a
part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes prescribed in § 228-2 of this chapter.
§ 228-2. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following sections are hereby revised:
A. Section 101.1 is changed to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the International
Property Maintenance Code of the Borough of Hillsdale, hereinafter
referred to as "this code."
B. Section 103.5 is changed to read as follows:
103.5 Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the
department in carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall
be as indicated and set forth in Chapter 138, Fees of the Code of the
Borough of Hillsdale.
C. In Section 112.4, insert "not less than $500 nor more than $2,000."
D. In Section 302.4, insert "four inches" as height maximum.
E. In Section 304.14, insert "May 1 to September 30."
F. In Section 602.3, insert "October 1 to May 1."
G. In Section 602.4, insert "October 1 to May 1."
§ 228-1 PARKING LOTS § 228-3
218:281
§ 228-3. Repeal of inconsistent ordinances.
Ordinance No. 05-13 of the Borough of Hillsdale, entitled "An Ordinance of
the Borough of Hillsdale, County of Bergen, State of New Jersey, Adopting
International Property Maintenance Code 2003," and all other ordinances
or parts of ordinances in conflict or inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed to the extent of such conflicts or inconsistencies.
§ 228-4. Effect on existing proceedings.
Nothing in this chapter or in the Property Maintenance Code hereby
adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding pending in any
court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited
in § 228-3 of this chapter; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any
character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
§ 228-3 HILLSDALE CODE § 228-4
218:282
ARTICLE II
Maintenance of Vacant and Abandoned Residential Properties
[Adopted 3-1-2016 by Ord. No. 16-03]
§ 228-5. Definitions.
A. CREDITOR — Consistent with Section 3 of P.L. 2008, c.86, a statechartered
bank, savings bank, savings and loan association or any
credit union, any person required to be licensed under the provisions of
the New Jersey Residential Mortgage Lending Act, and any entity
acting on behalf of the Creditor named in the debt obligation, including
but not limited to, servicers.
B. VACANT AND ABANDONED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Consistent
with Section 1 of P.L. 2010, c.70 (C.2A:50-73), residential real estate for
which a notice of violation has been issued pursuant to § 159-10.3 of
this chapter and Subsection b of section 1 of P.L. 2014, c.35. Where a
notice of violation has not been issued pursuant to § 159-10.3 of this
chapter and Subsection b of Section 1 of P.L. 2014, c.35, residential
property shall be deemed vacant and abandoned where a mortgaged
property is not occupied by a mortgagor or tenant as evidenced by a
lease agreement entered into prior to the service of a notice of intention
to commence foreclosure according to Section 4 of the Fair Foreclosure
Act, P.L. 1995, c.244 and at least two of the following conditions exist:
(1) Overgrown or neglected vegetation;
(2) The accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers or mail on the
property;
(3) Disconnected gas, electric, or water utility services to the property;
(4) The accumulation of hazardous, noxious, or unhealthy substances
or materials on the property;
(5) The accumulation of junk, litter, trash or debris on the property;
(6) The absence of window treatments such as blinds, curtains or
shutters;
(7) The absence of furnishings and personal items;
(8) Statements of neighbors, delivery persons, or government
employees indicating that the residence is vacant and abandoned;
(9) Windows or entrances to the property that are boarded up or
closed off or multiple window panes that are damaged, broken and
unrepaired;
(10) Doors to the property that are smashed through, broken off,
unhinged, or continuously unlocked;
§ 228-5 PARKING LOTS § 228-5
218:283
§ 228-6. Creditor responsibility for vacant and abandoned
properties.
§ 228-7. Notice.
(11) A risk to the health, safety or welfare of the public, or any adjoining
or adjacent property owners, exists due to acts of vandalism,
loitering, criminal conduct, or the physical destruction or
deterioration of the property;
(12) An uncorrected violation of a municipal building, housing, or
similar code during the preceding year, or an order by municipal
authorities declaring the property to be unfit for occupancy and to
remain vacant and unoccupied;
(13) The mortgagee or other authorized party has secured or winterized
the property due to the property being deemed vacant and
unprotected or in danger of freezing;
(14) A written statement issued by any mortgagor expressing the clear
intent of all mortgagors to abandon the property; and
(15) Any other reasonable indicia of abandonment.
A. A creditor filing a summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on a
residential property within the Borough shall be immediately
responsible for the care, maintenance, security, and upkeep of the
exterior of the property, after the property becomes vacant and
abandoned as defined in this chapter.
B. Where a creditor is located out-of-state, the creditor shall be
responsible for appointing an in-state representative or agent to act on
the creditor's behalf for the purpose of satisfying the requirements of
Subsection A of this section. Notice of said representative or agent shall
be provided to the Borough clerk in a manner that is consistent with
Subsection a of Section 17 of P.L. 2008, c.127 (the Save New Jersey
Homes Act of 2008), and shall further include the full name and contact
information of the in-state representative or agent.
A. Any public officer designated by the Borough or authorized municipal
official responsible for the administration of any property maintenance
or public nuisance code shall be authorized to issue a notice to a
creditor that has filed a summons and complaint in an action to
foreclose on a residential property within the Borough, if the public
officer determines that the creditor has violated this chapter by failing
to provide for the care, maintenance, security, and upkeep of the
exterior of the property. Where a creditor is an out-of-state creditor, the
notice shall be issued to the representative or agent that has been
identified by the creditor pursuant to the Save New Jersey Homes Act of
2008.
§ 228-5 HILLSDALE CODE § 228-7
218:284
§ 228-8. Violations and penalties.
B. The notice referenced in Subsection A of this section shall require the
creditor to correct the violation(s) within 30 days of receipt of the
notice, or within 10 days of receipt of the notice if the violation presents
an imminent threat to public health and safety.
C. The issuance of a notice pursuant to Subsection A of this section shall
constitute proof that a residential property is vacant and abandoned for
the purposes of this chapter.
A. A creditor subject to this chapter that is found by the municipal court of
the Borough, or by any other court of competent jurisdiction, to be in
violation of the requirement to correct a care, maintenance, security, or
upkeep violation cited in a notice issued pursuant to this chapter shall
be subject to a fine of $1,500 for each day of the violation. Any fines
imposed pursuant to this subsection shall commence 31 days following
the creditor's receipt of the notice, except where the violation is
deemed to present an imminent risk to the public health and safety, in
which case any fines shall commence 11 days following receipt of the
notice.
B. An out-of-state creditor subject to this chapter that is found by the
municipal court of the Borough, or by any other court of competent
jurisdiction, to be in violation of the requirement to appoint an in-state
representative or agent shall be subject to a fine of $2,500 for each day
of the violation. Any fines imposed on an out-of-state creditor for the
failure to appoint an in-state representative or agent shall commence
on the day after the ten-day period set forth in Paragraph (1) of
Subsection a of Section 17 of P.L. 2008, c. 127 (C.46:10B-51) for
providing notice to the municipal clerk that a summons and complaint
in an action to foreclose on a mortgage has been served.
C. No less than 20% of any money collected by the Borough pursuant to
this section shall be utilized by the Borough for municipal code
enforcement purposes.
§ 228-7 PARKING LOTS § 228-8
218:285
Chapter 230
RECORDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 138.
§ 228-8 HILLSDALE CODE § 228-8
230:286
ARTICLE I
Public Access
[Adopted 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-13]
§ 230-1. Policy created.
The Borough of Hillsdale hereby creates a Borough public records policy
governing public records created/governed by:
§ 230-2. Form required; exceptions.
All requests for records shall be made through the Borough Clerk's Office
on a form approved by the Borough. No request for records shall be honored
without a properly filled out form, except for document requests by the
Mayor and/or Borough Council, the Borough Attorney or other Borough
Special Counsel and tax record cards requested by taxpayers of the Tax
Assessor, pursuant to pending Bergen County Board of Taxation or New
Jersey State Court appeal(s).
§ 230-3. Depository of records requests.
All requests for public records directed to department heads or other
Borough officials/employees shall be directed to the Borough Clerk's Office,
which will serve as the depository of such requests and the dissemination
of said forms to obtain public records not within the Clerk's control/
possession.
§ 230-4. Borough action upon request. [Amended 4-10-2007 by Ord.
No. 07-17]
Upon receipt of a request for records, if said records are public, the
Borough will endeavor to respond to the request within seven days of the
receipt of said request. Working days are defined as Monday through Friday,
excluding holidays.
§ 230-5. Public business to take procedure over requests.
All persons requesting records will be advised that the public business of
the Borough will take precedence over a record request, especially where
such request is a broad or far reaching information request.
A. N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq. (Right to Know Law);
B. Records that are considered public records in accordance with common
law; and
C. Records that are subpoenaed pursuant to pending litigation and/or
court order, which may be subject to judicial review.
§ 230-1 RECORDS § 230-6
230:287
§ 230-6. Request to be specific.
All requests for records shall be as specific as possible to the Borough.
§ 230-7. Copying costs. [Amended 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. 07-17]
Copying costs shall be payable in accordance with statute and
supplemented by the schedule in Chapter 138.
§ 230-8. Restricted records.
The following records, or types of records which are not public and shall not
be made available to the public, include but are not limited to, the following:
§ 230-9. Questions regarding potential release of specific records.
Not all requests for records do, in fact, lead to the copying, review and/or
release of such records. A record may be a public record under common
law, but may not be a public record under the Right To Know Law (N.J.S.A.
47:1A-1 et seq.) or it may be or may not be a public record under any other
legal statute, rules, regulations and/or court decision. The Borough Clerk
shall seek the opinion of the Borough Attorney as to whether or not a record
is public if there is any question as to its release. The Borough Clerk's
actions on this type of matter shall be guided by such legal opinion.
A. Records of a personal nature regarding Borough officials, employees
and/or other applicable individuals;
B. Medical records;
C. All records exempted by state and/or federal statutes, rules and/or
regulations;
D. All records exempted by presidential and/or gubernatorial executive
order;
E. All records which are not included in the definition of "public records"
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq. where applicable;
F. Confidential police investigation reports;
G. Work product or notes of Borough officials/employees; and
H. Council closed session minutes involving personnel matters. Council
open session minutes shall not be considered public records until such
time as they are approved by the Borough Council. Council closed
session minutes shall not be considered public records until such time
as they are approved by the Borough Council and the matter(s) in
question have been concluded pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
10:4-6 et seq. A report prepared for review by the Mayor and Borough
Council shall not be deemed a public record until at least seven
calendar days after disbursement of the report by the Borough Clerk to
the Mayor and Council or the next Council meeting, whichever is later.
§ 230-6 HILLSDALE CODE § 230-9
230:288
Chapter 232
RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 138.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 188.
Penalties — See Ch. 226.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 228.
Solid waste — See Ch. 252.
§ 230-9 RECYCLING § 230-9
232:289

ARTICLE I
Newspaper and Wastepaper Recycling
[Adopted 11-12-1985 as Ord. No. 85-19 (Ch. 11, Art. 3, of the
Revised Ordinances of 1972)]
§ 232-1. Program established.
There is hereby established a program for the collection of used and/or old
newspapers and wastepaper from the residences of the Borough of Hillsdale
for the purpose of resale by the Borough of Hillsdale for recycling purposes.
§ 232-2. Collection.121
Such collections shall be made under the supervision of the Borough
Administrator at least once per month by the Department of Public Works
or such private firm as may be retained by the Borough Administrator upon
prior approval by the Council.
§ 232-3. Regulations.
The Borough Administrator is hereby authorized and directed to establish
and promulgate reasonable regulations as to the manner, days and times of
such collections and the bundling, handling, location and time of placement
of all materials for collection.
§ 232-4. Contracts.
With the prior approval of the Council, the Borough Administrator is hereby
authorized to negotiate and enter into contracts from time to time to sell
and deliver all materials so collected for recycling purposes.
§ 232-5. Materials placed for collection; unlawful collection.
From the time of placement by any resident of used and/or old newspapers
and wastepaper for collection by the Borough of Hillsdale, pursuant to the
program established hereby and the rules and regulations to be issued
hereunder, such materials shall become and be the property of the Borough
of Hillsdale, and it shall be a violation of this Article for any person other
than authorized personnel of the Department of Public Works or such
private firm as may be retained by the Borough Administrator pursuant to
§ 232-2 of this Article to collect, pick up or cause to be collected or picked
up such materials for a period of twenty-four (24) hours thereafter. Any and
each such collection in violation hereof from one (1) or more residences
during said period shall constitute a separate and distinct offense
punishable as hereinafter provided. It shall further be a violation of this
Article and punishable as provided herein for any person to violate any
regulation issued pursuant hereto.
121. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 232-1 RECYCLING § 232-6
232:291
§ 232-6. Violations and penalties.122
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this Article shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 226, Penalties.
122. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 232-6 HILLSDALE CODE § 232-6
232:292
ARTICLE II
Collection of Waste and Recyclables
[Adopted 3-8-1988 as Ord. No. 88-6 (Ch. 11, Art. 4, of the Revised
Ordinances of 1972)]
§ 232-7. Storage of debris and waste.
§ 232-8. Residential recycling of materials. [Amended 7-10-1990 by
Ord. No. 90-9124]
All recyclable materials shall be separated and placed at curbside for
collection as set forth herein:
A. No person in possession, charge or control of any premises shall allow
debris or waste to accumulate or to be stored in any manner which does
not conform to the requirements established herein.
B. No person shall dispose of debris or waste in the Borough of Hillsdale in
a manner inconsistent with the provisions herein.
C. All debris and waste shall be stored in watertight containers with
handles or in plastic bags of suitable strength to permit collection
without spillage. Recyclable materials may only be stored in reusable
containers which contain handles to facilitate dumping and which
either have watertight lids or which otherwise do not permit water to
accumulate in the container.
D. All waste material shall be stored such that it will not permit the
littering, scattering or disintegration thereof.
E. All waste material, with the exception of recyclable material, shall be
collected not less than once per week. Recyclable material shall be
collected as often as necessary to ensure the public health, safety and
welfare, but not less than once per month.
F. Containers of waste material, when full, shall not exceed fifty (50)
pounds.
G. Wood, branches, and carpeting shall be securely bound and shall not
exceed four (4) feet in length.123
A. Used newspapers shall be separated and secured in bundles not to
exceed fifteen (15) inches in height. Such bundles may not be contained
in plastic bags. All paper can be placed in reusable containers not to
exceed a thirty-two gallon capacity.
B. Aluminum, tin, and bimetal cans; glass bottles; and plastic bottles, such
as the type used for milk, juice, laundry detergent, motor oil, antifreeze,
123. Editor's Note: Original Section 11-22, Commercial Waste Removal, which immediately
followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II.
124. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 232-7 RECYCLING § 232-8
232:293
§ 232-9. Nonresidential recycling of materials. [Amended 6-14-1994
by Ord. No. 94-11]
Persons owning or having control of properties the primary use of which
is not single- or two-family residential shall recycle the following materials:
glass, newspaper, aluminum, cardboard, high-grade office paper, food
waste, containers, magazines, ferrous scrap, white goods, mixed paper; and
construction and demolition debris. The Superintendent of Public Works
shall require documentation in a suitable form to substantiate the
effectiveness of such a recycling program. Such documentation shall be
provided by March 31 and September 30 of each year. Should the owner or
person having control of such nonresidential property fail to provide for the
collection of recyclable materials the Borough may arrange for collection of
said material, the cost for such collection and disposal to be borne by the
owner or person having control of said property.
§ 232-10. Ownership of materials.
§ 232-11. Referral to Planning Board.
This Article shall be referred to the Planning Board of the Borough of
Hillsdale for a revision of the Master Plan in accordance with N.J.S.A.
13:1E-99.16, Subdivision c, specifically with regard to the collection,
disposition and recycling of designated recyclable materials within any
water and soda, shall be separated from newspapers and shall be
stored in suitable reusable containers. All cans and bottles which have
contained food products shall be rinsed prior to being discarded.
C. Leaves, grass and such other yard waste as may subsequently be
established by the Public Works Superintendent shall be placed at the
curb in such a manner so as to make them easily identifiable as
recycling materials. Such leaves, grass and designated yard waste shall
not be mixed with nonrecyclable materials, but shall be placed for
recycling.
D. Ferrous scrap; white goods such as water heaters, stoves, refrigerators
and the like; and construction and demolition debris in volume greater
than ten (10) gallons shall be separated from waste or other recyclable
materials for collection. [Amended 6-14-1994 by Ord. No. 94-11]
A. From time of placement at the curb for collection, the recyclable
material shall be the property of the Borough of Hillsdale or its duly
authorized agent. No person shall collect or cause to be collected any
such recyclable material without the express written consent of the
Borough of Hillsdale. Each collection of recyclable material from any
one (1) or more properties shall constitute a distinct and separate
offense.
B. No person may remove any material placed at the curb without the
written permission of the Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 232-8 HILLSDALE CODE § 232-11
232:294
development proposal for the construction of fifty (50) or more units of
single-family residential housing and any commercial or industrial
development proposal for the utilization of one thousand (1,000) square
feet of land. The Planning Board shall also make recommendations to the
Mayor and Council for amendments to the Borough's Zoning Ordinance
and Subdivision Site Plan Ordinance125 in accordance with this section. The
governing body shall adopt the required revisions to the Master Plan no
later than thirty (30) days from the effective date of this Article.
§ 232-12. Issuance of regulations.
The Superintendent of Public Works may issue such regulations as are
necessary for the implementation of this Article. Such regulations shall not
take effect until they have been subject to review by the Borough Council
for a period of at least thirty (30) days. During said thirty-day review period,
the Borough Council may amend or veto such regulations through adoption
of a Council resolution.
§ 232-13. Enforcement.
The Superintendent of Public Works and such personnel within the
Department of Public Works as he or she may designate shall be responsible
for enforcement of the provisions of this Article.
§ 232-14. Violations and penalties.126
Any person or firm who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this
Article or of any regulation promulgated hereunder shall be subject to the
penalty as provided in Chapter 226, Penalties.
125. Editor's Note: See Ch. 310, Land Use.
126. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 232-11 RECYCLING § 232-14
232:295
Chapter 240
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 124.
Fees — See Ch. 138.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 146.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 188.
Penalties — See Ch. 226.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 228.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 260.
Private swimming pools — See Ch. 264.
Land use — See Ch. 310.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 345.
Sanitary Inspector — See Ch. 353.
Protection of water supply — See Ch. 369.
§ 232-14 HILLSDALE CODE § 232-14
240:296
ARTICLE I
Definitions127
§ 240-1. Definitions and word usage. [Amended 12-13-1983 by Ord.
No. 83-20]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORITY — The Bergen County Sewer Authority that maintains the
district sewer system into which the Borough sewer system shall connect.
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Board of Health of the Borough, or any officer,
employee or agent designated by the Board of Health to act in the matter
on behalf of the Board.128
BUILDING CONNECTION — That part of the sewer system that begins five
(5) feet outside the inner face of the building wall and that receives sewage
from the building drain and conveys it to the building sewer lateral.
BUILDING DRAIN — The lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system
within a building which receives sewage and conveys it to the building
connection.
BUILDING SEWER LATERAL — That part of the public sewer that runs
from the sewer main to the curb or property line and includes all necessary
fittings, all as shown on connection or wye plans.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of
food and from the handling, storage or sale of produce.129
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — The liquid waste from industrial processes as
distinct from domestic sewage.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a stream, water course, pond, ditch,
lake or other body of storm, surface or ground water.130
PLUMBING — The practice of installing, maintaining, extending, repairing
and altering plumbing systems. It also means the plumbing system as
defined in this article.
PLUMBING INSPECTOR — That person described in the provisions of
the Uniform Construction Code [N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.]. All duties
heretofore performed by the Plumbing Inspector under this chapter shall be
performed by that person designated under the Uniform Construction Code.
127. Editor's Note: For state statutes setting forth municipal powers over sewers and drains,
see N.J.S.A. 40A:26A-4 et seq.
128. Editor's Note: The definitions of "B.O.D." and "Borough sewer system," which immediately
followed this definition, were deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II.
129. Editor's Note: The definitions of "House drain" and "House sewer lateral," which
immediately followed this definition, were deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II.
130. Editor's Note: The definition of "pH," which immediately followed this definition, was
deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 240-1 SEWERS § 240-1
240:297
PLUMBING SYSTEM — The system or network of facilities within or
adjacent to any building, structure or conveyance (including piping
materials, controls and fixtures, together with their venting systems and
other appurtenances) up to the point of connection of such system to a
public or private sewer, a public or private water supply for potable or
nonpotable purposes, a natural outlet or any other point of discharge or
supply.
PUBLIC SEWER — The sewers laid in the streets or other rights-of-way
or easements controlled by the Borough which the Borough has caused to
be installed or otherwise caused to be made available for conveyance of
sewage.
SEWAGE — Any liquid waste containing animal, chemical or vegetable
matter in suspension or solution.
SEWAGE, DOMESTIC — Ordinary nonindustrial sewage (but not including
storm-, ground- and surface water) for example, sewage discharging from
the toilets, washbowls, bathtubs and like sanitary conveniences installed in
dwellings, apartment houses and hotels, office and commercial buildings,
factories and institutions.131
SEWAGE WORKS — All facilities for collecting, pumping and disposing of
sewage.
SEWER — A a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.132
SEWER INSPECTOR — The officer, agent or employee designated by the
Borough to inspect the Borough sewer system, or his or her authorized
deputy, agent or representative.
SEWER, SANITARY — A sewer that has been designed to carry sewage and
not storm-, surface and ground water.
STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN — A sewer, gutter, culvert, catchbasin
or like facility that has been designed to carry storm-, surface and ground
water and not domestic sewage or industrial wastes.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in, water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
WYE PLANS — A plan prepared by the Sewer Engineer showing existing
building sewer laterals.
131. Editor's Note: The definition of "Sewage treatment plant," which immediately followed this
definition, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
132. Editor's Note: The definition of "Sewer engineer," which immediately followed this
definition, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 240-1 HILLSDALE CODE § 240-2
240:298
§ 240-2. Applicability of other provisions. [Added 12-13-1983 by
Ord. No. 83-20]
Insofar as any provision contained in this chapter is inconsistent or
coextensive with the provisions of the Uniform Construction Code Act
[N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.], said provision is hereby repealed and
superseded by the provisions of the Uniform Construction Code Act.
§ 240-2 SEWERS § 240-2
240:299

ARTICLE II
Toilet Installations; Connection to Sewer
§ 240-3. Toilet installations and public sewer connections.
§ 240-4. Notice to install and connect.
§ 240-5. Failure to make connection; installation by Borough.
If, after the expiration of the one-year period set forth in § 240-2B, the
owner has failed to install the toilet facilities and to make the sewer
connections required by § 240-2, the Borough may cause such installation
A. 133The owners of any property upon which there is erected or placed a
structure used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other
purpose, situated within the Borough and abutting on any street, alley
or right-of-way, or abutting on any other property so abutting and
having access to such street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now
located, or may in the future be located, any portion of the public sewer
of the Borough, is hereby required at his or her own cost and expense
to:
(1) Install approved toilet facilities therein; and
(2) Connect such facilities and all other parts of the sewerage system
in such house, building or structure directly with the public sewer
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and of the
requirements of the Board of Health. Connections of such facilities
to any other means of sewage disposal is hereby prohibited.
B. Such toilet facilities shall be installed and connection shall be made
with the public sewer as described in Subsection A of this section not
later than the expiration of the one-year period stated in the official
notice requiring such action. Upon such completion, all use of septic
tanks, cesspools or similar individual sewage disposal systems
theretofore used shall be discontinued.
A. The official notice referred to in § 240-3B shall consist of a notice
published twice in a newspaper qualified to publish legal notices of the
Borough. The one-year period shall commence on the first day of the
month next following the second publication of said notice.
B. In addition to the newspaper publication, the Borough may mail to
every owner of the property referred to in § 240-2A a copy of the official
notice or the substance thereof, by ordinary mail addressed to the
person listed on the tax assessment rolls of the Borough as the owner.
C. Failure to mail or receive such notice shall not impair or invalidate the
legal effect of the published notice provided for in Subsection A of this
section.
133. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 240-3 SEWERS § 240-5
240:301
or connection to be made and assess the cost thereof as a first and
paramount lien against the property, in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:63-52 et seq.134
134. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:63-52 was repealed by L. 1991, c. 53.
§ 240-5 HILLSDALE CODE § 240-5
240:302
ARTICLE III
Installation of Building Connections
§ 240-6. Plans to be filed with Board of Health.135
The Borough Engineer shall file a complete set of connection or wye plans,
including the latest revisions thereof, with the Board of Health.
§ 240-7. Prior certificate of Plumbing Inspector required.
No person shall connect any portion of the building drain outside of the
house to the building connection or any portion of the building connection
to the building sewer lateral unless and until the Plumbing Inspector shall
first have issued a certificate to the effect that the building connection is in
good order and conforms in every respect to the requirements of the Board
of Health for construction thereof.
§ 240-8. Construction requirements.136
Construction requirements shall be as provided in the residential site
improvement standards, N.J.A.C. title 5, Chapter 21.
135. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
136. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 240-6 SEWERS § 240-8
240:303

ARTICLE IV
Connections to Public Sewers
§ 240-9. Connections to be made only by authorized persons.
No person other than a person authorized by the Borough shall uncover,
make any connection with or opening into, use, repair, alter or disturb any
public sewer or building sewer lateral and the appurtenances thereof.
§ 240-10. Application for building sewer lateral; minimum fee; lien
for excess costs.
§ 240-11. Protective measures; restoration of streets, sidewalks and
curbs.
§ 240-12. Performance guaranties.
A. If no building sewer lateral is available, the property owner shall, prior
to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, apply to the Borough Clerk
to have a building sewer lateral installed.
B. Each application shall be accompanied by payment of a fee as provided
in Chapter 138, Fees, which is hereby fixed as a minimum charge. If,
because of the nature and extent of the work to be done or the
pavement or terrain to be penetrated, or the width of the road, or any
like circumstances, the said sum as provided in Chapter 138, Fees, shall
not be sufficient to cover the costs and expenses of the Borough, the
Borough Engineer or such other official or department as the Borough
may designate shall fix the fee at a higher figure to cover fully all the
costs and expenses of such installation. Any cost or expense in excess of
the sum paid with the application shall constitute a lien against the
property until paid.137
A. Each person performing work on public property of the Borough for the
purpose of installing or making connections to building sewer laterals
shall cause the work to be adequately guarded with barricades, lights
and other measures for protection of the public.
B. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, curbs and other public property
disturbed in the course of such work shall be restored or replaced in a
manner satisfactory to the Borough.
A. Maintenance of the public sewer and building sewer laterals, all
connections to the public sewer, and all work performed on the sewer
system between the main and the property line, including the
installation of building sewer laterals, shall be performed by the
Department of Public Works, or by some other person authorized by the
Borough.
137. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 240-9 SEWERS § 240-12
240:305
B. Any person so authorized, other than a Borough employee, shall be
required to post a performance guaranty in the amount of one hundred
twenty-five percent (125%) of the Sewer Engineer's estimate of the
cost. Said performance guaranty shall be in such form as the Borough
shall prescribe.
§ 240-12 HILLSDALE CODE § 240-12
240:306
ARTICLE V
Use of Public Sewers
§ 240-13. Prohibited uses.
No person shall:
A. Place or deposit, or cause or permit to be placed or deposited, in an
unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the Borough
or in any street or other area under the jurisdiction of the Borough, any
human or animal excrement, garbage, industrial waste, foul liquids or
any other liquid or solid waste that is malodorous or unsanitary.
B. Discharge, or cause or permit to be discharged, to any natural outlet or
storm sewer in the Borough, or any street or other area under the
jurisdiction of the Borough, any domestic sewage, industrial waste or
other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been
provided in accordance with this chapter.
C. Uncover, or cause or permit to be uncovered, any portion of the public
sewer or any storm drain or the connecting branches thereof, or open
any manhole or flush tank, unless authorized, in writing, by the
Borough to do so.
D. Open, or cause or permit to be opened, any public street or place for the
purpose of making any sewer connection, or to make, or cause to be
made, any connection with the public sewer, or any building
connection, or any other branch of the public sewer, unless authorized,
in writing, by the Borough to do so.
E. Make, or cause or permit to be made, any excavation within four (4) feet
of any public sewer or to blast any rock within ten (10) feet thereof,
unless authorized, in writing, by the Borough to do so.
F. Use, or cause or permit to be used, any metal, mechanical or electrical
cutters, eels or snakes, or any other sewer cleaning apparatus within
the Borough without first having been authorized or licensed by the
Department of Public Works Superintendent to do so.138
G. Break, cut or remove, or cause or permit to be broken, cut or removed,
any pipe of the public sewer unless authorized, in writing, by the
Borough to do so.
H. Direct the discharge, or cause or permit the direction of the discharge,
into any portion of the public sewer, directly or indirectly, of any clear
drainage, such as the discharge from swimming pools, air-conditioning
units, groundwater, surface water or rainwater from sidewalks, yards,
areas, courts, roofs or any sump, cistern or tank overflow, it being the
intent hereby to prohibit combined sewers.
138. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 240-13 SEWERS § 240-13
240:307
§ 240-14. Prohibited discharges.
Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge, or cause or
permit to be discharged, any of the following described waters or wastes
into any public sewer:
I. Discharge, or cause or permit the discharge, into any building
connection, building sewer lateral, or any portion of the public sewer,
directly or indirectly, of any drainage or overflow from cesspools,
manure pits, privy vaults, privies or other receptacles storing or
designed to store organic wastes, or any underground drains or
channels, unless the connection thereof to the building connection,
building sewer lateral or public sewer has been authorized and
approved, in writing, by the Board of Health.
J. Connect or to cause or permit the connection with any portion of the
public sewer, directly or indirectly, of any exhausts, boiler blowoffs,
sediments, drips or any pipes carrying or constructed to carry acids,
dyes, brine, germicides, greases, brewery mash, gasoline, naphtha,
benzine, oil, flammable or explosive liquids, industrial wastes,
radioactive materials or any other substance detrimental to the sewers
or their appurtenances or to the operation of the Borough or the
Authority sewer systems.
K. Throw or deposit, or to cause or permit to be thrown or deposited, in
any fixture, vessel, receptacle, inlet or opening connected directly or
indirectly with any portion of the public sewer, anything other than
sewage, it being the intent hereby to prohibit any straw, garbage, wood,
glass, feathers, plastics, vegetables, parings, ashes, cinders, fabrics or
tar or other viscous material or any other substance capable of causing
obstructions from being introduced into the public sewers.
A. Any liquid which may contain more than one hundred (100) parts per
million by weight of fat, oil or grease.
B. Gasoline, benzine, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive
liquid, solid or gas.
C. Any liquid having a pH factor lower than five point five (5.5) or higher
than nine point zero (9.0) or having any other corrosive property
capable of causing damage or hazard to the structure, equipment and
personnel of the Borough or the Authority.
D. Any liquid containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient
quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, to
constitute a hazard to humans or animals or to create any hazard in the
receiving of waters of the sewage treatment plant.
E. Any liquid containing suspended solids of such character and quantity
that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such matters at
the sewage treatment plant.
§ 240-13 HILLSDALE CODE § 240-14
240:308
§ 240-15. Grease, oil and sand interceptors.
§ 240-16. Prohibited liquids.
No person shall introduce, or cause or permit to be introduced, into the
public sewer any liquids having:
§ 240-17. Pretreatment.
F. Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance.
A. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion
of the Board of Health, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable
wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such
interceptors shall not be required for one-family dwelling houses. All
interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Board of
Health and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection.
B. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious
materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in
temperature. They shall be of a substantial construction, watertight and
equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place,
shall be gastight and watertight.
C. Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be
maintained by the owner, at his or her expense, in continuously
effective operation at all times.
A. A B.O.D. greater than three hundred (300) parts per million by weight;
B. More than three hundred fifty (350) parts per million by weight of
suspended solids;
C. Any quantity of substances having the characteristics described in
§ 240-14; or
D. An average daily flow greater than two percent (2%) of the average
daily sewage flow of the Borough, unless approval therefor has first
been procured from the Borough Engineer.139
A. 140If necessary in the opinion of the Board of Health and/or the Borough
Engineer, the owner shall provide, at his or her expense, such
preliminary treatment as may be necessary to:
139. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
140. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 240-14 SEWERS § 240-17
240:309
§ 240-18. Control manhole where industrial wastes carried.142
When required by the Borough Engineer, the owner of any property served
by a building connection or building sewer lateral carrying industrial waste
shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate
observation, sampling and measurement of the waste. Such manhole, when
required, shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed in
accordance with plans approved by the Board of Health. The manhole shall
be installed by the owner at his or her expense and shall be maintained by
him or her so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
§ 240-19. Measurements, tests and analyses.
(1) Reduce the B.O.D. to three hundred (300) parts per million and the
suspended solids to three hundred fifty (350) parts per million by
weight;
(2) Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the
maximum limits provided for in § 240-14; or
(3) Reduce the quantities and rates of discharge of such liquids and
adjust the times thereof to two percent (2%) of the average daily
flow of the Borough.
B. Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to
proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the
approval of the Board of Health and of the Department of
Environmental Protection of the State of New Jersey. No construction of
such facilities shall be commenced until said approvals shall first be
obtained in writing.141
C. Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any liquids, the
owner shall maintain them in continuously effective operation, at his or
her expense.
A. All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of liquids to
which reference is made in §§ 240-14 and 240-16 shall be determined in
accordance with Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Waterways, published by the American Public Health Association, Inc.,
being particularly the 12th Edition, 1965, thereof. A printed copy of the
said publication was annexed to and incorporated by reference in
Ordinance No. 69-5, passed on April 22, 1969, adopting said
publication. The said publication is hereby incorporated in this chapter
by reference and made a part hereof as fully as though it had been set
forth at length herein. In accordance with law, the required number of
copies have been placed on file in the office of the Borough Clerk and in
the office of the Board of Health and shall remain on file in said offices
141. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
142. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 240-17 HILLSDALE CODE § 240-19
240:310
§ 240-20. Damage to system prohibited.
for the use and examination of the public so long as this chapter shall
remain in effect.
B. All such measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of
waters and wastes shall be determined at the control manhole provided
for in § 240-18, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole.
In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control
manhole shall be considered to be the downstream manhole in the
public sewer nearest to the point at which the building sewer is
connected.
A. No person shall break, damage, destroy, deface or tamper with any
structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the Borough
sewer system.
B. Any person who, by reason of the violation of the provisions of this
chapter or other improper use of the Borough sewer system or any of its
branches, appurtenances or connections, shall cause damage to said
Borough sewer system or to the system or facilities of the Authority to
which the Borough sewer system is connected, shall be liable to the
Borough for all costs and expenses that may be incurred by the Borough
for the correction of any such damage. The Borough shall have the right
to recover such costs and expenses and the cost and expense of
prosecuting its claim from any such person by appropriate action at law
in a court of competent jurisdiction. The right of the Borough to be
reimbursed for any costs and expenses incurred shall be an additional
remedy, and such person shall also be subject to the penalties contained
in this chapter for violation of its provisions.
§ 240-19 SEWERS § 240-20
240:311

ARTICLE VI
Administration and Enforcement
§ 240-21. Concurrent jurisdiction of Borough and Board of Health.
The Borough and the Board of Health shall have concurrent jurisdiction in
the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 240-22. Right of entry.
The duly authorized officers, agents and employees of the Borough and
of the Board of Health bearing proper credentials and identification shall,
subject to law, be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 240-21 SEWERS § 240-22
240:313

ARTICLE VII
Violations and Penalties
§ 240-23. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter, or who shall participate or assist in such violation or failure
to comply, or who as owner, tenant or other person in occupancy, architect,
contractor or agent, servant or employee, shall permit the commission of
such violation or maintain such violation or shall suffer such violation to
continue shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the provisions of
Chapter 226, Penalties.
§ 240-23 SEWERS § 240-23
240:315

ARTICLE VIII
Bergen County Utilities Authority Rules and Regulations
[Added 11-7-1979 by Ord. No. 79-16]
§ 240-24. Applicability.
The use of all sanitary sewers of the Borough of Hillsdale shall be in
compliance with the rules and regulations enacted by the Bergen County
Utilities Authority.
§ 240-25. Rules adopted.
The Borough of Hillsdale hereby adopted and enacts the user charge system
and industrial cost recovery system contained in the rules and regulations
of the Bergen County Utilities Authority, and authorizes their immediate
implementation by the appropriate municipal official, to be designated by
resolution of the governing body.
§ 240-26. Copies of rules.
No fewer than three (3) copies of the rules and regulations of the Bergen
County Utilities Authority have been and are filed in the office of the Clerk
of the County of Bergen, and are available for public inspection during
normal business hours.
§ 240-27. Purchase of rules.
Copies of the rules and regulations of the Bergen County Utilities Authority
can be obtained from the Bergen County Utilities Authority for the cost of
publication.143
143. Editor's Note: Original Section 17-27, Mayor and Clerk authorized signatories;
amendment, which immediately followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of
Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 240-24 SEWERS § 240-27
240:317
Chapter 246
SMOKING
§ 246-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
BOARD OF EDUCATION — The Pascack Valley Regional High School Board
of Education or the Board of Education for the Hillsdale Public Schools.
BOARD OF EDUCATION FACILITIES — Any and all property, structures, or
other areas owned or leased by the Hillsdale Board of Education or Pascack
Valley Board of Education or operated by employees and agents of and/or
persons authorized by the Hillsdale Board of Education and used for the
official business of the Hillsdale Board of Education.
ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE — An electronic device that can be used
to deliver nicotine or other substances to the person inhaling from the
device, including, but not limited to, an electronic cigarette, cigar, cigarillo
or pipe.
ENCLOSED AREAS — All areas between a floor and a ceiling, extending to
the outer perimeter walls of a structure.
MUNICIPAL FACILITIES — All structures, improvements, property and
enclosed areas owned, leased, rented, and/or operated by the Borough
of Hillsdale, and/or occupied by employees and agents of and/or persons
authorized by the Borough of Hillsdale used for official business of the
Borough of Hillsdale. This definition shall not include any area adjacent to
the Borough Municipal Building that may from time to time be designated
as the Borough of Hillsdale staff smoking area.
PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITIES — All public parks, playgrounds,
open space areas or ball fields, publicly owned or leased by the Borough
of Hillsdale, upon which the public is invited or upon which the public is
permitted and where individuals gather for recreational activities, including
all areas adjacent to such facilities including, but not limited to, parking
areas, driveways or driveway aisles. This definition excludes public parking
lots, sidewalks and public streets within the Borough of Hillsdale, other
than as noted herein.
SMOKING — The burning of, inhaling from, exhaling the smoke from, or
the possession of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or any other matter or
substance which contains tobacco or any other matter that can be smoked,
or the inhaling or exhaling of smoke or vapor from an electronic smoking
device.
§ 246-2. Smoking prohibited.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke any product as defined in
this chapter in or on any of the following areas:
§ 240-27 HILLSDALE CODE § 246-2
240:318
§ 246-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) observed to be in violation of this article shall be issued a
summons and may be subject to, at the discretion of the Court, the following
penalties:
Chapter 248
SOIL MOVEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 124.
Fees — See Ch. 138.
Flood hazard areas — See Ch. 154.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 188.
Penalties — See Ch. 226.
Land use — See Ch. 310.
(1) In any municipal facilities and parks and recreational facilities, as
such terms are defined herein;
(2) In or on the area between the edge of pavement of any street/
roadway line and the property boundary of any Board of Education
Facility as defined in § 246-1 of this chapter, inclusive of the
sidewalk and open or grass area adjacent to the property boundary.
B. "No smoking" signs or the international "no smoking" symbol may be
clearly and conspicuously posted in or on any area defined in § 246-1
above, or at the discretion of the Borough of Hillsdale, except in or on
the Board of Education facilities, which signage may be posted at the
discretion of the Board of Education. It shall not be a defense to a
violation of this section that "no smoking" signs were not conspicuously
posted as they are not required by this article.
A. A warning by the Court or a fine of not less than $100 for conviction of a
first offense;
B. A fine of up to $250 for conviction of a second offense;
C. A fine of up to $500 for conviction of a third and/or any subsequent
offense.
D. For any conviction, the Court shall assess court administration fees and
costs and may sentence the offender to community service, for a period
of time and type of service to be determined by the Court.
§ 246-2 SOIL MOVEMENT § 248-1
248:319
§ 248-1. Definitions.144
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOVE — To dig, excavate, remove, deposit, place, fill, grade, regrade, level
or otherwise alter of change the location or contour; transport or supply.
This term shall not be construed to include plowing, spading, cultivating,
harrowing or discing of soil, or any other operation usually and ordinarily
associated with the tilling of soil for agricultural or horticultural purposes.
SOIL — Any earth, sand, clay, loam, gravel, humus, rock or dirt, without
regard to the presence or absence therein of organic matter.
TOPSOIL — Soil that, in its natural state, constitutes the top layer of earth,
and is composed of two percent (2%) or more, by weight, of organic matter
and has the ability to support vegetation.
§ 248-2. Permit required.
§ 248-3. Application made to Borough Engineer.
The matter of reviewing and considering all applications for soil removal
permits is hereby referred to the Borough Engineer.
§ 248-4. Issuance of permit.
The Construction Code Official of the Borough shall issue permits required
by this chapter, only after the Borough Engineer has submitted a report
and recommendation for issuance. If the Borough Engineer recommends
that a permit not be issued, the Construction Code Official shall not issue
the permit unless and until he or she is notified that the Borough Engineer
recommendation has been overruled, as hereinafter provided.
A. No person shall move, or cause, allow, permit or suffer to be moved, any
soil to or from any lot within the boundaries of the Borough in an
amount greater than twenty-five (25) cubic yards, unless and until a soil
removal permit therefor shall have first been issued, as hereinafter
provided.
B. All applicants for development before the Planning or Zoning Board
shall seek a soil movement permit.
C. Any person who, within a period of twelve (12) consecutive months,
moves less than twenty-five (25) cubic yards of soil shall be exempt
from these regulations.
144. Editor's Note: The grant of general police powers to municipalities under N.J.S.A. 40:48-2
authorizes the adoption of ordinances to license and regulate the removal of soil. See Fred
v. Mayor and Council, Old Tappan Borough, 10 N.J. 515, 92 A. 2d 473 (1952).
§ 248-1 HILLSDALE CODE § 248-5
248:320
§ 248-5. Application procedure.
The procedure for applying for and issuance of a soil removal permit shall
be as follows:
A. Form of application. On forms prescribed and supplied by the Borough,
the applicant shall set forth, in duplicate:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The block and lot number of lands in question.
(3) The name and address of the owner of the lands; if the owner is a
person other than the applicant, the owner shall signify his or her
consent to the application by signing it along with the applicant.
(4) The purpose or reason for moving the soil.
(5) The kind and quantity in cubic yards of soil to be moved.
(6) In case of removal, the place to which the soil is to be removed, and
the kind and quantity of soil to be removed.
(7) The proposed date of completion of the work.
(8) Such other pertinent data as the Borough Engineer may require.
B. Topographical map. Accompanying the application to move more than
fifty (50) cubic yards shall be a topographical map, prepared by a
licensed civil engineer or land surveyor, in duplicate, showing:
(1) The dimensions of the lot and the lot and block number of the lot
and each abutting lot.
(2) The present grades, on a one-hundred-foot grid layout.
(3) The proposed grades at said points when the work has been
completed.
(4) The quantity, in cubic yards, of soil involved in the work, as
computed from cross sections which shall be shown on the map.
(5) The grades of all abutting streets and lots.
(6) Present and proposed surface water drainage and any existing
proposed appurtenances therefor.
(7) Proposed slopes and lateral supports.
(8) The location of all trees having a diameter of six (6) inches, or
more, at the base.
(9) Such other pertinent data as the Borough Engineer may require.
C. Permit fee and deposit for costs.
§ 248-5 SOIL MOVEMENT § 248-5
248:321
§ 248-6. Factors to be considered in determining application.
In considering and reviewing the application, the Borough Engineer shall
be guided by the general purpose of municipal planning and shall take into
consideration the following factors:
(1) The application shall be submitted to the Construction Code
Official with a fee and deposit for costs in an amount computed as
provided in Chapter 138, Fees.
(2) Deposits for costs shall be used for the costs associated with the
review of the application and for filed monitoring inspections,
reports to the Mayor and Council or Construction Official, during
soil movement activities. Unused portions of the deposit shall be
refunded to the applicant upon approval of completion of activities
by the Borough Engineer.
(3) Should a resubmission of the application documents be necessary
due to incompleteness, or the review by the Borough Engineer, an
additional deposit as provided in Chapter 138, Fees, shall be made
by the applicant for each resubmission. This deposit may be waived
by the Chief Financial Officer if it is deemed that sufficient deposits
are adequate to fully process the application.
D. Review of application; hearing. Within forty-five (45) days after receipt
of the application, the Borough Engineer shall review and consider the
application and render its report and recommendation to the
Construction Code Official, who shall grant or refuse the permit in
accordance with the recommendation.
E. Appeal. In the event of refusal, the applicant may, not later than thirty
(30) days after such refusal, appeal to the Borough Council. The
Borough Council may sustain or overrule the Borough Engineer's
recommendation.
F. Permit: form and conditions. The soil removal permit shall contain any
special conditions set forth by the Borough Engineer.
A. Prior development approvals.
B. Soil erosion by water and wind.
C. Surface and subsurface water drainage.
D. Soil fertility.
E. Lateral support of abutting streets and lands.
F. Public health and safety.
G. Land values and uses.
H. Preservation of trees and shrubbery.
§ 248-5 HILLSDALE CODE § 248-6
248:322
§ 248-7. Topsoil restrictions.
§ 248-8. Final grades.
No person shall deposit soil upon, fill in or raise the grade of any lot without
first making provision for:
I. Prevention of sharp declivities, pits and depressions.
J. Such other factors as may bear upon or relate to the coordinated,
adjusted and harmonious physical development of the Borough.
K. Consistency with the Bergen County Soil Conservation District
standards.
L. The route that soil-moving vehicles will use, and the adequacy of the
public streets to accommodate the same.
M. Proximity to wetlands and flood hazard areas.
A. Whenever any person moves topsoil in or upon any lot, provision shall
be made for the storage of said topsoil within the boundary lines of said
lot.
B. Except as hereinafter provided, all of the topsoil so stored shall be
uniformly replaced over the entire area or surface of the lot on or
before the completion date set forth in the soil removal permit, so that
the final grade or grades of said replaced topsoil shall be in accordance
with the proposed final grades shown on the topographical map.
C. No person shall remove beyond the boundary lines of the lot any topsoil
unless and until topsoil not inferior in quality to that to be removed
shall first have been replaced as shown of the topographical map. In no
event shall any person remove from the lot more topsoil than that
comprising the surplus or excess remaining after the replacement of
the topsoil as aforesaid.
A. The use in said work of soil or such other materials as will not result in
deviation from the proposed final grades of the uniformity thereof by
reason of abnormal shrinkage or settlement.
B. The collection and storage upon the lot of the original topsoil to the end
that said topsoil shall not be buried beneath soil or other material of
inferior quality, and the uniform replacement of the topsoil so stored
over the entire area or surface of the fill soil or other material, so that
the final grade or grades of said replaced topsoil shall be in accordance
with the proposed final grades shown on the topographical map. In the
event that such provision is not practicable, provision shall be made for
the uniform placement over the entire area or surface of the fill soil or
other material, excepting only such portions thereof as shall be or shall
have become permanently covered by a building or structure, street
pavement, curb, sidewalk, driveway or other paved area, or by any body
§ 248-6 SOIL MOVEMENT § 248-8
248:323
§ 248-9. Prohibited deposits; vehicle spillage.
§ 248-10. Performance guaranty.
§ 248-11. Approved farm plan exemption.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect or apply to any person
engaged in the moving of soil in and upon lands enrolled in the soil
conservation program of the Northeastern Jersey Soil Conservation District
of the United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service,
and for which lands an approved farm plan has been established by said
agency, provided that all soil-moving operations in and upon such lands are
performed in accordance with said approved farm plan.
§ 248-12. Authorized inspections.
For the purpose of administering and enforcing this chapter, any duly
authorized officer, agent or employee of the Borough shall have the right to
enter into and upon any lands in or upon which soil-moving operations are
being conducted, to examine and inspect such lands.
of water or waterway. The said topsoil shall not be inferior in quality
to that of the original topsoil, to a depth of not less than six (6)
inches, measured from the proposed final grades as shown on the
topographical map.
A. No person shall deposit, cause to be deposited or create any condition
which causes soil to be deposited on any street, sidewalk or other public
place of the Borough. The prohibition in this subsection shall not apply
to the Borough or its authorized agents, employees or representatives.
B. No person shall drive a vehicle carrying soil unless such truck or other
vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any soil from being
deposited on any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private
property.145
A. When greater than two hundred (200) cubic yards of soil are to be
moved, no permit shall be issued unless the applicant posts with the
Borough a performance guaranty in form and with the surety
acceptable to the Borough, in such amount as the Borough Engineer
determines, conditioned upon full and faithful performance by the
principal, within the time specified in the application, of all the
proposed work in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and of
the soil removal permit issued pursuant hereto.
B. When other performance guaranties are posted for development
applications which include soil movement, no separate performance
guaranty is required.
145. Editor's Note: For statutory provisions prohibiting spillage from vehicles, see N.J.S.A.
29:4-7.
§ 248-8 HILLSDALE CODE § 248-13
248:324
§ 248-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished as provided in Chapter 226, Penalties. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 252
SOLID WASTE
§ 248-13 SOIL MOVEMENT § 248-13
248:325

ARTICLE I
Commercial Garbage and Trade Wastes
[Adopted 6-27-1972 by Ord. No. 72-9 as Ch. 11, Art. 2, of the
Revised Ordinances of 1972]
§ 252-1. Findings.
It is hereby found, determined and declared that it is in the public interest
that:
§ 252-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL GARBAGE — All putrescible animal, fruit and vegetable
wastes and offal that result from the operation of any business, trade or
industry in or upon any premises in the Borough that are not used primarily
for residential purposes.
TRADE WASTES — All nonputrescible wastes, both combustible and
noncombustible, that result from the operation of any business, trade or
industry in or upon any premises in the Borough that are not used primarily
for residential purposes.
§ 252-3. Prohibited practices.
No person in possession, charge or control of premises in or upon which
commercial garbage or trade wastes are produced or accumulate shall:
A. The periodic collection and disposal of commercial garbage and trade
wastes be required at the cost and expense of the persons in
possession, charge or control of the premises in or upon which
commercial garbage or trade wastes are produced or accumulate.
B. Rules and regulations governing the accumulation, storage,
transportation and disposal of commercial garbage and trade wastes be
established.146
A. Permit commercial garbage and trade wastes to be stored in any
manner that does not conform with the requirements set forth in
§ 252-6.
B. Permit commercial garbage and trade wastes to remain stored on the
premises at places, in quantities and for periods of time in excess of
those prescribed in § 252-6.147
146. Editor's Note: Original Section 11-9(c), which immediately followed this subsection, was
deleted 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8.
147. Editor's Note: Original Section 11-11(c), which immediately followed this subsection, was
deleted 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8.
§ 252-1 SOIL MOVEMENT § 252-3
248:327
§ 252-4. Regulations to be observed.
The maximum number of cans per collection for each of the premises served
by the Department of Public Works; the number of collections per week; the
rates to be charged for such services; the method and times of billing and
payment of said charges; and the terms and conditions of the performance
of said services shall be as set forth in § 252-6.
§ 252-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No.
97-8]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished as provided in Chapter 226, Penalties.
§ 252-6. Service regulations; charges. [Amended 3-27-1984 by Ord.
No. 84-2; 12-23-1986 by Ord. No. 86-20; 2-9-1988 by Ord. No. 88-1;
12-12-1989 by Ord. No. 89-27; 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
Storage and removal:
C. Dispose of any commercial garbage within the Borough by any means
whatsoever.
D. Dispose of any trade wastes within the Borough by burning or in any
other way except in accordance with the ordinances and regulations of
the Borough governing such disposal.
A. No commercial garbage or trade wastes, shall be stored in such manner
as will permit the scattering, littering or disintegration thereof, or
violate any of the statutes, ordinances, regulations or requirements
relating to health, cleanliness, nuisances, safety, fire, public passage,
property maintenance or like exercise of the general police powers.
B. All commercial garbage and trade wastes, shall be removed from the
premises on which they are stored as frequently as may be required to
comply with the aforesaid statutes, ordinances, regulations and
requirements.
§ 252-3 HILLSDALE CODE § 252-6
248:328
ARTICLE II
Dumpsters and Refuse Containers
[Adopted 6-9-2009 by Ord. No. 09-12]
§ 252-7. Purpose.
An article requiring dumpsters and other refuse containers that are
outdoors or exposed to stormwater to be covered at all times and prohibits
the spilling, dumping, leaking, or otherwise discharge of liquids, semiliquids
or solids from the containers to the municipal separate storm sewer
system(s) operated by the Borough of Hillsdale and/or the waters of the
state so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe
penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 252-8. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of Hillsdale or other public
body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Any waste container that a person controls
whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash cans,
garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or artificial,
within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 252-9. Prohibited conduct.
Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
§ 252-7 SOIL MOVEMENT § 252-9
248:329
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing. Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does
not leak or otherwise discharge liquids, semiliquids or solids to the
municipal separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of
Hillsdale.
§ 252-10. Exceptions to prohibition.
§ 252-11. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department of the Borough of
Hillsdale.
§ 252-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
A. Permitted temporary demolition containers.
B. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
C. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers.
D. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
associated with industrial activity under a valid NJPDES permit.
E. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods placed curbside for pickup).
§ 252-9 HILLSDALE CODE § 252-12
248:330
Chapter 256
STONYBROOK SWIM CLUB
§ 256-1. Purpose. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
§ 256-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGE — The individual's age on March 31 of each season.[Amended
5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
AREA — The total area of Stonybrook Swim Club.
COMMISSION — The Hillsdale Swimming Pool Commission.
POOL APRON AREA — The first ten-foot-wide area of concrete immediately
surrounding the pool.
POOL AREA — The entire area surrounding the pool and the bathhouse.
POOL PATIO — The remainder of concrete area surrounding the pool.
RECREATION SEASON — The period commencing the weekend closest to
September 15 and terminating the weekend closest to May 15 of each year.
SUMMER SEASON — The period commencing the weekend closest to May
15 and terminating the weekend closest to September 15 of each year.
§ 256-3. Identification.
A. There are hereby established and promulgated the Rules and
Regulations governing the use and operation of the municipal facility
known as "the Stonybrook Swim Club," located at the southwest corner
of Piermont Avenue and Cedar Lane, in the Borough of Hillsdale,
County of Bergen and State of New Jersey.
B. A copy of the Rules and Regulations shall be posted upon the bulletin
board in the main office, and a copy hereof shall be filed with the
Borough Clerk for public inspection.
A. The Commission shall annually issue to each member an identification
badge or card which shall be shown for admission to the area and be
exhibited at all times within the area.
B. Identification badges or cards are not transferable.
C. Illegal transfer of badges or cards, the giving of false information or
changing of identification badges or cards shall result in revocation or
suspension of membership.
D. Lost identification badges or cards shall be reported to the Manager
immediately and may be replaced upon payment of a fee as provided in
§ 252-12 SOIL MOVEMENT § 256-3
248:331
§ 256-4. Pool rules.
Chapter 138, Fees, with a temporary identification, valid for seven
consecutive days only. On or before the seventh day, a new
identification badge or card shall be issued. [Amended 5-13-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-8]
A. All bathers, including babies, shall wear bathing suits in both the
swimming and wading pools.148
B. Any person having a communicable disease, open blisters or cuts, sore
or inflamed eyes, ears, nose or mouth infections, excessive sunburn or
any type of skin disease shall be excluded from the pool area. No person
wearing any type of bandage, cast or band-aid shall be permitted in the
pool.
C. No inflatable water paraphernalia shall be allowed within the pool area.
Snorkels, fins, masks or other swimming aids shall not be worn except
upon the prior permission of the Manager.
D. Diving shall be restricted to permitted diving board areas. Diving from
a position along any wall or ledge is prohibited.
E. No one shall be permitted in the swimming or wading pool unless a
lifeguard is present.
F. No swimming shall be permitted in diving area.
G. No one shall be permitted to swim in the deep water [over six feet in
depth] without having successfully passed the official deep water test.
H. The following activities are prohibited:
(1) Carrying a lighted cigarette, cigar, pipe or other flammable or
smoking substance in the pool area.
(2) Dunking another swimmer or riding on the shoulders of another
swimmer.
(3) Removal of water or sand from the pool apron. [Amended
5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
(4) Eating or bringing food or drink within the pool area.
(5) Hanging on ropes within the pool.
(6) Bringing bicycles, tricycles, big wheels, carriages, strollers or baby
toys within the pool area.
(7) Combing hair within the pool apron area.
(8) Wearing curlers within the pool apron area.149
148. Editor's Note: Original Subsection (b), which immediately followed this subsection, was
deleted 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8.
§ 256-3 HILLSDALE CODE § 256-5
248:332
§ 256-5. General rules. [Amended 4-8-1980 by Ord. No. 80-7]
A. All vehicles shall be parked in designated areas. Parking in
unauthorized areas or in areas restricted to emergency vehicle traffic
shall be subject to motor vehicle violation prosecutions.
B. No item of personal property shall be left on the pool apron or pool
area.
C. The Commission may issue and post special rules and regulations
governing the use of the following special facilities. These regulations
shall be prominently posted at each such facility:150
(1) Children's play area.151
(2) Picnic and recreation area.
(3) Stonybrook Pool. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
(4) Changing areas.
(5) Bathrooms and showers.152
D. Dressing and undressing shall be done in locker rooms only. Dressing or
undressing shall not be permitted in parking areas or in any other part
of the area. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
E. All food shall be served and consumed within designated areas only.
Under no circumstances shall food or beverages be brought into the
pool area or stored overnight. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No.
97-8]
F. Children under 10 years of age shall not be permitted to enter the
Stonybrook Swim Club or to be anywhere in the area unless
accompanied by a responsible person 16 years of age or older.
[Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
G. Destruction or defacing of property shall be subject to suspension or
revocation of membership and expulsion from the Stonybrook Swim
Club Area. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
H. Neither the Borough nor the Commission, nor any of their officers or
employees, shall be responsible for valuables brought into the area.
I. All litter, paper or debris shall be placed in designated trash
receptacles.
149. Editor's Note: Original Section 2-76.4A, Tennis rules, added by Ord. No. 77-10, which
immediately followed this section, was deleted 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8.
150. Editor's Note: Original Section 2-76.5(c)(1), Cabanas, which immediately followed this
paragraph, was deleted 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8.
151. Editor's Note: Original Section 2-76.5(c)(3), Tennis courts, which immediately followed
this subsection, was deleted 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8.
152. Editor's Note: Original Section 2-76.5(c)(8), Stonybrook Field House, which immediately
followed this subsection, was deleted 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8.
§ 256-5 SOIL MOVEMENT § 256-5
248:333
§ 256-6. General prohibitions. [Amended 4-8-1980 by Ord. No. 80-7]
In addition to any other conduct which is determined by the Commission
to be inimical to the safe and orderly operation of the area, the following
activities are expressly prohibited:
§ 256-7. Enforcement of rules and regulations. [Amended
5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
J. Card tables and umbrellas shall be permitted in designated areas only.
K. Dress in and out of the pool shall be consistent with standards of good
taste.
L. Persons wearing street clothing or street shoes shall not be permitted
within the pool apron area.
M. Subject to appropriate alcoholic beverage control laws, supervised
civic, patriotic, fraternal, charitable events, festivals and observances
and pool parties shall be permitted to consume food and serve and
consume alcoholic beverages on the premises of Stonybrook Swim Club
subject to prior application to and written approval by the Hillsdale
Swimming Pool Commission. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No.
97-8]
A. The use of glass, glass containers or metal containers within the pool
and tennis areas.
B. The possession, display or consumption of alcoholic beverages within
the area; subject, however, to distribution in accordance with alcoholic
beverage control laws of § 256-5M.
C. The operation of bicycles, three-wheel vehicles, baby carriages or
strollers except in designated areas, and in no event within the pool
apron area.
D. The operation of musical instruments, portable radios, television sets or
tape or record players, except in areas designated by the Commission
or its agents. Loud, boisterous noisy conduct is prohibited in all areas.
E. The presence of pet dogs, cats or any other animals within the area.
F. Ball playing, roughhousing, wrestling, rowdiness or other similar
conduct affecting the safety and comfort of others within the area.
G. Swimming, wading or otherwise using the lake facilities to the rear of
the pool unless such use is specifically authorized by the Commission.
H. Any other conduct which in the opinion of the Hillsdale Swimming Pool
Commission or the Manager creates a public or private nuisance or is
inimical to the safe and healthful operation of the area or any part
thereof.
§ 256-5 HILLSDALE CODE § 256-7
248:334
§ 256-8. Hours of operation. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
The hours of operation of the Stonybrook Swim Club, including the
swimming pool facilities, shall be determined by the Commission.
§ 256-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No.
97-8]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be punished as provided in Chapter 226, Penalties. Each
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be a
separate and distinct offense.
§ 256-10. Rules and regulations not exclusive.
Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall not relieve any person
of the duty to observe other applicable provisions of any New Jersey statute
or of any ordinance of the Borough of Hillsdale.
Chapter 258
STORM SEWERS
A. The Borough Council, Hillsdale Swimming Pool Commission or the
Manager may close or limit the operation of the Stonybrook Swim Club
facilities, including the pool and swimming facilities, whenever any of
them shall deem such action to be necessary or desirable for the
protection of health, safety, comfort and welfare of the persons using
the facilities and of the public at large.
B. Members of the Police Department of the Borough of Hillsdale,
designated agents of the Borough, the Commission and the Manager
shall have authority to prohibit dangerous, improper or immoral
conduct or any conduct in violation of these Rules and Regulations. The
Commission shall have the power of: suspension or revocation of the
privileges otherwise granted to the holder of the membership badge or
card; and immediate expulsion from the Stonybrook Swim Club Area.
§ 256-7 SOIL MOVEMENT § 256-10
248:335

ARTICLE I
Illicit Connections
[Adopted 3-6-2007 by Ord. No. 07-06]
§ 258-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit illicit connections to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of Hillsdale, so as
to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for
the failure to comply.
§ 258-2. Definitions; word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural include the singular number, and words
used in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions below are the
same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New Jersey Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Borough of
Hillsdale unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit other
than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES Permit
Number NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may include, but are not
limited to, leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal separate storm
sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including but not limited to
those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the Federal
Clean Water Act [33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c)].
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of Hillsdale or other public
body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished
§ 258-1 SOIL MOVEMENT § 258-2
248:337
product. Noncontact cooling water may however contain algaecides or
biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers, and/or
corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production or
use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct,
or waste product. Process wastewater includes but is not limited to leachate
and cooling water other than noncontact cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 258-3. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by
the Borough of Hillsdale any domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water,
process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
§ 258-4. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Borough of Hillsdale Police Department
and Construction Official.
§ 258-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
§ 258-2 HILLSDALE CODE § 258-5
248:338
ARTICLE II
Spilling, Dumping or Disposal of Materials Other than Stormwater
[Adopted 3-6-2007 by Ord. No. 07-07]
§ 258-6. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the spilling, dumping, or disposal
of materials other than stormwater to the municipal separate stormwater
sewer system (MS4) operated by the Borough of Hillsdale so as to protect
public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure
to comply.
§ 258-7. Definitions; word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have meanings stated herein unless their use in the
text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of Hillsdale or other public
body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 258-8. Prohibited conduct.
The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater to
the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Borough of
Hillsdale is prohibited. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other
than stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge of pollutants
to the municipal separate storm sewer system is also prohibited.
§ 258-9. Exceptions to prohibition.
A. Water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
B. Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g. infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising
groundwaters).
§ 258-6 SOIL MOVEMENT § 258-9
248:339
§ 258-10. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Borough of Hillsdale Police Department
and Construction Code Official.
§ 258-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who continues to be in violation of the provisions of this
article, after being duly notified, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed
$500.
C. Air-conditioning condensate (excluding contact and noncontact cooling
water).
D. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
E. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
F. Residential car washing water, and residential swimming pool
discharges.
G. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
H. Flows from fire-fighting activities.
I. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
(1) Beach maintenance equipment immediately following its use for its
intended purposes; and
(2) Equipment used in the application of salt and deicing materials
immediately following salt and deicing material applications. Prior
to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and deicing materials
must be removed from equipment and vehicles to the maximum
extent practicable using dry cleaning methods (e.g., shoveling and
sweeping). Recovered materials are to be returned to storage for
reuse or properly discarded.
(3) Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the above situation, is limited to
exterior, undercarriage, and exposed parts and does not apply to
engines or other enclosed machinery.
§ 258-9 HILLSDALE CODE § 258-11
248:340
ARTICLE III
Retrofitting of Storm Drain Inlets
[Adopted 6-9-2009 by Ord. No. 09-13]
§ 258-12. Purpose.
An article requiring the retrofitting of existing storm drain inlets which are
in direct contact with repaving, repairing, reconstruction, or resurfacing
or alterations of facilities on private property, to prevent the discharge of
solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles, cans, food wrappers and other
litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the
Borough of Hillsdale so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and
to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 258-13. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of Hillsdale or other public
body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or artificial,
within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 258-14. Prohibited conduct.
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one
single-family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing
or altering any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain
inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
§ 258-12 SOIL MOVEMENT § 258-14
248:341
§ 258-15. Design standard.
Storm drain inlets identified in § 258-13 above shall comply with the
following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this section, "solid and floatable
materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or
settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see § 258-15C below.
A. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid
and floatable materials; or
B. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in § 258-15 below prior
to the completion of the project.
A. Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever they
use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water body
under that grate:
(1) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle
safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle
Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
(2) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate has an
area of no more than 7.0 square inches, or is no greater than 0.5
inch across the smallest dimension. Examples of grates subject to
this standard include grates in grate inlets, the grate portion (noncurb-
opening portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer bars in
slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces include surfaces of
roads (including bridges), driveways, parking areas, bikeways,
plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open channels, and stormwater
basin floors.
B. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than 7.0
square inches, or be no greater than 2.0 inches across the smallest
dimension.
C. This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the municipal engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
(2) Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end-of-pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
§ 258-14 HILLSDALE CODE § 258-15
248:342
§ 258-16. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Construction Official of Borough of
Hillsdale.
§ 258-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000 for each storm drain inlet that
is not retrofitted to meet the design standard.
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
(a) A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches wide
(This option does not apply for outfall netting facilities.); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register-listed historic property.
§ 258-15 SOIL MOVEMENT § 258-17
248:343
Chapter 260
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 96.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 110.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 124.
Fees — See Ch. 138.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 188.
Mailboxes — See Ch. 200.
Parades and street meetings — See Ch. 216.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 224.
Penalties — See Ch. 226.
Sewers — See Ch. 240.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 272.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 288.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 292.
Land use — See Ch. 310.
§ 258-17 HILLSDALE CODE § 258-17
248:344
ARTICLE I
Grading, Construction, Paving and Repairing153
[Adopted 6-27-1972 by Ord. No. 72-9 as Ch. 19, Art. 1, of the
Revised Ordinances of 1972, amended in its entirety 5-13-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-8]
§ 260-1. Abutting owner to maintain sidewalk, curb and gutter.
Any person owning, leasing or occupying any house or other building,
or vacant lot, fronting on any street in the Borough shall, at his or her
charge and expense, well and sufficiently pave and maintain in good repair
according to the provisions of this article, the sidewalk, including the
authorized installations thereon and therein, and the curb and gutter of the
street in front of such house, building or lot.154
§ 260-2. Notice to make improvements; contents.
§ 260-3. Failure to comply with notice; Borough to make
improvements.
If after service of any notice as provided for in § 260-2, the owner of any
lands affected thereby shall neglect to make improvements directed by such
notice, the Mayor and Council shall cause such improvements to be made,
and the cost of the same shall be assessed against the abutting property
owner as provided for by law.
§ 260-4. Permit required for improvements or storage of
construction materials.
No person shall construct, remove, repair, replace, reset or alter any
sidewalk, curb or gutter in the Borough or cause the construction, removal,
A. Upon failure of any owner, lessee or occupant to construct or maintain
the sidewalk, curb and gutter as provided for in § 260-1, the
Construction Code Official or an authorized representative shall serve,
according to law, a notice upon such owner, lessee or occupant.
B. The notice referred to in Subsection A above shall:
(1) Describe the property affected and the improvement or repairs
required; and
(2) State the intention of the Borough to cause such improvement or
repairs to be made within 30 days after service of the notice in the
event that such owner, lessee or occupant shall fail to make the
required improvement or repairs.
153. Editor's Note: For state statute authorizing municipalities to adopt ordinances providing
for the repair of sidewalks, see N.J.S.A. 40:65-1 et seq.
154. Editor's Note: For authority of a municipality to adopt ordinances to provide for the
construction, paving, curbing and repair of sidewalks at the cost of the municipality or at
the cost of the owner or abutting property or both, see N.J.S.A. 40:65-1 et seq.
§ 260-1 SOIL MOVEMENT § 260-4
248:345
repair, replacement, resetting or altering of the sidewalk, curb, gutter of
any public street in the Borough nor store thereon construction materials
for the same without the written permit of the Borough Engineer or his or
her authorized representative as referred to in § 260-5.
§ 260-5. Fee and deposit to be paid before issuance of permit;
schedule. [Amended 4-14-1998 by Ord. No. 98-3]
No permit required by § 260-4 shall be issued until there has been paid to
the Borough Clerk a fee and deposit in accordance with Chapter 138, Fees.
§ 260-6. Improvements to conform to established grade.
When the center line or gutter grades of any street have been previously
established or approved by the Borough Engineer, the proposed
improvement shall conform as nearly as practicable with the established
grades. When none has been established or approved, the Borough
Engineer shall establish same at the applicant's expense.
§ 260-7. Cross sections and material composition.
The following shall comply with the Residential Site Improvement
Standards, N.J.A.C. Title 15, Chapter 21:
§ 260-8. Borough Engineer to supervise all improvements of
sidewalks, curbs and gutters; specifications.
The materials used in, and the work of, constructing, placing and replacing,
setting and resetting, altering or repairing any sidewalk, curb or gutter
of any public street in the Borough shall be under the supervision of the
Borough Engineer and in accordance with the specifications as adopted by
the Mayor and Council of the Borough and placed on file with the Borough
Clerk.
§ 260-9. Marking or defacing of pavements, curbs and sidewalks
prohibited; exceptions. [Amended 5-14-2002 by Ord. No. 02-07]
A. Construction details.
B. Construction of sidewalks: grade; slope; driveways.
C. Construction of sidewalks: unpaved portions.
A. No person shall paint, stencil, color, mark or deface the pavement,
sidewalk or curb of any public street in the Borough; provided, however,
that this section shall not apply to painting under the direction of the
Chief Law Enforcement Officer of the Borough in the regulation of the
traffic and parking of motor vehicles.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
§ 260-4 HILLSDALE CODE § 260-9
248:346
§ 260-10. Permission and permit required for crossing over curb or
sidewalk other than at driveway.155
No person shall cross over or upon the curb or paved sidewalk of any street
in the Borough with any cart, wagon, truck, or other vehicle except at
driveways, without:
§ 260-11. Deposit required before permit issued to cross over curb
or sidewalk.
No permit required by § 260-10 shall be granted until and unless there has
been deposited with the Borough Clerk the sum as provided in Chapter 138,
Fees. Upon expiration of the permit, the deposit shall be returned less any
cost or expense to the Borough by reason of any injury or damage to the
curb or sidewalk caused by the permittee.
§ 260-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the provisions of Chapter 226, Penalties.
PUBLIC UTILITY — As herein used, this term shall have the meaning
set forth in N.J.S.A. 48:2-13.
UTILITY MARKOUT — Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:2-80, the marking,
staking, locating or other identification of underground facilities
performed by utility providers or their agents that may be affected by a
planned excavation or demolition.
C. Temporary marking is customarily done in indelible paint on the ground
surface above the utility to indicate its location to enable an excavator
to employ prudent construction techniques to determine the precise
location of the provider's underground facilities. The markout is
performed within three business days after receipt of a notice of intent
of any person performing excavations, exploratory borings, or
subsurface probing, and demolition, in public or private properties.
Public and private utility providers shall ensure that painted markouts
must be removed no later than four weeks after the markouts are
ordered or performed, but no less than the term of longevity required
under state law. Removal of a markout shall not destroy, damage or mar
the public sidewalks on which the paint exists.
A. Permission of the owner or occupant of the building or lot in front of
which such curb or sidewalk is situated; and
B. Written permit obtained therefor from the Borough Clerk.
155. Editor's Note: For statutory provisions concerning driving over sidewalks, see N.J.S.A.
30:4-71.
§ 260-9 SOIL MOVEMENT § 260-12
248:347

ARTICLE II
Openings and Excavations
[Adopted 6-27-1972 by Ord. No. 72-9 as Ch. 19, Art. 2, of the
Revised Ordinances of 1972]
§ 260-13. Permit required. [Amended 6-13-1978 by Ord. No. 78-12]
§ 260-14. Form of application; supporting documents. [Amended
6-13-1978 by Ord. No. 78-12]
A. No person other than the Borough or other political subdivision of the
State of New Jersey or a quasi-public authority or similar body
established by a political subdivision or by the state shall disturb or
cause to be disturbed (by digging up, excavating, cutting, tunneling
under or otherwise) the surface or bed of any Borough street, public
place, sidewalk, gutter, pavement or other area within the public rightof-
way without a permit therefor as hereinafter provided.
B. No work for which a permit is required hereunder shall be commenced
until a permit shall first have been obtained as hereinafter required;
provided, however, that in the event of emergency constituting an
immediate jeopardy to persons or property, such work may be
commenced immediately if:
(1) The Borough Police Department, Fire Department and Department
of Public Works shall be notified prior to commencement of the
work, by telephone, radio, telegram or personal communication;
and
(2) The permit required hereunder shall be obtained within three days
after commencement of the work.
C. The right to perform work under a permit shall expire on the day
following the completion date stated in the application; provided,
however, that if the permittee shall be unable to commence or complete
the work within the time specified, he or she may, prior to said
expiration date, request an extension of time by a writing, addressed to
the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works, setting forth the
reasons for the requested extension. If such an extension is necessary
and not contrary to the public interest, the Superintendent may grant
additional time for the commencement or completion of the work.
A. Application for a permit shall be made to the Borough Clerk on such
form as shall, from time to time, be approved by resolution hereafter
adopted by the Borough Council.
B. The application shall be accompanied by:
(1) A plan, in quadruplicate, detailing the work to be performed.
(2) Certificate of insurance coverage, or a statutory form of certificate
of self insurance in an amount of not less than $1,000,000 for bodily
§ 260-13 SOIL MOVEMENT § 260-14
248:349
§ 260-15. Fee and deposit schedule. [Amended 6-13-1978 by Ord.
No. 78-12; 4-24-1984 by Ord. No. 84-6; 3-12-1985 by Ord. No. 85-3;
5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
§ 260-16. Street opening regulations. [Added 6-13-1978 by Ord. No.
78-12; amended 3-12-1985 by Ord. No. 85-3]
injury or death and not less than $500,000 for property damage,
expressly designating the Borough and its agents as additional
named insureds.156
(3) A cash deposit or corporate surety bond in amount sufficient to
comply with the fee and deposit schedule hereinafter set forth.
C. The application shall bear the recommendation of the Superintendent
of Public Works and the approval of the Borough Engineer, and the
permit shall be issued by the Borough Clerk.
D. Acceptance of the permit shall constitute an agreement by the applicant
to indemnify and save the Borough, its officers, employees and agents
harmless from any and all costs, fees, expenses, charges, damages and
liabilities of any nature whatsoever which may accrue or be claimed to
accrue by reason of the work or project that is the subject of the
application.
A. The schedule as provided in Chapter 138, Fees, shall be utilized in
computing the fee and deposit required in connection with the issuance
of a permit.
B. A public utility may, at its option:
(1) Elect, in lieu of a cash permit and inspection fee, to be billed
periodically therefor by the Borough;
(2) Elect, in lieu of paying a maintenance charge and supplying a
performance bond for each opening, to furnish the Borough with an
annual performance bond in the amount of $5,000, guaranteeing
compliance with all provisions of this article.
A. The Borough Engineer or the Superintendent of the Department of
Public Works is hereby authorized and directed to promulgate proposed
written regulations for the implementation and enforcement of the
provisions of this article. Such regulations shall include, but shall not be
limited to:
(1) Limitations on the time of making of an opening;
(2) Restrictions for the protection of existing and proposed surface and
subsurface installations, monuments and drainage facilities;
(3) Requirements for the storage and removal of excavated materials;
156. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 260-14 HILLSDALE CODE § 260-16
248:350
§ 260-16.1. Specifications and procedures for pavement. [Added
12-9-2014 by Ord. No. 14-17]
The following specifications and procedures shall be applicable to all
pavement on roads and streets within the Borough of Hillsdale:
(4) Requirements for safety precautions to be taken by the permittee;
(5) Restrictions as to the periods of day when the work may be
performed; and
(6) Requirements for backfilling, inspecting, restoring and
maintenance of openings.
B. Notice that the Borough Engineer has promulgated and filed for public
inspection said proposed street opening regulations in the office of the
Borough Clerk shall be published once a week for two successive
weeks, informing the public of such promulgation and filing and fixing a
date when and where the Borough Council will consider approval,
modification or rejection of said proposed regulations by resolutions.
C. All excavations within the public right-of-way shall be backfilled with
broken stone or gravel, regardless of the purpose of the excavation or
opening. Excavation and backfill methods shall be as currently specified
by the New Jersey Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, with addenda.
[Added 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
A. For openings of less than 100 square feet in surface area, the upper 7 1/
2 inches of trench shall be filled by the applicant with graded one-andone-
half-inch stone equal to the applicable and current State
Specification(s), with dust, compacted by a five-ton roller. After 24
hours of traffic, or other period as stipulated by the appropriate
Borough official, the edges of the trench shall be saw cut parallel to the
street center line and six inches outside the widest trench limits, after
which the upper 3 1/2 inches of stone shall be removed and final
pavement shall be constructed. After 30 calendar days, and after six
months, the applicant shall place fine aggregate bituminous concrete in
depressed areas to form a smooth, even street surface.
B. For openings of greater than 100 square feet in surface area, the upper
7 1/2 inches of trench shall be filled by the applicant with five inches of
graded one-and-one-half-inch stone equal to the applicable and current
State Specification(s), with dust, and 1 1/2 inches of stabilized base
material equal to the applicable and current State Specification(s),
compacted by a ten-ton roller. The surface shall be maintained by the
applicant for not less than 30 calendar days and, at the discretion of the
appropriate Borough official, to a maximum of 90 calendar days, such
that maximum surface depression is one inch. Thereafter, the edges of
the trench shall be saw cut parallel to the street center line and six
inches outside the widest trench limits, after which the upper 3 1/2
§ 260-16 SOIL MOVEMENT § 260-16.1
248:351
§ 260-17. Revocation of permits. [Added 6-13-1978 by Ord. No.
78-12]
inches of material shall be removed, and final pavement shall be
constructed. After six months, the applicant shall place fine aggregate
bituminous concrete in depressed areas to form a smooth, even, street
surface.
C. For emergency openings from November 15 through March 31, the
procedure shall be the same as for openings greater than 100 square
feet, except that temporary paving material may be approved cold
patching compound, if hot material is not available.
D. Final pavement in all cases shall be four inches of graded one-and-onehalf-
inch stone, equal to the applicable and current State
Specification(s), with dust, two inches of stabilized base material equal
to the applicable and current State Specification(s), 1 1/2 inches of fine
aggregate bituminous concrete equal to the applicable and current
State Specification(s), feathered over a twelve-inch width of tack coat,
to meet adjacent surfaces. All thickness shall be as measured after
compaction by a ten-ton roller.
E. Where a trench exceeds 100 feet in length, a one-and-one-half-inch
surface course shall be placed from curb to curb on all streets. Where a
trench exceeds six feet in width, or is skewed to street center line or is
connected to spur trenches, a one-and-one-half-inch surface course
shall be placed from curb to curb. In all cases the surface shall be
cleaned end tack coat placed before application of surface course,
which shall be feathered toward each curb.
F. Upon prior approval of the appropriate Borough official, subgrade stone
may be replaced with an equivalent thickness of stabilized base
material.
G. The roadway restoration and trench repair as stipulated within this
section shall be followed. If it is found during trench excavation that a
roadway section is thicker than stipulated within this section, the
existing, thicker pavement section shall be constructed.
H. All roadway restoration work shall be performed to maintain current
drainage patterns. In addition, unless authorized by the Borough,
roadway surface grade elevations shall not change. If milling is
necessary to satisfy these requirements, milling shall be performed in
accordance with current NJDOT regulation and in accordance with the
requirements as stipulate by the Borough and its professionals.
A. Any permit may be revoked by the Borough Engineer or Superintendent
of Public Works, after notice to the permittee, for:
(1) Violation of any condition of the permit or of any provisions of this
article or any regulation promulgated pursuant to this article;
§ 260-16.1 HILLSDALE CODE § 260-17
248:352
§ 260-18. Concurrent and adjoining jurisdictions. [Added 6-13-1978
by Ord. No. 78-12]
§ 260-19. Inspection of sewer openings. [Amended 6-13-1978 by
Ord. No. 78-12]
All sewer openings shall be made and inspected in accordance with Chapter
240, Sewers.
(2) Violation of any provisions of any other applicable ordinance or law
relating to the work;
(3) Existence of any condition or the doing of any act constituting or
creating a nuisance or endangering the lives or properties of
others.
B. Written notice of any such violation or condition shall be served upon
the permittee or his or her agent engaged in the work. The notice shall
contain a brief statement of the grounds for revoking the permit. Notice
may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be
notified, or by certified or registered United States mail, addressed to
the person to be notified.
C. A permittee may, if the Borough Engineer or Superintendent of Public
Works finds that immediate danger to persons or property does not
require immediate revocation, be granted a period of 48 hours from the
date of the notice to correct the violation and to proceed with the
diligent prosecution of the work authorized by the permit. If the
Borough Engineer or the Superintendent finds that immediate danger
to persons or property does exist, the permit may be revoked
immediately.
D. When any permit has been revoked and the work by the permit has not
been completed, the Superintendent shall cause to be performed such
work as may be necessary to complete such work as was authorized by
the permit and to restore the street or part thereof to the condition
existing before the opening. The permittee shall be liable for all
expenses incurred by the Borough under the provisions of this section.
A. If the proposed opening lies partly within a Borough street and partly
within a street under the jurisdiction of any other public or quasi-public
body, the applicant shall not proceed with the work under the Borough
permit until he or she has also procured a permit for the work in the
adjoining jurisdiction.
B. If the proposed opening is in a street within the Borough but wholly
under the jurisdiction of another public or quasi-public body, the work
therein shall not be commenced until the holder of a permit for said
work shall have given not less than 48 hours notice to the Borough
Police Department.
§ 260-17 SOIL MOVEMENT § 260-20
248:353
§ 260-20. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-13-1978 by Ord. No.
78-12]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the provisions of Chapter 226, Penalties.
§ 260-20 HILLSDALE CODE § 260-20
248:354
ARTICLE III
Obstructions
[Adopted 6-27-1972 by Ord. No. 72-9 as Ch. 19, Art. 3, of the
Revised Ordinances of 1972]
§ 260-21. Permit required.
No person shall encumber or obstruct any street or public place within the
Borough with any article or thing whatsoever unless he or she has obtained
a permit to do so approved by the Council and signed by the Borough Clerk.
§ 260-22. Application for permit; fee to accompany application.
§ 260-23. Conditional permission by Borough Clerk to obstruct
streets.158
The Borough Clerk is hereby authorized to grant permission on request to
carpenters, masons, builders, contractors, homeowners or materialmen to
use 1/3 of the street in front of any premises upon which it is intended
to construct, alter or repair any building or store, building material and
equipment, for a period not exceeding 10 days upon payment of the fee
referred to in § 260-22 and upon the conditions that the applicant will
remove all surplus material and refuse from the street when the work is
completed, will not obstruct the free flow of water in the said street and will
guard the said obstruction with lights and otherwise at night.
A. Application for a permit required by § 260-21 shall be made to the
Borough Clerk, in writing, except as otherwise provided in § 260-23,
and shall specify:
(1) The full name and address of the person to whom the permit is to
be granted.
(2) The place or places at which the work is to be done.
(3) The character of the work and purpose of the permit.
(4) The length of time for which the permit is requested.
(5) Such additional information as the Borough Engineer may require.
B. The fee as prescribed by § 260-5 shall accompany each application.
C. The person or persons responsible for obstructing the street shall
obtain liability insurance for a minimum of $1,000,000, naming the
Borough of Hillsdale as additional insured and shall contain a holdharmless
clause in favor of the Borough of Hillsdale.157
157. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
158. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 260-21 SOIL MOVEMENT § 260-24
248:355
§ 260-24. Responsibility of permittee.
The issuance of a permit pursuant to the provisions of § 260-21 shall impose
upon the permittee the responsibility to:
§ 260-25. Access to sidewalks and curbs.
Access to and across sidewalks and curbs shall be left open and suitable
planks provided for the safety of pedestrians at all times.
§ 260-26. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the provisions of Chapter 226, Penalties.
A. Remove all surplus material and refuse from the street upon completion
of the project or expiration of the permit.
B. Guard the obstruction with adequate safeguards, including lights at
night.
C. Not to obstruct the free flow of water in the street.
§ 260-24 HILLSDALE CODE § 260-26
248:356
ARTICLE IV
Removal of Snow, Ice, Grass and Debris159
[Adopted 6-27-1972 by Ord. No. 72-9 as Ch. 19, Art. 5, of the
Revised Ordinances of 1972]
§ 260-27. Duty of owner or tenant to remove. [Amended 12-13-1994
by Ord. No. 94-16]
The owner or tenant in possession of any land abutting or bordering upon
the sidewalks and gutters of any public street of the Borough shall remove
or cause to be removed from the abutting sidewalks and gutters:
§ 260-28. Duty of owner or tenant to cut grass.
The owner or tenant in possession of any lands abutting or bordering upon
the sidewalks and gutters of any public streets of the Borough shall cut or
cause to be cut, below a height of four inches from the ground, all grass or
growth of any kind which may grow between the curbline and the sidewalk
A. All snow or ice therefrom within 24 hours after the same shall fall or be
formed thereon, or such longer period as may be fixed by the Mayor or
Superintendent of Public Works in case of emergency.160
B. In the event of ice which may be so frozen as to make removal
impracticable, the owner or owners, tenant or tenants of lands abutting
or bordering upon public streets, avenues or highways shall cause the
some to be thoroughly covered with sand, ashes or rock salt within 24
hours after the same shall cease to fall or be formed thereon.
C. Said snow or ice, whether from the sidewalk, gutter or any other
portion of the property, shall not be deposited on the street or sidewalk,
or on the property of someone else without the express consent of the
owner of the property on which the snow or ice is to be deposited. It
being the intent and purpose of this provision to prohibit all persons
from throwing, casting, placing or depositing snow and ice, which
accumulated within the private property of said person, upon the
sidewalks or streets of the Borough of Hillsdale.
D. It being the responsibility of the Borough of Hillsdale, County of
Bergen, and the State of New Jersey to ensure the public safety, nothing
in this article shall be construed to apply to the plowing of snow from
the public streets by the Borough of Hillsdale, County of Bergen, the
State of New Jersey or their duly authorized agents.
E. All grass, weeds, brush and other impediments therefrom within three
days after notice to remove the same.
159. Editor's Note: For statutory authority of a municipality to compel removal of snow and ice,
grass, weeds and other impediments from sidewalks and gutters, see N.J.S.A. 40:65-12.
160. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 260-27 SOIL MOVEMENT § 260-28
248:357
of the street, within three days after notice to cut such grass or growth or
cause it to be cut.
§ 260-29. Notice; service. [Amended 11-25-1986 by Ord. No. 86-17;
12-13-1994 by Ord. No. 94-16]
§ 260-30. Failure to comply; removal by Borough; costs.
In cases where the owner or tenant shall have failed or refused to remove
said snow, ice, grass, weeds, brush or other impediments or to cut the
grass or growth within the time provided in §§ 260-27 and 260-28, the
Superintendent of Public Works shall remove, or cause to be removed, the
same. The Superintendent of Public Works shall certify the cost thereof to
the Council. Upon receipt of the certificates, the Council shall examine the
same and, if found correct, shall cause such cost to be charged against the
lands abutting as aforesaid. The amount so charged shall thereupon become
a lien and tax upon such lands and shall be added to and become part of
the taxes next to be levied and assessed upon such lands. Said amount shall
bear interest at the same rate and shall be collected and enforced by the
same officers and in the same manner as taxes.
§ 260-31. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the provisions Chapter 226, Penalties.
A. In the instance of owner or tenant failing to comply with provision of
§ 260-28, the Borough Administrator shall designate the Borough
employees who shall give or cause notice to be given.
B. The said notices may be served upon the owner or tenant by personal
service or by certified mail and addressed to the last known address.
§ 260-28 HILLSDALE CODE § 260-31
248:358
ARTICLE V
Trimming of Plant Life Near Intersections161
[Adopted 6-27-1972 by Ord. No. 72-9 as Ch. 19, Art. 6, of the
Revised Ordinances of 1972]
§ 260-32. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PLANT LIFE — Includes any hedge, brush or other plant life on lands within
the Borough.
§ 260-33. Necessity of trimming plant life. [Amended 11-25-1986 by
Ord. No. 86-17162]
Whenever the Chief Law Enforcement Officer shall determine that it is
necessary and expedient for the preservation of the public safety that
plant life growing within 10 feet of any roadway and within 25 feet of the
intersection of two roadways be cut to a height of not more than 2 1/2 feet,
the Chief Law Enforcement Officer may order the owner or tenant of the
land described in said determination to cut said plant life to the required
height.
§ 260-34. Notice to owner or tenant. [Amended 11-25-1986 by Ord.
No. 86-17163]
The Chief Law Enforcement Officer shall cause to be served upon the owner
or tenant of the lands described in said determination, by personal service
or by certified mail addressed to the last known address, a notice directing
said owner or tenant to comply with the provisions of § 260-35 of this
article.
§ 260-35. Plant life to be cut within 10 days after service of notice.
Within 10 days after service of said notice, the owner or tenant shall cause
the plant life described in said determination to be cut to a height of not
more than 2 1/2 feet.
§ 260-36. Failure to comply; cutting by Borough; costs. [Amended
11-25-1986 by Ord. No. 86-17]
If the plant life described in said determination shall not be cut in the
manner and within the time designated in said notice, the Superintendent
of Public Works may cause the same to be cut. Should the Superintendent
161. Editor's Note: For statute authorizing a municipality to enact ordinances for the trimming
of plant life near street intersections, see N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.26 and 2.27.
162. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
163. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 260-32 SOIL MOVEMENT § 260-36
248:359
of Public Works cause the same to be cut, he or she shall certify the cost of
said work to the Borough Council.
§ 260-37. Council to examine certificate; reasonable cost as lien.
§ 260-38. Violations and penalties.
Every owner, tenant or occupant who shall refuse or neglect to cut or trim
any plant life in the manner and within the time hereinabove provided
in this article, or who violates any provision of this article, shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the provisions of Chapter 226, Penalties.
A. The Council shall examine the certificate of costs submitted by the
Superintendent of Public Works and, if found correct, shall, by
resolution, cause the cost as shown thereon to be charged against said
lands, or, in the event that the cost shown thereon is excessive, shall
cause the reasonable cost of said work to be charged against said lands.
A certified copy of said resolution shall be filed with the Tax Collector of
the Borough.
B. The amount so charged shall forthwith become a lien upon such lands
and shall be added to and become and form part of the taxes next to be
assessed and levied upon such lands. Said amount shall bear interest at
the same rate as other taxes and shall be collected and enforced by the
Tax Collector in the same manner as taxes.
§ 260-36 HILLSDALE CODE § 260-38
248:360
ARTICLE VI
Yard Waste Collection Program
[Adopted 10-10-2006 by Ord. No. 06-10]
§ 260-39. Purpose.
To establish a yard waste collection and disposal program in the Borough of
Hillsdale, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe
penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 260-40. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CONTAINERIZED — The placement of yard waste in a trash can, bucket,
bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling or
blowing out into the street and coming into contact with stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state, subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive
or other way which is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway,
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Leaves and grass clippings.
§ 260-41. Yard waste collection.
Sweeping, raking, blowing or otherwise placing yard waste that is not
containerized at the curb or along the street is only allowed during the
seven days prior to a scheduled and announced collection, and shall not be
placed closer than 10 feet from any storm drain inlet. Placement of such
yard waste at the curb or along the street at any other time or in any other
manner is a violation of this article. If such placement of yard waste occurs,
the party responsible for placement of the yard waste must remove the
yard waste from the street or said party shall be deemed in violation of this
article.
§ 260-42. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Borough of Hillsdale
Police Department and Construction Code Official.
§ 260-39 SOIL MOVEMENT § 260-43
248:361
§ 260-43. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
§ 260-44. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this article is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this article to be
unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause or reason shall not affect
any other portion of this article.
§ 260-43 HILLSDALE CODE § 260-44
248:362
Chapter 264
SWIMMING POOLS, PRIVATE
Editor's Note: For statutory provisions regulating public swimming
pools and places, see N.J.S.A. 26:4A-1 et seq.
§ 264-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FENCE — A permanent barrier or obstruction not less than four feet nor
more than 10 feet in height, so constructed as entirely to enclose the area
on which the swimming pool is located and to bar all reasonable and normal
access to the swimming pool except through a substantial, self-closing gate
or gates of the same height as the fence, equipped with facilities for locking
said gate or gates when the pool is unattended or unguarded.164
PERSON — Any individual, firm or corporation having an interest in the lot
or lots on which the swimming pool is located, as owner, tenant, occupant
or the agent, servant or employee of such owner, tenant or occupant.
SWIMMING POOL — A body of water, artificially constructed in whole or in
part, having at any point a depth of more than 18 inches below the ground
or area surrounding it, and designed, established, constructed, maintained
or used as an accessory use to a residence for private swimming, bathing or
wading purposes of a person, the members of his or her household or their
guests.
§ 264-2. Fence enclosure required for swimming pool area.
No person shall construct, maintain or use, or cause, suffer or permit to
be constructed, maintained or used, a swimming pool on any lot or lots
in the Borough, unless there shall be constructed and maintained a fence
as defined in § 264-1 enclosing the area on which the swimming pool is
located.
§ 264-3. Locking and closing of gates.
The gate or gates in the fence shall be kept closed at all times except when
being used for ingress or egress, and shall be kept locked at all times when
the swimming pool is unattended or unguarded.
§ 264-4. Zoning provisions not affected.
Nothing herein shall be deemed to alter, modify or repeal the provisions
of Chapter 310, Land Use, Part 4, Zoning, with respect to the height and
location of fences in residence districts.
164. Editor's Note: The original definition of "Person," which immediately followed this
definition, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 260-44 SOIL MOVEMENT § 264-5
248:363
§ 264-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the provisions of Chapter 226, Penalties.
§ 264-6. Swimming pool removal permit requirements. [Added
9-4-2018 by Ord. No. 18-06]
Chapter 268
TARGET RANGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 138.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 188.
Noise — See Ch. 208.
Penalties — See Ch. 226.
Land use — See Ch. 310.
A. Swimming pools on private property may be removed upon cessation of
use. Pools may NOT be filled in or abandoned in place. A demolition
permit is required for the removal of all pools, prior to the required
removal and demolition work.
B. Permit Requirements shall be as follows:
(1) The pool shell must be removed, regardless of material type.
(2) The pool void shall be filled with crushed rock material (3/4"
minimum size to 1 1/2" maximum size) for a minimum of 12" deep
at the bottom and then clean fill, or other approved material shall
be added on top to match adjacent grade level.
(3) All gas, water and sewer lines to the pool shall be securely capped
off with an approved fitting (gas line is required to have a screw
fitting).
(4) All electric pool equipment, including the breaker in the electrical
panel underground wiring, conduit or other items, shall be
removed.
(5) If a structure is to be constructed above or near the filled area, a
geotechnical report/letter prepared by a soils engineer shall be
required, in the discretion of the Construction Official.
C. Inspections.
Two inspections are required for pool removals. The in-progress
inspection shall be scheduled during the demolition and removal
process. Final inspection shall be scheduled after all work is completed
and the site/soil is stabilized.
§ 264-5 HILLSDALE CODE § 264-6
268:364
§ 268-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TARGET RANGE — Any place designed, used or intended to be used for the
discharge of any firearm at a mark or target.
§ 268-2. Permit required.
§ 268-3. Application for permit; fee.
§ 268-4. Contents of application.
The application shall set forth:
A. No person shall maintain or conduct a target range nor allow nor
permit the discharge of any firearm therein unless such person has
applied for and received a target range permit as provided by this
chapter.
B. No person shall discharge any firearm at any target range located
within the Borough unless a permit for the maintenance of such range
shall first have been approved by the Council.
A. Application for a target range permit shall be submitted to the Chief
Law Enforcement Officer, in writing, in duplicate, on forms prescribed
by the Borough.165
B. The application shall be signed by the applicant. In the event that the
applicant is not the record owner or exclusive lessee of the property on
which the target range is located, the application shall be signed by
said owner or lessee in addition to the applicant.
C. The application fee as provided in Chapter 138, Fees, shall accompany
the application.166
A. The name and address of the record owner of the real estate upon
which the target range is located.
B. The name and address of the person in charge of and responsible for
the maintenance of such target range.
C. Description, by way of sketch or otherwise, stating and showing:
(1) Lot and block numbers, as shown on the tax assessment map of the
Borough, of the property upon which the range is located.
165. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
166. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 264-6 TARGET RANGES § 268-4
268:365
§ 268-5. Inspection by Chief Law Enforcement Officer.167
§ 268-6. Approval of permit.168
The Council may, notwithstanding the recommendation of the Chief Law
Enforcement Officer, grant approval or disapproval of the permit, or it may
conduct such further investigation of the facts set forth in the application as
it may deem necessary.
§ 268-7. Issuance of permit; term.
§ 268-8. Revocation of permit.
The permit for a target range may be revoked by the Council for cause, but
only after due notice and hearing.
(2) Location of the target range on said property.
(3) Distance in feet between the firing point and the farthest target
between the target and the nearest property line, and between the
firing point and the nearest property line.
(4) All houses, barns or other buildings and all streets or highways
within four hundred (400) feet of any part of the target range.
A. The Chief Law Enforcement Officer shall promptly cause an inspection
of the target range to be made to ascertain whether or not such range
may be used without jeopardizing the health, safety and general
welfare of the public.
B. After such inspection, the Chief Law Enforcement Officer shall indicate
upon each application submitted his or her recommendations of
approval or disapproval of the target range, taking into consideration
the factors set forth in Subsection A and the proximity of dwelling
houses, schools and other places of public assembly; density of
population; volume of pedestrian and vehicular traffic on adjoining
streets and adjoining properties; and precautionary measures and
devices in and about such range.
C. In the event of disapproval of the target range by the Chief Law
Enforcement Officer, he or she shall set forth his or her reasons
therefor, in writing, and shall forward the application and reasons to the
Borough Clerk.
A. Upon approval of the application by the Council, the Borough Clerk
shall issue the permit for a target range.
B. The permit shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from the date of its
issuance, unless said permit shall be revoked at an earlier date.
167. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
168. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 268-4 HILLSDALE CODE § 268-9
268:366
§ 268-9. Applicability of other provisions.
The issuance of a permit for a target range pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall not relieve the permittee of the obligation to obtain any other
permit or license required by any other ordinance of the Borough, or by any
state or federal law or regulation applicable to the subject matter hereof.
§ 268-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the provisions of Chapter 226, Penalties.
Chapter 272
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 138.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 188.
Penalties — See Ch. 226.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 292.
§ 268-9 TAXICABS § 268-10
272:367

ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 272-1. Definitions.169
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TAXICAB — Includes any automobile or motor car, commonly called taxi,
engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire which is held out,
announced or advertised to operate or run or which is operated or run
over any of the streets or public highways of the Borough, and particularly
accepts and discharges such persons as may offer themselves for
transportation from points or places within the Borough to points or places
within or without the Borough.
169. Editor's Note: For statutory provisions authorizing municipalities to license and regulate
vehicles for the transportation of passengers and to revoke such licenses, see N.J.S.A.
40:52-1 and 40:52-2. For statutory provisions defining taxicabs, requiring municipal
consent to operate, requiring liability and property damage insurance, and authorizing
revocation of municipal consent, see N.J.S.A. 48:16-1 et seq.
§ 272-1 TAXICABS § 272-1
272:369

ARTICLE II
General Licensing Provisions
§ 272-2. Authority to grant licenses; rejection of applicants.
§ 272-3. Register; contents; endorsement of license number.
The Clerk shall:
§ 272-4. Issuance, signing and sealing of licenses; term.
A. The Council shall have the sole power to grant licenses required by this
chapter.
B. The Council may reject any applicant for a license required by this
chapter if the applicant does not comply with the requirements of
Article III or IV, as applicable.
A. Keep a register of all licenses granted under the provisions of this
chapter, which register shall show the character of the license, the
number, date of issue, name of person licensed and other information
pertaining thereto.
B. Retain all applications.
C. Endorse upon all applications on which licenses are granted by the
Council, the numbers of the licenses issued pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter.
A. The licenses required by the provisions of this chapter shall be issued
and signed by the Clerk and shall be sealed with the Borough seal.
B. Each license shall be effective for one (1) year commencing January 1,
and shall expire on December 31 of the year for which the license shall
have been issued.
§ 272-2 TAXICABS § 272-4
272:371

ARTICLE III
Taxi Owners' Licenses
§ 272-5. License required.
No taxicab shall be operated within the Borough for the transportation of
passengers for hire until a taxi owner's license shall have been issued in
accordance with the provisions of this Article, nor until such owner shall
have complied with all of the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:16-1 et seq.
§ 272-6. Application for license.
Each application for a taxi owner's license shall:
§ 272-7. Qualifications of noncorporate licensees.
No taxi owner's license shall be issued to any natural person unless he or
she is:
§ 272-8. Qualifications of corporate licensees.
A. Be addressed to the Council.
B. Set forth:
(1) Description of the vehicle to be licensed.
(2) Name of the owner.
(3) Residence address and office address of the owner.
(4) Complete schedule of fares.
C. Have annexed thereto satisfactory evidence of good moral character of
the applicant, attested in writing by two (2) residents of the Borough, if
the applicant is a natural person.
D. Be accompanied by the license fee as provided by § 272-11.
A. At least twenty-one (21) years of age.
B. A citizen of the United States.
A. No taxi owner's license shall be issued to any corporation unless each
stockholder, director, officer and manager of such corporation qualifies
in all respects as an individual applicant for such license.
B. If, at any time during the period for which such license is issued, more
than twenty-five percent (25%) of the stock of such corporation is
transferred, or any new director or officer is elected or appointed, or
any new manager is employed, then such new stock transferee, officer,
director or manager shall meet all of the requirements of an individual
application for such owner's license before such license shall continue
in effect.
§ 272-5 TAXICABS § 272-9
272:373
§ 272-9. Issuance of license; requirements. [Amended 7-8-1986 by
Ord. No. 86-11; 4-11-1989 by Ord. No. 89-8]
No taxi owner's license shall be issued until:
§ 272-10. Contents of license.
The taxi owner's license shall briefly describe the taxicab licensed and shall
contain the motor vehicle registration number as well as the serial and
motor numbers of such taxicab.
§ 272-11. License fee. [Amended 7-8-1986 by Ord. No. 86-11172]
The fee for a taxi owner's license shall be as provided in Chapter 138, Fees,
for each vehicle licensed under this Article.
A. The applicant shall have complied with the requirements of §§ 272-6
through 272-8.
B. The taxicab for which the license is sought shall have been inspected
and approved by the Chief Law Enforcement Officer, and his or her
approval endorsed upon the application for the license.170
C. The owner shall have been fingerprinted and such prints filed at Police
Headquarters.
D. The applicant shall have filed with the Clerk an insurance policy
acceptable to the Council as to form and sufficiency, with premium
prepaid, as provided in Revised Statutes of New Jersey, Title 48,
Chapter 16, except that the amount of such policy shall be in the sum of
at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.) against loss from liability
imposed by law upon said owner for damage on account of bodily injury
or death suffered by one (1) person as the result of an accident
occurring by reason of the ownership, maintenance or use of such
vehicle; and in the sum of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.)
against loss from liability imposed upon said owner for damage on
account of bodily injury or death suffered by more than one (1) person
as the result of an accident, occurring by reason of the ownership,
maintenance or use of such vehicle, and in the sum of at least one
million dollars ($1,000,000.) against loss from liability imposed by law
upon said owner for property damage suffered by any person as the
result of an accident occurring by reason of the ownership,
maintenance or use of such vehicle. The Borough of Hillsdale shall be
named as an additional insured on the policy of insurance. Such taxicab
shall be licensed only so long as such insurance shall remain in full
force and effect for the full amounts as herein provided.171
E. The application has been approved by the Council.
170. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
171. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
172. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 272-9 HILLSDALE CODE § 272-12
272:374
§ 272-12. Display of license.
The taxi owner's license shall at all times be openly and conspicuously
exhibited in any motor vehicle licensed under the provisions of this Article.
§ 272-13. License nontransferable.
No taxi owner's license shall be transferable.
§ 272-12 TAXICABS § 272-13
272:375

ARTICLE IV
Taxi Drivers' Licenses
§ 272-14. License required.
No person shall drive or operate any taxicab used for the transportation of
passengers for hire within the Borough until he or she shall have obtained
a taxi driver's license as provided by this Article.
§ 272-15. Qualifications for license; disqualifying attributes.
§ 272-16. Application for license; accompanying data.
Each application for a taxi driver's license shall:
A. Each applicant for a taxi driver's license shall be:
(1) At least twenty-one (21) years of age.
(2) A citizen of the United States.
(3) Fit to drive or operate a motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire.
(4) Of good moral character.
(5) Possessed of good eyesight and hearing.
B. No taxi driver's license shall be issued to any person who:
(1) Is subject to epilepsy, vertigo, heart trouble or any other infirmity.
(2) Is addicted to the use of intoxicating liquors, habit-forming
narcotics, or other drugs.
(3) Habitually violates the motor vehicle laws or traffic laws of the
State of New Jersey or any of the ordinances of the Borough
relating to the use of streets or public places.
(4) Violates any of the provisions of this chapter.
(5) Is convicted of any crime.
A. Be addressed to the Council, and filed with the Clerk;
B. Set forth:
(1) Name of the the applicant.
(2) Residence address of the applicant.
(3) Age of the applicant.
C. Be accompanied by:
(1) Certificate of good moral character attested by two (2) residents of
the Borough.
§ 272-14 TAXICABS § 272-16
272:377
§ 272-17. Issuance of licenses; conditions precedent.
No taxi driver's license shall be issued until:
§ 272-18. License fee. [Amended 7-8-1986 by Ord. No. 86-11174]
The fee for a taxi driver's license shall be as provided in Chapter 138, Fees.
§ 272-19. License nontransferable.
No taxi driver's license shall be transferable.
§ 272-20. Form of license; display; removal of photograph
prohibited.
(2) Four (4) recent photographs of the applicant, of such size as shall
be required by the Police Department (commonly known as
passport size). One (1) of such photographs shall be attached to the
driver's license, one (1) shall be filed with the application for such
driver's license in the office of the Clerk and two (2) shall be filed at
Police Headquarters.
(3) Doctor's certificate certifying that the applicant driver has good
eyesight and hearing; is not subject to epilepsy, vertigo, heart
trouble or any physical infirmity which, in the opinion of the doctor,
would make him or her unfit to drive or operate an automobile.
(4) License fee as provided by § 272-18.
A. The applicant has met all of the requirements of this Article.
B. The applicant has been fingerprinted and his or her prints filed at Police
Headquarters.
C. The Chief Law Enforcement Officer has endorsed his or her approval of
the applicant on the application.173
D. The Council has approved the license.
A. The taxi driver's license provided for in this Article shall be a card in
such form as to contain the photograph and signature of the licensee.
Such photograph shall be one of the photographs filed with the
application, shall be a front view of the head and shoulders of the
licensee taken within ninety (90) days of the date of application and
shall be so attached to the license that it cannot be removed and
another photograph substituted without detection.
B. The license issued to the taxi driver shall be displayed in the holder
referred to in § 272-25 at all times while the taxi driver to whom such
license has been issued is driving such taxicab.
173. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
174. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 272-16 HILLSDALE CODE § 272-20
272:378
C. No licensee shall remove any photograph from a license or substitute
another thereon, or willfully or maliciously deface, damage or obliterate
any official entry made upon his or her license.
§ 272-20 TAXICABS § 272-20
272:379

ARTICLE V
Regulations Governing Vehicles and Drivers
§ 272-21. Vehicular requirements.
All taxicabs herein required to be licensed, used or operated for the
carrying of passengers shall be automobile sedans with a minimum of three
(3) doors. At least two (2) of said doors shall be for the exclusive use of the
passengers.
§ 272-22. Vehicles to be kept clean and in good repair.
All vehicles used as taxicabs shall be, at all times, clean and in good repair.
§ 272-23. Number of passengers to be carried; persons permitted in
driver's compartment.
§ 272-24. Taxicab rates to be displayed.
Every taxicab licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall have
fastened in a conspicuous place therein a printed card showing the rates
provided for in the approved application, in letters and figures of not less
than one-half (1/2) inch in height. Such card shall bear the license number
of such vehicle and the name of the owner thereof.
§ 272-25. License holder to be provided in taxicab.
§ 272-26. Taxicab charges; application for change; overcharges.
A. The total number of persons permitted in any taxicab at any one (1)
time shall not exceed the number of persons for which permanent
seating capacity is provided in the vehicle as originally designed.
B. No person other than the licensed driver, or a passenger for hire, of a
taxicab, shall ride or sit in the compartment of the taxicab reserved for
the driver thereof.
A. Each licensed taxicab shall be provided by the owner thereof with a
holder for the license of the taxi driver, which holder shall permit such
license to be freely inserted therein or removed therefrom.
B. The holder shall be securely attached to the rear of the front seat and
shall permit a clear view of the taxi driver's license to passengers in the
taxicab.
A. The charges for carrying passengers shall conform to the rates set forth
in the schedule of fares filed with the application pursuant to § 272-6 of
this chapter.
B. Such charges shall not be increased either during the license year or
upon renewal of the license, unless and until an application for such
increase shall have been submitted to the governing body not less than
§ 272-21 TAXICABS § 272-26
272:381
§ 272-27. Establishment and designation of taxi stands; other
vehicles than taxicabs prohibited from occupying.
§ 272-28. Taxis to park at taxi stands; exceptions.
No taxicab shall be permitted to stand on any street other than at a taxi
stand, except when the same shall be waiting to pick up or discharge a
passenger. The driver of any such vehicle shall remain in or immediately
outside such vehicle when the same is at any taxi stand, street or public
place.
§ 272-29. Soliciting passengers restricted.
No person shall solicit customers for transportation in any taxicab in a noisy
or offensive manner nor at any place other than the office of the taxicab
owner or at a public taxi stand.
three (3) months prior to the proposed effective date of such increase
and shall have been approved by the governing body. The application
shall be accompanied by financial statements, balance sheets, profit
and loss statements, cash flow projections and such other evidence as
shall be pertinent to the establishment of rates that will yield a fair and
reasonable return; all in form satisfactory to the governing body and in
accordance with standard accounting practice. The application shall be
promptly acted upon by the governing body and in no event later than
the proposed effective date of the increase. Only one (1) application for
an increase shall be considered during any license year.
C. The charging of any fare or fares in excess of the approved rates
referred to shall constitute a violation of this chapter by the owner or
driver or both.
A. Taxi stands may be established in such places as the Council shall from
time to time authorize. Such stands shall be designated by appropriate
signs.
B. Taxi stands established and designated as provided by Subsection A
shall be occupied only by licensed taxicabs and shall be subject to such
rules and regulations as to the use of the public taxi stands as the
Council from time to time may promulgate and establish. No vehicle
other than one licensed hereunder and prepared to accept passengers
on request, shall stand in any public taxi stand; provided that the
location of such public taxi stand, together with a statement of the
number of vehicles that may occupy said stand or the amount of space
reserved therein is conspicuously displayed at the front end of such
stand.
§ 272-26 HILLSDALE CODE § 272-30
272:382
§ 272-30. Refusal to carry orderly passengers prohibited.
No driver of any taxicab which is disengaged shall refuse to carry any
orderly person who tenders payment of the rate or fare permitted to be
charged.
§ 272-31. Receipt for fare on request.
Upon the request,of any passenger, the driver of any taxicab shall give to
such passenger a receipt for the fare paid.
§ 272-30 TAXICABS § 272-31
272:383

ARTICLE VI
Suspension and Revocation
§ 272-32. Taxi owner's license.
§ 272-33. Taxi driver's license.
A. Any taxi owner's license issued pursuant to this chapter may be
suspended as punishment or revoked by the Council after due notice
and hearing, if:
(1) The licensee shall be adjudged by the Council to have violated any
of the provisions of this chapter or of any ordinances of the
Borough or of state or of federal laws applicable thereto;
(2) The licensed taxicab is determined by the Council to be unsafe,
unfit, unsanitary or unsuited for public patronage; or
(3) The licensee shall be found by the Council not to have complied
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:16-10.
B. A second suspension of any taxi owner's license shall, at the option of
the Council, be cause for the revocation of such license.
C. The Chief Law Enforcement Officer may suspend a taxi owner's license
issued under this chapter, based upon any of the grounds set forth in
Subsection A of this section, for a period of not more than fifteen (15)
days, pending a hearing by the Council.175
A. Any taxi driver's license issued pursuant to this chapter may be
suspended as punishment or revoked by the Council after due notice
and hearing, for any of the following grounds:
(1) Inability of the licensee to comply with the physical or mental
requirements or qualifications prescribed by Article IV of this
chapter; or
(2) Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or of any state or
federal law applicable thereto.
B. A second suspension of any taxi driver's license shall, at the option of
the Council, be cause for the revocation of such license.
C. The Chief Law Enforcement Officer may suspend a taxi driver's license
issued under this chapter, based upon any of the grounds set forth in
Subsection A of this section, for a period of not more than fifteen (15)
days pending a hearing by the Council.176
175. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
176. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 272-32 TAXICABS § 272-33
272:385

ARTICLE VII
Violations and Penalties
§ 272-34. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the provisions of Chapter 226, Penalties.
§ 272-34 TAXICABS § 272-34
272:387
Chapter 274
TOBACCO PRODUCTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tobacco sales — See Ch. 363.
§ 272-34 HILLSDALE CODE § 272-34
274:388
ARTICLE I
Use by Minors
[Adopted 6-9-1998 by Ord. No. 98-9]
§ 274-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLIC PLACE — Any building or enclosed structure open to the public and
any street, road, sidewalk, walkway, park or open space located within the
Borough and which is open to the public.
TOBACCO — Any product made from the tobacco plant for the purpose
of smoking, chewing, inhaling and other personal use, including cigars,
chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff and cigarettes in any form.
§ 274-2. Prohibiting use by minors.
§ 274-3. Violations and penalties; juvenile record card.
A violation by a minor of this article shall be enforced as follows:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to smoke
or use a tobacco product in or on any public place or nonpublic place or
to possess in open view an opened pack, opened carton, or other
opened container holding a tobacco product in any public place or
nonpublic place.
B. This article shall not apply to a minor smoking or using tobacco in a
nonpublic place which constitutes the residence of the minor and his or
her parent or parents or guardian.
A. First offense.
(1) A verbal warning will be given to the offender by the officer
observing the violation. The officer will take the offender's name,
age, address, telephone number and name and address of parents
or guardians. The information will be placed on a juvenile record
card maintained at the Department of Police, which said card shall
also contain the date and place of the offense.
(2) Unless there are other violations outstanding, or the offender is
uncooperative, he or she will not be taken to police headquarters
for a first violation. The information from the juvenile record card
will be transmitted to the Detective Bureau Commander who will
file it and advise the parent or guardian of the incident and
information contained on the card.
B. Second offense. The officer observing the violation will take the
offender's name, address, telephone number, parent's or guardian's
name and address (the information will be placed on a juvenile record
§ 274-1 TOBACCO PRODUCTS § 274-3
274:389
§ 274-4. Intent.
This article is intended to implement N.J.S.A. 2A:170-51 et seq.
card). The card will also contain the date and place of the offense. The
Detective Bureau Commander will arrange a station house adjustment
with the offender and the offender's parents or guardians. The station
house adjustment will involve discussion of the third phase of
enforcement, and antitobacco use literature will be provided. Unless
there are extenuating circumstances, the officer does not have to take
the offender into custody.
C. Third offense.
(1) The information described above for the juvenile record card will
be verified and given to the Detective Bureau Commander. The
card will also contain the date and place of the offense. The
Detective Bureau Commander will take appropriate action, which
will be a referral to a two-hour education program currently
conducted by The Valley Hospital Community Education
Department. In the event that such a program is not available, the
Bureau Commander will assign attendance at a similar education
program. Attendance at this program is required, both by the
offender and a minimum of one parent or guardian. Unless there
are extenuating circumstances, the officer does not have to take
the offender into custody.
(2) If a period of two years or more passes after the commission of the
third offense, the next offense will not be considered a fourth
offense, but the procedure for a third offense will be repeated.
D. Fourth offense. The information on the juvenile record card will be
implemented and verified and given to the Detective Bureau
Commander. The card will also contain the date and place of the
offense. The Detective Bureau Commander will take appropriate action,
which will include a referral to a six-session smoke stop program
offered by the Community Education Program at Valley Hospital, or
equivalent. Any costs involved for these programs shall be paid by the
offender. Unless there are extenuating circumstances, the officer does
not have to take the offender into custody.
E. Fifth offense.
(1) A juvenile complaint will be issued to the offender for appearance
in Juvenile Court or Municipal Court.
(2) In the event that the offender does not comply with any of the
requirements set forth in first, second, third or fourth offenses, a
juvenile complaint will be issued to the offender for the initial and
any subsequent violations.
§ 274-3 HILLSDALE CODE § 274-4
274:390
Chapter 276
TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS
§ 276-1. Findings.177
In order to protect the health, welfare and safety of the residents of the
Borough, it is deemed advisable to prohibit the parking or placing of trailers
or camp cars within the Borough.
§ 276-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS — Any vehicles used or intended for use as
a conveyance upon tracks, public streets or highways; and shall include
self-propelled and non-self-propelled vehicles so designed, constructed and
reconstructed or added to by means of accessories in such a manner as to
permit the occupancy thereof as a temporary dwelling or sleeping place for
one (1) or more persons, including but not limited to automobile recreation
design (Winnebago or mobile home of similar type), and having no
foundation other than wheels, jacks or other mechanism so arranged as
to be integral with or portable by said trailer or camp car. [Amended
6-24-1980 by Ord. No. 80-8178]
§ 276-3. Parking prohibited.179
Except as provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to
park any trailer or camp car for dwelling or sleeping purposes on any street
or on any premises in the Borough, except for the purpose of repairs or
storage. Any such trailer or camp car undergoing repairs or being stored
shall not, during such period of repairs or storage, be used by any person as
a dwelling or sleeping place.
§ 276-4. Exceptions; notifications.180
Temporary occupancy not to exceed seven (7) days of a trailer or camp car
shall be permitted for visitation purposes, provided that the trailer or camp
car is parked off the street and in the driveway of the improved lot of the
home visited and that prior notification is provided to the Hillsdale Police
Department.
177. Editor's Note: In the zoning case of Vickers v. Township Committee of Gloucester
Township, 37 N.J. 232 (1962), the power of a municipality to prohibit trailer camps or
trailer parks was upheld.
178. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
179. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
180. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 274-4 TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS § 276-5
276:391
§ 276-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the provisions of Chapter 226, Penalties.
Chapter 284
TRAVELING SHOWS, CARNIVALS AND CIRCUSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 138.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 188.
Parades and street meetings — See Ch. 216.
Penalties — See Ch. 226.
Land use — See Ch. 310.
§ 284-1. Permit required.181
No person shall conduct a traveling show, carnival or circus, or any street
parade in connection therewith, in the Borough unless he or she obtains
a permit therefor from the Borough Clerk. Compliance with Chapter 310,
Land Use, § 310-55I(6), is required.
§ 284-2. Term of permit; fee; waiver.
§ 284-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 226, Penalties.
A. All permits issued under this chapter shall be valid only for the time
therein expressed.
B. The fees as provided in Chapter 138, Fees, shall be paid by the licensee.
C. The Borough Council is hereby authorized to waive the payment of the
license fees set forth in Subsection B of this section for any show,
carnival or circus given by or for the benefit of any religious, charitable,
social or fraternal organization or association.
181. Editor's Note: Outdoor shows are subject to the special requirements of N.J.S.A. 40:52-1.1.
§ 276-5 HILLSDALE CODE § 284-3
284:392
Chapter 288
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 138.
Penalties — See Ch. 226.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 292.
Land use — See Ch. 310.
§ 288-1. Definitions.182
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PROPERTY — Any real property within the Borough which is not a street.
STREET — The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel.
VEHICLE — A machine propelled by power other than human power
designed to travel along the ground by the use wheels, treads, runners or
slides, and shall include, without limitation, an automobile, truck, trailer,
motorcycle, tractor, buggy and wagon.
§ 288-2. Findings; purpose.
It is hereby determined and declared that the abandonment and discarding
in the streets and other places within the Borough of any dismantled,
partially dismantled, wrecked, junked, nonoperating, discarded or
unlicensed vehicles other than in places appropriate therefor tend to
impede traffic in the streets; interfere with the enjoyment, and reduce the
value of, private property; invite plundering; create fire hazards and other
safety and health hazards to children as well as to adults; and otherwise
interfere with the comfort and well-being of the public. It is further
determined and declared that adequate protection of the public health,
safety and welfare require that such conditions be regulated, abated or
prohibited.
§ 288-3. Abandonment prohibited.
No person shall abandon any vehicle within the Borough, and no person
shall leave any vehicle at any place within the Borough for such time and
under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle reasonably to appear to
have been abandoned.
182. Editor's Note: For statutory provisions prohibiting the abandonment of motor vehicles on
highways, see N.J.S.A. 39:4-56.1.
§ 284-3 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 288-4
288:393
§ 288-4. Abandoned vehicles in streets.
No person shall leave or cause to be left any nonoperating, discarded,
dismantled, junked or unregistered vehicle on any street within the
Borough.
§ 288-5. Abandoned vehicles on private property; exceptions.
§ 288-6. Removal; impounding; notice; disposition.
A. No person in charge or control of any property within the Borough,
whether as owner, lessee, occupant or otherwise, shall place, deposit,
store, leave or keep any discarded, wrecked, junked, dismantled or
partially dismantled vehicle, which is also unregistered or
nonoperating, on such property, or suffer, permit or allow any such
vehicle to be placed, deposited, stored, left or kept on such property, for
a longer period of time than five (5) days. Any abandoned or junked
vehicle so stored or placed is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to such a vehicle:
(1) In an enclosed building, garage, barn or shed;
(2) On the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place
and manner, when necessary to the operation of such business
enterprise; or
(3) In an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a
lawful place and manner by the Borough.
A. The Chief Law Enforcement Officer, or any member of the Department
of Police, is hereby authorized to remove, or cause to be removed, any
vehicle left at any place other than on private property within the
Borough, which has been left in violation of this chapter or state
statute, or which appears to have been lost, stolen or unclaimed.183
B. With respect to vehicles on private property, the Chief Law
Enforcement Officer shall serve, or cause to be served, a notice, in
writing, either personally or by registered or certified mail, upon the
owner, tenant, lessee or occupant of such property, as the case may be,
to remove such vehicle therefrom within a certain period of time, not
less than fifteen (15) days after the date of service of such notice, to be
specified therein. In the event that such vehicle is not removed within
the time specified, the Chief Law Enforcement Officer may impound
such vehicle or cause the same to be impounded. For such purpose, he
or she or his or her duly authorized agent may enter upon private
property upon which such vehicle may be located.184
183. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
184. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 288-4 HILLSDALE CODE § 288-6
288:394
§ 288-7. Expenses of removal and impounding; cost as lien.
[Amended 6-12-1990 by Ord. No. 90-7]
§ 288-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the provisions of Chapter 226, Penalties.
Chapter 292
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking fees for west lot: See § 138-28B.
Limousines — See Ch. 192.
Parking lots — See Ch. 218.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 272.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 288.
Idling of vehicles — See Ch. 294.
C. Any vehicle impounded pursuant to any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be held until lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:10A-1 et seq. and of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-157,
whichever may be applicable.
A. The owner of any private property from which a vehicle is removed and
impounded pursuant to the preceding section, and the tenant, lessee or
occupant of the premises, if any, shall be jointly and severally liable for
the cost and expense, including reasonable overhead charges, paid or
incurred by the Borough in effecting such removal and impounding, and
shall be paid by the person liable therefor upon demand. In the event
that such payment is not made, the amount due shall become a lien
upon the lot or tract of real estate from which such vehicle was removed
and shall be added to and form a part of the taxes next to be assessed
and levied upon such lands, to be collected and enforced in the same
manner as taxes upon real estate.
B. When a vehicle has been abandoned or impounded within the Borough
of Hillsdale and has been removed and stored at a place designated by
the Borough for this purpose, the Borough shall be permitted to charge
the following storage fees in addition to any charges permitted by any
other ordinance of the Borough: Such storage fees shall be as provided
in Chapter 138, Fees.185
C. In addition to any other remedy provided in this chapter, any such
discarded, wrecked, junked, dismantled or partially dismantled vehicle
on private or public property, which is also unregistered or
nonoperating, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be
remedied as such in accordance with law.
185. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ 288-6 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 288-8
288:395

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 292-1. Definitions.
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used herein.
§ 292-2. Official time standard.
Whenever certain hours are named in this chapter, they shall mean either
Eastern standard time or Eastern daylight saving time as may be in current
use.
§ 292-3. Authorization for the closing of any street.
§ 292-4. Removal of illegally parked vehicles.
Any vehicle parked in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a nuisance
and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic, and any peace
officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle. The owner shall bear
the reasonable costs of removal and storage which may result from such
removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 292-5. Violations and penalties.
A. The Chief of Police or, in his or her absence, disability or inability to act,
then his or her designee, is hereby authorized to provide by regulation
for the closing of any street or portion thereof to motor vehicle traffic on
any day or days during specified hours on any day or days whenever he/
she finds that such closing is necessary for the preservation of the
public safety, health or welfare.
B. Any regulations promulgated by the Borough Council and in
accordance with Subsection A above shall provide for the posting of
proper warning signs of such closing on any street or portion thereof
during the time the same is closed in pursuance thereof.
C. Any violation of this regulation promulgated hereunder shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $50.
D. Any regulation adopted that mandates the closing of any street for a
period greater than 48 consecutive hours shall not become effective
unless and until it has been submitted to and approved by the
Commissioner of the Department of Transportation.
A. Unless another penalty is expressly provided herein or by New Jersey
statute, every person convicted of a violation of a provision of this
chapter or any supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not
§ 292-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 292-5
288:397
more than $150 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or
both.
B. Local supplemental violations.
(1) Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 7:12-4, the following Local Supplemental
Violations Bureau schedule of designated offenses and payable
amounts has been approved by the vicinage assignment judge and
shall be in effect for offenses committed on and after March 9,
2012. This local schedule shall be prominently posted for public
inspection at the location of the Violations Bureau.
(2) The Local Supplemental Violations Bureau schedules that were
prepared, pursuant to the N.J.S.A.7:12-4, for offenses committed
prior to the effective date of this schedule, are on file with the
municipal court administrator and are available for public
inspection upon request.
Code
Section Short Description
Payable
Amount
§ 292-22A No parking overnight between
2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.
$51
§ 292-22B No parking overnight between
2:00 a.m. to 5:00 a.m. in
commercial zone
$51
§ 292-23 No parking school, playgrounds,
public parks and municipal pool
grounds 10:30 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
$51
§ 292-24 No parking anytime certain
streets, Schedule XIV
$51
§ 292-25 No stopping or standing
anytime, Schedule XV
$51
§ 292-26 Parking prohibited certain
streets at certain times,
Schedule XVI
$51
§ 292-27 No stopping or standing certain
hours, Schedule XVII
$51
§ 292-28 Time limit parking, Schedule
XVIII
$51
§ 292-28.1 Parking not within lines $51
§ 292-29 Angle parking only within stall
lines
$51
§ 292-30 No parking-loading zone,
Schedule XX
$51
§ 292-5 HILLSDALE CODE § 292-5
288:398
§ 292-6. Severability.
If any part or parts of this chapter are, for any reason, held to be invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
Code
Section Short Description
Payable
Amount
§ 292-31 No parking-taxi stand, Schedule
XXI
$51
§ 292-32 No parking-bus stop, Schedule
XXII
$51
§ 292-33A(1) No parking 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m., Municipal Parking Lot east
of Broadway over 3 hours,
except Sat., Sun., holidays
$51
§ 292-33A(2) No parking 6:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m., spaces abutting Hillsdale
Avenue, in parking lot west of
Railroad Station over 3 hours,
except on Sat., Sun., holidays
$51
§ 292-33A(3) No parking in West Borough
Lots specified in Subsections
A(1) and (2) without valid
permit, except Sat., Sun.,
holidays
$51
§ 292-33A(4) No parking 5:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m. without current
identification sticker Trans-Lot
between Park Avenue and
Borough of Hillsdale Public
Works Garage, west of railroad
tracks, except Sat., Sun.,
holidays
$51
§ 292-33A(5) No parking commercial vehicle
on any municipal parking lot
$51
§ 292-33A(6) No parking municipal Borough
Hall lot, official business only
$51
§ 292-33A(7) No parking area designated
parking for Fire Dept. only
$61
§ 292-33A(8) No parking in any Borough lot
between 2:00 a.m. to 5:00 a.m.
$51
§ 292-36 No parking-snow removal $51
§ 292-5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 292-7
288:399
§ 292-7. Repealer.
All former traffic ordinances of the Borough of Hillsdale are hereby repealed
and all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with or inconsistent
with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed, except that this
repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any
person for any act done or committed in violation of any ordinance hereby
repealed prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
§ 292-7 HILLSDALE CODE § 292-7
288:400
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 292-8. Traffic control signals.
The traffic signal installations shall be in accordance with the provisions
of Title 39 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated, and with the standards
of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, and shall be installed
and maintained as authorized by the New Jersey Department of
Transportation.186
§ 292-9. Speed limits.
§ 292-10. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule III (§ 292-44), attached
to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as one-way streets
in the direction indicated.
§ 292-11. U-turns.
No person shall make a U-turn on any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule IV (§ 292-45), attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 292-12. Prohibited turns at intersections.
No person shall make a turn of the kind designated (left, right, all) at any
of the locations described in Schedule V (§ 292-46), attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 292-13. Prohibited right turns on red signal.
No person shall make a right turn when facing a steady red signal (stop
indication) at any of the locations described in Schedule VI (§ 292-47),
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 292-14. Through streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VII (§ 292-48),
attached to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as
through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near right side of each
A. The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule II (§ 292-43), attached to and made a part
of this chapter, is hereby established at the rate of speed indicated.
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits.
186. Editor's Note: See § 292-42, Schedule I: Traffic Control Signals, for locations of
intersections with traffic control signals.
§ 292-8 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 292-14
288:401
street intersecting the through street except where yield signs are provided
for in the designations.
§ 292-15. Stop intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule VIII (§ 292-49), attached to and
made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as stop intersections.
Stop signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 292-16. Yield intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule IX (§ 292-50), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as yield intersections. Yield
signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 292-17. Lane use reservations.
The lane locations described in Schedule X (§ 292-51), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as lane use reservations, and
traffic shall move only as indicated.
§ 292-18. No-passing zones.
No-passing zones are hereby established and shall be maintained along
those streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XI (§ 292-52),
attached to and made a part of this chapter, as authorized by the New
Jersey Department of Transportation in accordance with the sketch dated
and numbered as indicated.
§ 292-19. Trucks over certain weights excluded.
Trucks in excess of the gross weights indicated are hereby excluded from
the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XII (§ 292-53), attached
to and made a part of this chapter, except for the pickup and delivery of
materials on such streets.
§ 292-20. Midblock crosswalks.
Midblock crosswalks are hereby established on the portion of streets
described in Schedule XIII (§ 292-54), attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 292-14 HILLSDALE CODE § 292-20
288:402
ARTICLE III
Parking, Standing and Stopping
§ 292-21. Regulations not exclusive.
The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey statute or as
hereinafter provided.
§ 292-22. Overnight parking.
§ 292-23. Public parks, playgrounds, school grounds and municipal
pool facilities.
No person shall park or leave standing a vehicle, other than a vehicle
owned by the Borough, the Hillsdale Board of Education or the Pascack
Valley Board of Education, within the boundary lines of any public park,
playground, school ground or municipal pool facility except in accordance
with the purpose of the facility, and in no event between the hours of 10:30
p.m. and 6:00 a.m., without the express permission of the owner.
§ 292-24. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule XIV (§ 292-55), attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
§ 292-25. No stopping or standing.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule XV (§ 292-56), attached to and made a part of
this chapter.
§ 292-26. Parking prohibited certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule XVI
(§ 292-57) of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or
A. No person, except as noted herein, shall park a vehicle upon any street
in a residential, semipublic, industrial, recreational, office, research,
senior citizen housing, townhouse or condominium zone in the Borough
of Hillsdale between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. Vehicles with
a specific government license plate, Municipal (MG), County (CG) or
State (SG), shall be permitted to park overnight on the street of
Hillsdale Borough during the hours set forth above. [Amended
9-9-2014 by Ord. No. 14-14]
B. No person shall park a vehicle upon any street in a commercial zone in
the Borough of Hillsdale between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.
§ 292-21 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 292-26
288:403
parts of streets described in said schedule, attached to and made a part of
this chapter.
§ 292-27. No stopping or standing certain hours.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle during the times specified in
Schedule XVII (§ 292-58) of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any
of the streets or parts of streets described in said schedule, attached to and
made a part of this chapter.
§ 292-28. Time limit parking.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in
Schedule XVIII (§ 292-59) at any time between the hours listed in said
schedule of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described in said schedule, attached to and made a part of
this chapter.
§ 292-28.1. Parking spaces.
Whenever a parking space is indicated by lines or other appropriate
markers on the pavement, all wheels of the parked vehicle shall be within
said lines or markers.
§ 292-29. Angle parking.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts thereof
described in Schedule XIX (§ 292-60), attached to and made a part of this
chapter, except at the angle designated and only within the painted white
stall lines.
§ 292-30. Loading zones.
The locations described in Schedule XX (§ 292-61), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as loading zones.
§ 292-31. Taxi stands.
The locations described in Schedule XXI (§ 292-62), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as taxi stands.
§ 292-32. Bus stops.
The locations described in Schedule XXII (§ 292-63), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as bus stops.
§ 292-26 HILLSDALE CODE § 292-32
288:404
ARTICLE IV
Municipal Parking Lots187
§ 292-33. Parking regulations.
A. The parking of vehicles in the municipal parking lot situate between
Hillsdale Avenue and Washington Avenue, east of Broadway; in the
municipal parking lot situate between Hillsdale Avenue and Washington
Avenue, west of the Erie-Lackawanna Railroad; in the municipal
parking lot situate between Hillsdale Avenue and Park Avenue, west of
Central Avenue; and in the municipal parking lot situate between Park
Avenue and the Borough of Hillsdale Public Works garage west of the
railroad tracks are hereby regulated and limited as follows:
(1) Between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on all days except
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, no person shall cause a vehicle to
occupy any of the parking spaces in the municipal parking lot
situate east of Broadway for a period exceeding three hours, except
for such spaces which may be designated by the Chief of Police for
longer-term parking.
(2) Between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on all days except
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, no person shall cause a vehicle to
occupy any of the parking spaces abutting Hillsdale Avenue, in the
parking lot situate west of the railroad station for a period
exceeding three hours.
(3) Between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on all days except
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, no person shall cause a vehicle to
occupy any of the parking spaces other than those specified in
Subsections A(1) and (2) of this section unless said vehicle shall
bear a current identification sticker, as described in § 292-34,
affixed in accordance with such regulations as the Chief of Police
may hereafter promulgate, except that restrictions on parking in
the municipal parking lot situate between Park Avenue and the
Borough of Hillsdale Public Works garage, west of the railroad
tracks are set forth in Subsection A(4).
(4) Between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on all days except
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, no person shall cause a vehicle to
occupy any of the parking spaces in the parking lot situate between
Park Avenue and the Borough of Hillsdale Public Works garage,
west of the railroad tracks, unless said vehicle shall bear a current
identification sticker, as described in § 292-34, affixed in
accordance with such regulations as the Chief of Police may
hereafter promulgate, or has paid the required fee for use of spaces
designated for daily parking.
187. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 218, Parking Lots.
§ 292-33 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 292-33
288:405
(5) No person shall at any time cause a commercial vehicle to be
parked in any municipal parking lot.
(6) No person shall at any time cause any vehicle to occupy any of the
parking spaces in the municipal parking lot situate between
Hillsdale Avenue and Park Avenue, west of Central Avenue, other
than in connection with the transaction of official business with an
agency or office of the Borough.
(7) No person shall cause a vehicle to occupy any of the parking spaces
designated "Parking for Fire Department Only" located on the west
side of the firehouse between Hillsdale Avenue and Washington
Avenue unless such vehicle shall bear a valid "Emergency Services
Member" sticker.
(8) No person shall cause any vehicle to be parked in any of the lots
described above between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.,
except in case of emergency and with the approval of the Police
Department.
B. Fees in west lot.
(1) Establishment of fee. Notwithstanding anything set forth in
Subsection A, there is hereby established a parking fee as set forth
in Chapter 138 herein188 for parking between the hours of 6:00 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m. on all days, except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays,
in the municipal lot commonly referred to as the West Lot. Said
West Lot is more particularly described as the Borough-owned
property lying between Hillsdale Avenue and Washington Avenue
west of the railroad tracks and bordered on the north by Hillsdale
Avenue, on the south by Washington Avenue, on the east by Block
1105, Lot 1, and on the west by Block 1105, Lot 4.
(2) Administration and implementation.
(a) Parking decals shall be obtained by payment of fee and
application designating name, address and license plate of the
vehicle upon which the decal shall be displayed and proof of
ownership thereof.
(b) All persons parking in the West Lot except for those spaces
excepted and exempted in Subsection B(2)(c) and (3) hereof
shall display an annual parking decal in the rear left window of
each vehicle.
(c) Daily fee parking shall be permitted in spaces so designated in
the West Lot. All persons parking in the daily section shall
display a current identification sticker and pay the daily fee.
Such fee shall be payable in a lock box established on site.
Persons with an annual parking decal shall be permitted to
188. Editor's Note: See § 138-28B.
§ 292-33 HILLSDALE CODE § 292-33
288:406
§ 292-34. Identification stickers.
park in the daily fee spaces when the West Lot is full for the
fee designated for parking in that area on a daily basis.
(d) In addition to the payment of fees, between the hours of 6:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on all days, except Saturdays, Sundays and
holidays, no person shall cause a vehicle to occupy any of the
spaces described herein unless such vehicle shall bear a
current identification sticker and have paid the required fees.
(3) Exemption. Exempt from these requirements shall be the spaces
marked as shoppers' spaces abutting the right-of-way of Hillsdale
Avenue from the east to the west of the aforementioned and
described lot. No person shall park in these spaces for a period
exceeding three hours. Current penalties for violation of this
provision shall remain in full force and effect.
(4) Penalty. For and in violation of the terms and conditions of this
subsection, a penalty of $17 per day is hereby imposed.
A. The Police Department is hereby authorized to issue an identification
sticker for each vehicle owned by a bona fide resident of the Borough.
B. The Police Department is hereby further authorized to issue an
identification sticker for each vehicle owned by a nonresident who is
regularly engaged in business in the Borough as proprietor, employee,
tenant or otherwise, but no such nonresident shall be issued a sticker if
the business in which such person is engaged, as proprietor, employee,
tenant or otherwise, has facilities for the parking of 50 or more cars.
C. The Police Department shall also issue parking stickers for use in the
municipal parking lot situate between Park Avenue and the Borough of
Hillsdale Public Works garage west of the railroad tracks, at an annual
fee as established by the Borough Council. Such stickers may be issued
to residents of Hillsdale and nonresidents.
D. Application for the identification stickers shall be made on forms
prescribed by the Chief of Police, and the stickers shall be in such form
and shall be affixed in such manner as the Chief may hereafter
prescribe. The stickers shall be issued without charge and shall be valid
only for and during the calendar year in which they are issued and not
thereafter.
§ 292-33 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 292-34
288:407

ARTICLE V
Emergency No Parking
§ 292-35. Parking prohibited during state of emergency.
§ 292-36. Temporary parking prohibition for snow plowing and
removal.
A. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or sections of streets where temporary EMERGENCY NO
PARKING signs are displayed. The Chief of Police or, in his/her absence,
the ranking police officer is authorized to declare an emergency and to
direct the posting of EMERGENCY NO PARKING signs when weather
conditions, accidents, road construction, fire or public celebrations
dictate or require avoidance of hazards or other conditions which
interfere with the free flow of traffic. Notification that EMERGENCY
NO PARKING signs are being or will be posted shall be given to the
operator or owner of any vehicle which has been parked prior to the
posting of the signs.
B. The effectiveness of this section is contingent upon the signs being
erected as required by law.
A. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers
the streets or highways, an emergency shall exist, and no vehicle shall
be parked on the streets or highways or portions thereof indicated in
Schedule XXIII (§ 292-64).
B. The above parking prohibitions shall remain in effect after the snow has
ceased until the streets have been plowed sufficiently and to the extent
that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of traffic.
C. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation shall be deemed
a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic,
and any police officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle. The
owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal and storage which
may result from such removal before regaining possession of the
vehicle.
§ 292-35 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 292-36
288:409

ARTICLE VA
Truck Routes to Solid Waste Transfer Station
§ 292-36.1. Truck routes for solid waste and recycling vehicles.
The routes noted in Schedule XXIV (§ 292-65) are hereby established as the
sole route of ingress and egress in and through the Borough of Hillsdale
for solid waste and recycling vehicles traveling to and from the solid waste
transfer station located at 131 Patterson Street. The operator of the solid
waste transfer facility shall be responsible for apprising all patrons utilizing
the facility of these prescribed routes and shall be liable for any violation
committed.
§ 292-36.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 292-36.1
288:411

ARTICLE VI
Parking for Handicapped
§ 292-37. Restricted parking spaces established; certificate
required.
It is hereby declared and established, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-1, that
restricted parking spaces be established and designated for the benefit of
handicapped persons who have been issued special vehicle identification
cards, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-205, when using a motor vehicle on which
is displayed a certificate in accordance with the identification card. The
spaces shall be designated from time to time by the Police Department
of the Borough of Hillsdale under authorization granted under N.J.S.A.
39:4-197, subject to the following.
§ 292-38. Schedules.
Two schedules shall be maintained by the Police Department to designate
restricted parking spaces hereunder as follows:
§ 292-39. Parking spaces.
Each of the parking spaces referred to on the respective schedules shall
conform to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for streets
and highways approved by the State of New Jersey Department of
Transportation.
§ 292-40. Jurisdiction of municipal court.
The Municipal Court of the Borough of Hillsdale shall have jurisdiction to
hear and dispose of complaints alleging a violation of this article.
§ 292-41. Violations and penalties.
For a violation of any provision of this article, the penalties shall be as
provided under N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.
A. Schedule A, municipal parking spaces.
B. Schedule B, all other parking spaces over which jurisdiction is afforded
under N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.5.
§ 292-37 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 292-41
288:413

ARTICLE VII
Schedules
§ 292-42. Schedule I: Traffic Control Signals.
In accordance with the provisions of § 292-8, traffic control signals shall be
installed at the following described intersections:
Intersection
(Reserved)
§ 292-43. Schedule II: Speed Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 292-9, speed limits are hereby
established upon the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Church Road 25 From Reservoir Road to the Woodcliff
Borough line (both directions)
East Liberty Avenue 20 From the easterly curbline of
Kinderkamack Road to the easterly
curbline of Holdrum Street (both
directions)
Hillsdale Avenue 25 From the center line of Kinderkamack
Road to Cedar Lane
Patterson Street 25 Entire length
Saddlewood Drive 25 Entire length
Wierimus Lane 25 Entire length (except as listed below)
Wierimus Lane 15 From 500 feet east and west of Stony
Ridge Drive
§ 292-44. Schedule III: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 292-10, the following described
streets or parts thereof are hereby designated as one-way streets in the
direction indicated:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Arthur Street North From Dwight Avenue to
Kinderkamack Road
Circle Drive West From Broadway to the Colonial
Village entrance
§ 292-42 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 292-44
288:415
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Higginson Crossing South From Hillsdale Avenue to
Washington Avenue
Liberty Avenue West From Trinity Place to Magnolia
Avenue
Park Avenue East From Broadway to Central Avenue
Park Avenue West From Broadway to Winkler Way
Stockton Street North From Hillsdale Avenue to
Kinderkamack Road
Trinity Place North From Liberty Avenue to Hillsdale
Avenue
West Broadway South From the front of Erie-Lackawanna
Railroad station to Broadway
§ 292-45. Schedule IV: U-Turns.
In accordance with the provisions of § 292-11, no person shall make a Uturn
at any of the following locations:
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 292-46. Schedule V: Prohibited Turns at Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 292-12, no person shall make a turn
of the kind designated below at any of the following intersections:
Name of
Street
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours
At Intersection
of
Broadway South Left All Washington
Avenue
Dwight Avenue East Left All William Street
Grove Street South Left All Kinderkamack
Road
Kinderkamack
Road
North Left All Grove Street
Kinderkamack
Road
North Left All William Street
Kinderkamack
Road
South Right All William Street
Washington
Avenue
East Left All Broadway
§ 292-44 HILLSDALE CODE § 292-46
288:416
Name of
Street
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours
At Intersection
of
Winkler Way South Left All Hillsdale Avenue
§ 292-47. Schedule VI: Prohibited Right Turns on Red Signal.
In accordance with the provisions of § 292-13, no person shall make a right
turn when facing a steady red signal (stop indication) at any of the following
locations:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Hours/Days
Prohibited Right
Turn on Red
Signal Onto
Kinderkamack Road South 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./school days
Hillsdale Avenue
§ 292-48. Schedule VII: Through Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 292-14, the following described
streets or parts thereof are hereby designated as through streets. Stop
signs shall be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the
through street, except where yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Limits
Broadway * Entire length, except at the intersection of
Hillsdale Avenue
Cedar Lane * Entire length
Clinton Avenue Entire length, except at the intersections of
Broadway and Kinderkamack Road
Demarest Avenue * Entire length
Dwight Avenue Entire length, except at the intersections of
Broadway and Kinderkamack Road
Hillsdale Avenue * Entire length, except at the intersections of
Cedar Lane, Wierimus Road, Broadway and
Pascack Road
Kinderkamack Road * Entire length, except at the intersections of
Piermont Avenue and Hillsdale Avenue
Knickerbocker Avenue Entire length, except at the intersections of
Magnolia Avenue and Broadway
Lawrence Street Entire length, except at the intersections of
Broadway and Kinderkamack Road
§ 292-46 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 292-48
288:417
Name of Street Limits
Magnolia Avenue From Knickerbocker Avenue to its southerly
terminus, except at the intersections of
Piermont Avenue, Hillsdale Avenue, Washington
Avenue and Lawrence Street
Maple Avenue Between Ell Road and Colonial Boulevard;
between Colonial Boulevard and Yesler Way
Pascack Road * Entire length, except at the intersection of
Hillsdale Avenue
Patterson Street Entire length, except at the intersection of
Hillsdale Avenue
Piermont Avenue * Entire length, except at the intersections of
Broadway, Kinderkamack Road and Patterson
Street
Prospect Avenue * Entire length
Ralph Avenue Entire length, except at the intersections of
Kinderkamack Road and Legion Place
Ruckman Avenue Between Prospect Avenue and Piermont Avenue
St. Nicholas Avenue Entire length, except at the intersections of
Broadway and Kinderkamack Road
Van Emburgh Avenue * Entire length
Washington Avenue * Entire length, except at the intersections of
Broadway, Demarest Avenue, Kinderkamack
Road and Patterson Street
Wierimus Lane Between Pascack Road and Wierimus Road
Wierimus Road * Entire length, except at the intersections of
Overlook Road and Van Emburgh Avenue
Wilste Avenue Entire length
Yesler Way Entire length, except at the intersection of
Hillsdale Avenue
NOTE:
* These streets were designated through streets in whole or in part
by resolution of the Board of Chosen Freeholders of Bergen County
adopted June 6, 1962, approved by the Director of the Division of Motor
Vehicles on June 19, 1962.
§ 292-49. Schedule VIII: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 292-15, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections, and stop signs
shall be installed as follows:
§ 292-48 HILLSDALE CODE § 292-49
288:418
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Beech Street Both Maple Avenue
Briarcliff Road Both Windham Road
Cedar Street Both Maple Avenue
Center Drive Both Sycamore Avenue
Center Drive East Lafayette Avenue
Center Drive West Hazelwood Avenue
Central Avenue South Hillsdale Avenue
Chadwick Road Both Briarcliff Road
Cherry Place Both Chestnut Street
Cherry Place Both Maple Avenue
Chestnut Street Both Maple Avenue
Columbus Avenue East Magnolia Avenue
Craig Road East Alpine Terrace
Crest Road West Taylor Street
Cross Street Both Central Avenue
Ell Road Both Maple Avenue
Ell Road (east-west
portion)
East Ell Road (north-south portion)
Everdell Avenue Both East Liberty Avenue
Fernwood Avenue Both Chestnut Street
Fernwood Avenue Both Colonial Boulevard
Glendale Avenue West Hazelwood Avenue
Horizon Terrace Both Sunrise Drive
Lafayette Avenue North Glendale Drive
Lafayette Avenue South Beechwood Drive
Lake Drive East Park View Drive
Maple Avenue Both Colonial Boulevard
Maple Avenue East Yesler Way
Maplewood Avenue Both Midland Avenue
Midland Avenue South Westdale Avenue
Mountain View
Terrace
Both Sunrise Drive
Oak Street Both Maple Avenue
Park Avenue Both Central Avenue
§ 292-49 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 292-49
288:419
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Riverside Drive West Lafayette Avenue
Royal Park Terrace East Overlook Road
Schill Place South Drake Drive
Sierra Court East Alpine Terrace
Sunrise Drive East Royal Park Terrace
Sunrise Drive West Alpine Terrace
Sycamore Avenue Both Glendale Drive
Sycamore Avenue South Beechwood Drive
Taylor Street Both Maple Avenue
Westdale Avenue North Homestead Place
§ 292-50. Schedule IX: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 292-16, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as yield intersections, and yield signs
shall be installed as follows:
Yield Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
(Reserved)
§ 292-51. Schedule X: Lane Use Reservations.
In accordance with the provisions of § 292-17, all vehicles shall move as
described below:
Intersection (Location) Lane Reserved Purpose
Hillsdale Avenue, eastbound,
at Kinderkamack Road
Right lane Right turn only
Hillsdale Avenue, eastbound,
at Patterson Street
Center lane Left turns only
Hillsdale Avenue, westbound,
at Pascack Road
Center lane Left turns only
Hillsdale Avenue, westbound,
at Wierimus Road
Right lane Right turn only
Hillsdale Avenue, westbound,
at Yesler Way
Center lane Left turns only
Liberty Avenue, eastbound, at
Kinderkamack Road
All Right turn only
§ 292-49 HILLSDALE CODE § 292-51
288:420
Intersection (Location) Lane Reserved Purpose
Liberty Avenue at Magnolia
Avenue
Right turn only, 7:30 a.m.
to 9:00 a.m. and 2:30
p.m. to 3:30 p.m. school
days
Park Avenue, southbound, at
Prospect Avenue
Left lane Left turns only
Park View Drive, eastbound,
at Broadway
Right lane Right turn only
Piermont Avenue, westbound,
at Kinderkamack Road
Center lane Left turns only
Prospect Avenue, westbound,
at Ruckman Avenue
Left lane Left turns only
Ruckman Avenue,
northbound, at Prospect
Avenue
Left lane Left turns only
Washington Avenue, both
directions, at Broadway
All Right turn only
Wierimus Road, northbound,
at Hillsdale Avenue
Right lane Right turn only
Wierimus Road, northbound,
at Overlook Drive
Right lane Right turn only
§ 292-52. Schedule XI: No-Passing Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 292-18, no-passing zones are hereby
established and shall be maintained upon the following described streets or
parts thereof:
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 292-53. Schedule XII: Trucks Over Certain Weights Excluded.
In accordance with the provisions of § 292-19, trucks in excess of the gross
weights indicated are hereby excluded from the following streets or parts
thereof, except for the pickup and delivery of materials on such streets:
Name of Street
Weight
Limit
(tons) Location
(Reserved)
§ 292-51 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 292-54
288:421
§ 292-54. Schedule XIII: Midblock Crosswalks.
In accordance with the provisions of § 292-20, midblock crosswalks are
hereby established on the following portions of streets:
Name of Street Location
Brookside Place 200 feet west of the westerly curb of
Patterson Street
Brookside Place 140 feet east of the easterly curb of
Prospect Place
Hillsdale Avenue 150 feet west of the center line of Paul
Court
Piermont Avenue 460 feet east of the easterly curbline of
Cottage Place
§ 292-55. Schedule XIV: Parking Prohibited at All Times.
In accordance with the provisions of § 292-24, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Location
Allwood Place Both From the northerly terminus of
Allwood Place to a point 60 feet
southerly therefrom
Bedford Road
[Added 6-9-2015
by Ord. No. 15-12]
Both From Fairhaven Drive to a point of 50
feet northerly therefrom
Beechwood Drive Both From the easterly terminus of
Beechwood Drive to a point 70 feet
westerly therefrom
Boulevard South Both From the westerly terminus of
Boulevard South to a point 70 feet
easterly therefrom
Bradshaw Court Both Entire length
Broadway East From Clinton Avenue north to St.
Nicholas Avenue
Broadway East From Hillsdale Avenue to a point 105
feet southerly therefrom
Broadway East From the Westwood Borough line to
Lawrence Street
Broadway West From Orchard Street to Woodcliff Lake
Borough line
Broadway West From West Broadway to Hillsdale
Avenue
§ 292-54 HILLSDALE CODE § 292-55
288:422
Name of Street Side Location
Broadway West From Westwood Borough line to
Harrington Street
Brookside Place
[Added 9-6-2016
by Ord. No. 16-12]
North From Paterson Street to Prospect
Place
Central Avenue Both From Park Avenue to a point 90 feet
northerly therefrom
Central Avenue East From the northerly curbline of Park
Avenue to a point 100 feet north
thereof
Central Avenue West From Hillsdale Avenue to a point 100
feet north of the northerly curbline of
Park Avenue
Circle Drive Both Entire length
Craig Road [Added
6-9-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-12]
West From Douglas Drive to a point of 50
feet northerly and to a point of 50 feet
southerly therefrom
Craig Road [Added
6-9-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-12]
West From Glen Hook Road to a point of 50
feet northerly and to a point of 50 feet
southerly therefrom
Craig Road [Added
6-9-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-12]
West From Melville Road to a point of 50
feet northerly and to a point of 50 feet
southerly therefrom
Cross Street North From Broadway to Central Avenue
Douglas Drive
[Added 6-9-2015
by Ord. No. 15-12]
Both From Melville Road to a point of 50
feet southerly therefrom
Drake Drive East Entire length
Drake Drive West From Schill Place north to Bradshaw
Court
Dwight Avenue Both From Arthur Street to Kinderkamack
Road
Esplanade North From the westerly terminus of
Esplanade to a point 135 feet easterly
therefrom
Everdell Avenue Both From the southerly terminus of
Everdell Avenue to a point 60 feet
northerly therefrom
Fairhaven Drive
[Added 6-9-2015
by Ord. No. 15-12]
South From Bedford Road to a point of 50
feet easterly and to a point of 50 feet
westerly therefrom
§ 292-55 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 292-55
288:423
Name of Street Side Location
Grove Street Both From the northerly terminus of Grove
Street to a point 60 feet southerly
therefrom
Grove Street East From Kinderkamack Road to a point
50 feet northerly therefrom
Grove Street West From Hillsdale Avenue to a point 225
feet northerly therefrom
Hillsdale Avenue Both From side of Chestnut Street to west
curbline of Marilyn Lane
Hillsdale Avenue Both From a point 110 feet west of
Kinderkamack Road to a point 50 feet
east of Stockton Street
Hillsdale Avenue Both From a point 250 feet east of Pascack
Road to a point 250 feet west of
Pascack Road
Hillsdale Avenue North From its intersection with Broadway
to its intersection with Central Avenue
Hillsdale Avenue North From Broadway to Winkler Way
Hillsdale Avenue
[Added
11-12-2012 by
Ord. No. 12-16]
North From Everdell Avenue to Cedar Lane
Hillsdale Avenue
[Added
11-12-2012 by
Ord. No. 12-16]
North From Kinderkamack Road to the west
end of the parking stalls at Beechwood
Park
Hillsdale Avenue North From Musquapsink Brook to Bedford
Road
Hillsdale Avenue North From 400 feet west of the westerly
curbline of Patterson Street to Pascack
Road
Hillsdale Avenue South From Broadway to West Broadway
Hillsdale Avenue
[Added
11-12-2012 by
Ord. No. 12-16]
South From Kinderkamack Road to Cedar
Lane
Hillsdale Avenue South Between Oak Street and Cedar Street
Hillsdale Avenue South From the easterly side of Pascack
Brook to Yesler Way
§ 292-55 HILLSDALE CODE § 292-55
288:424
Name of Street Side Location
Hillsdale Avenue South From a point 210 feet east of the
easterly curbline of Patterson Street to
the Erie Lackawanna Railroad
Hillsdale Avenue South From Patterson Street to a point 125
feet westerly therefrom
Hopper Street
(north of East
Liberty Avenue)
Both From the northerly terminus of
Hopper Street to a point 60 feet
southerly therefrom
Hopper Street
(north of Hillsdale
Avenue)
Both From the northerly terminus of
Hopper Street to a point 60 feet
southerly therefrom
Howell Avenue Both From the westerly terminus of Howell
Avenue to a point 70 feet easterly
therefrom
Kinderkamack Road Both From a point 250 feet north of
Hillsdale Avenue to a point 250 feet
south of Hillsdale Avenue
Kinderkamack Road Both From a point 250 feet north of
Piermont Avenue to a point 250 feet
south of Piermont Avenue
Knickerbocker
Avenue
North From Patterson Street to Prospect
Place
Lake Drive Both From Patterson Street to Parkview
Drive
Magnolia Avenue Both From Piermont Avenue to a point 90
feet northerly therefrom
Magnolia Avenue East From Piermont Avenue to a point 80
feet southerly therefrom
Magnolia Avenue West From Piermont Avenue to a point 110
feet southerly therefrom
Melville Road
[Added 6-9-2015
by Ord. No. 15-12]
South From Douglas Drive to a point of 50
feet easterly and to a point of 50 feet
westerly therefrom
Orchard Street South From Patterson Street to Broadway
Park Avenue Both From the easterly curbline of Central
Avenue to the easterly terminus of
Park Avenue
Park View Drive Both From Broadway west to Lake Drive
Park View Drive Both From the westerly terminus of Park
View Drive to a point 70 feet easterly
therefrom
§ 292-55 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 292-55
288:425
Name of Street Side Location
Pascack Road Both Entire length
Patterson Street East From Orchard Street to Lake Drive
Patterson Street East From Washington Avenue to Park
Avenue
Patterson Street West From Washington Avenue to Lake
Drive
Piermont Avenue Both From Broadway to Raymond Street
Piermont Avenue North From Cedar Lane to the westerly
curbline of Cottage Place
Piermont Avenue
[Added 9-6-2016
by Ord. No. 16-12]
North From Paterson Street to Prospect
Place
Piermont Avenue South From Cedar Lane to the easterly
driveway of the Pascack Valley
Regional High School
Prospect Avenue South From the easterly curbline of
Ruckman Road to a point 300 feet
easterly therefrom
Prospect Avenue
[Added 9-6-2016
by Ord. No. 16-12]
North Entire length, from a point 150 feet
west from Paterson Street
Royal Park Terrace
[Added 6-9-2015
by Ord. No. 15-12]
North From Wiermus Road to a point 50 feet
westerly therefrom
Ruckman Road East From Prospect Avenue to a point 400
feet southerly therefrom
Schill Place Both Entire length
Standish Road
[Added 6-9-2015
by Ord. No. 15-12]
Both From Fairhaven Drive to a point of 50
feet northerly therefrom
St. Nicholas Avenue Both From the easterly curbline of St. Mary
Street to its easterly terminus
Sycamore Avenue Both From the northerly terminus of
Sycamore Avenue to a point 60 feet
southerly therefrom
Trinity Place
[Added
11-12-2014 by
Ord. No. 14-16]
West From Hillsdale Avenue to Liberty
Avenue
§ 292-55 HILLSDALE CODE § 292-55
288:426
Name of Street Side Location
Washington Avenue Both From Patterson Street to the Erie-
Lackawanna Railroad tracks
Washington Avenue North From Broadway to a point 335 feet
easterly therefrom
Washington Avenue North From its intersection with
Kinderkamack Road 75 feet west
Washington Avenue North From its intersection with
Kinderkamack Road 90 feet east
Washington Avenue South From a point 255 feet east of
Broadway to a point 80 feet easterly
therefrom
Washington Avenue South From Magnolia Avenue to 125 feet
east of Crosley Terrace
Wierimus Road Both From a point 400 feet north of the
northerly curbline of Hillsdale Avenue
to a point 400 feet south of the
southerly curbline of Hillsdale Avenue
Wierimus Lane Both From Pascack Road to a point 150 feet
westerly therefrom
Winthrop Road
[Added 6-9-2015
by Ord. No. 15-12]
Both From Fairhaven Drive to a point of 50
feet northerly therefrom
Yesler Way Both Entire length
§ 292-56. Schedule XV: No Stopping or Standing.
In accordance with the provisions of § 292-25, no person shall stop or stand
a vehicle upon any of the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Location
Broadway Both From Harrington Street to Washington
Avenue
Hillsdale Avenue Both From 400 feet west of the westerly
curbline of Patterson Street to 210
feet east of the easterly curbline of
Patterson Street
Hillsdale Avenue Both From the easterly curbline of
Wierimus Road to a point 300 feet
easterly therefrom
Melville Road Both From the westerly curbline of
Wierimus Road to a point 200 feet
westerly therefrom
§ 292-55 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 292-56
288:427
Name of Street Side Location
Patterson Street Both From 350 feet south of the southerly
curbline of Hillsdale Avenue to the
southerly side of Park Avenue
Prospect Avenue South From the easterly curbline of
Ruckman Avenue to a point 300 feet
easterly therefrom
Ruckman Avenue East From the southerly curbline of
Prospect Avenue to a point 400 feet
southerly therefrom
§ 292-57. Schedule XVI: Parking Prohibited Certain Hours.
[Amended 11-12-2012 by Ord. No. 12-16; 11-12-2014 by Ord. No.
14-16; 5-12-2015 by Ord. No. 15-11; 6-9-2015 by Ord. No. 15-12;
9-6-2016 by Ord. No. 16-12; 6-13-2017 by Ord. No. 17-09]
The following roadways on the west side of town shall be deemed no parking
on both sides of the street on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays between
9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. from August 30 until October 30. This parking
ordinance shall be enforced for no parking on both sides of all roads, for the
full length of the street, unless otherwise specified.
Name of Street
Alpine Terrace.
Apple Tree Lane.
Arigot Court.
Bedford Road (from Fairhaven Drive to Standish Road.)
Bedford Road (Hillsdale Avenue to Fairhaven Drive)
Beverly Road.
Buff Lane.
Chelsea Court.
Craig Road.
Douglas Drive.
Ellen Court.
Ell Road (from Pascack Road to Hillsdale Court).
Fairhaven Drive.
Glen Hook Road.
Glen Lane.
Heritage Court.
Hillsdale Court.
Horizon Terrace.
§ 292-56 HILLSDALE CODE § 292-57
288:428
Hunters Court.
Jane Court.
Langerfeld Road.
Lesa Lane.
Lynne Place.
Marilyn Lane.
Melville Road.
Mountain View Terrace.
Orchard Lane.
Paul Court.
Plymouth Road.
Ridge Court.
Royal Park Terrace.
Shady Side Lane.
Sierra Court.
Standish Road.
Sunrise Drive.
Wierimus Lane.
Winthrop Road.
§ 292-58. Schedule XVII: No Stopping or Standing Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 292-27, no person shall stop or stand
a vehicle between the times specified upon any of the following described
streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
(Reserved)
§ 292-59. Schedule XVIII: Time Limit Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 292-28, no person shall park a vehicle
for longer than the time limit specified upon any of the following described
streets or parts thereof:
§ 292-57 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 292-59
288:429
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Ackerman Place Both 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m./school
days
Entire length
Arden Place Both 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
Entire length
Arthur Street Both 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m./school
days
Entire length
Beechnut Street Both 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
Entire length
Bergen Avenue Both 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
Entire length
Birchwood Lane Both 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
Entire length
Broadway East 3 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Sundays
and holidays
From Harrington Street
to Lawrence Street
Broadway East 1 hour; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Sundays
and holidays
From a point 105 feet
south of Hillsdale Avenue
to Washington Avenue
Broadway East 1 hour; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Sundays
and holidays
From Hillside Avenue to
Cross Street
Broadway East 2 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Sundays
and holidays
From Washington
Avenue to the Westwood
Borough line
§ 292-59 HILLSDALE CODE § 292-59
288:430
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Broadway West 1 hour; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Sundays
and holidays
From Hillsdale Avenue to
Orchard Street
Broadway West 2 hours From Washington
Avenue to train station
Broadway West 2 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Sundays
and holidays
From Washington
Avenue to West
Broadway
Cathy Road South 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m./school
days
Entire length
Central Avenue East 2 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Sundays
and holidays
From Hillsdale Avenue to
Cross Street
Central Avenue West 2 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Sundays
and holidays
From Park Avenue to
Cross Street
Chadwick Road Both 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
North for 300 feet
Cherry Place Both 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
South and east from
Hillsdale Avenue to the
west curbline of
Chestnut Street
Chestnut Street Both 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
Entire length
Clayton Street Both 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m./school
days
From Kinderkamack
Road west 500 feet
Conklin Avenue Both 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m./school
days
From Kinderkamack
Road west 500 feet
§ 292-59 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 292-59
288:431
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Conklin Avenue Both 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m./school
days
From Kinderkamack
Road to Large Avenue
Cottage Place West 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m./school
days
Entire length
Country Lane Both 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m./school
days
Entire length
Crestwood Place Both 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
Entire length
Cross Street North 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
From Central Avenue to
Bergen Street
Cross Street South 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
From Broadway to
Bergen Street
Elaine Court Both 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
Entire length
Elf Hill Court Both 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
Entire length
Ellen Court Both 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
Entire length
§ 292-59 HILLSDALE CODE § 292-59
288:432
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Ell Road Both 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
From Pascack Road to a
point 300 feet therefrom
Ell Road Both 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
From 1,000 feet west of
Pascack Road to Pascack
Road
Ell Road Both 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
Pascack Road east and
north to Hillsdale Avenue
and south to Washington
Township border
Ell Road North 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
From Pascack Road to
the west side of Arden
Court as extended
Ell Road South 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
From Pascack Road to
the west side of Arden
Court
Everdell Avenue Both 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m./school
days
Entire length
Forest Drive Both 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
East from Saddlewood
Drive to Briarcliff Road
Glen Lane Both 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
Entire length
Hampton Place Both 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m./school
days
Entire length
§ 292-59 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 292-59
288:433
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Harrington
Street
Both 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
From Broadway to
Magnolia Avenue
Hillsdale Avenue North 2 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Sundays
and holidays
From Central Avenue to
Magnolia Avenue
Hillsdale Avenue North 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m./school
days
From Magnolia Avenue
to Trinity Place
Hillsdale Avenue North 1 hour; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Sundays
and holidays
From Winkler Way to a
point 210 feet east of the
easterly curbline of
Patterson Street
Hillsdale Avenue South 1 hour; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Sundays
and holidays
From Broadway to a
point 20 feet westerly of
the fire station driveway
entrance
Hillsdale Avenue South 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
From Central Avenue to
Magnolia Avenue
Holdrum Street Both 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m./school
days
Entire length
Hopper Street West
(res.
side)
9:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m. Saturday and
Sunday
From Hillsdale Avenue
south to Washington
Avenue
Jan Court Both 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
Entire length
Jolen Drive Both 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
Entire length
§ 292-59 HILLSDALE CODE § 292-59
288:434
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Kenwood Court Both 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
Entire length
King Court Both 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
Entire length
Knickerbocker
Avenue
Both 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m./school
days
From Kinderkamack
Road west 500 feet
Large Avenue Both 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m./school
days
From Kinderkamack
Road west 500 feet
Large Avenue Both 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m./school
days
From Kinderkamack
Road to Cottage Place
Lawrence Street Both 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
From Broadway to
Magnolia Avenue
Liberty Avenue Both 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m./school
days
From Kinderkamack
Road to Cedar Lane
Liberty Avenue Both 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m./school
days
From Magnolia Avenue
to Trinity Place
Magnolia
Avenue [Added
11-12-2014 by
Ord. No.
14-16]
East Permit parking/
school days
North from Hillsdale
Avenue to the south
driveway of 120
Magnolia Avenue
Magnolia
Avenue [Added
11-12-2014 by
Ord. No.
14-16]
West Permit parking/
school days
North from Hillsdale
Avenue to Liberty
Avenue
§ 292-59 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 292-59
288:435
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Magnolia
Avenue [Added
11-12-2014 by
Ord. No.
14-16]
West 2 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays/Sunday
and holidays
Cross Street to Liberty
Avenue
Maple Avenue Both 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
From west curbline east
to east side of Chestnut
Street
Maria Drive Both 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
Entire length
Marilyn Lane Both 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
Entire length
Meadow Drive Both 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m./school
days
Entire length
Midland Avenue Both 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m./school
days
From East Liberty
Avenue to Hillsdale
Avenue
Morris Drive Both 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
Entire length
Nancy Drive Both 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
Entire length
North Court Both 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m./school
days
Entire length
§ 292-59 HILLSDALE CODE § 292-59
288:436
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
North Ramapo
Lane
Both 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
Entire length
Oak Ridge Road Both 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m./school
days
Entire length
Oak Trail Road Both 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
From Wierimus Lane
south to the south
curbline of Crestwood
Place
Orchard Street North 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
From Broadway to Valley
Street
Orchard Street South 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
From Patterson Street to
Valley Street
Park Avenue Both 1 hour; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Sundays
and holidays
From Central Avenue
west to Broadway
Park Avenue Both 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
From Patterson Street to
Winkler Way
Park Avenue Both 2 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
From Winkler Way to
Broadway
Patterson Street East 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Sundays
and holidays
From Park Avenue north
to Orchard Street
§ 292-59 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 292-59
288:437
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Queen Court Both 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
West from Morris Drive
to western terminus
Ramapo Lane Both 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
Entire length
Rawson Court Both 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m./school
days
Entire length
Raymond Street Both 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m./school
days
Entire length
Rutgers Place Both 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m./school
days
Entire length
Saddle Ranch
Lane
Both 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
Entire length
Saddlewood
Drive
Both 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
East from Pascack Road
to Forest Drive
St. Mary's Street Both 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m./school
days
Entire length
St. Nicholas
Avenue
Both 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m./school
days
From Kinderkamack
Road east to the
terminus of St. Nicholas
Avenue
Sherwood Drive Both 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
Entire length
§ 292-59 HILLSDALE CODE § 292-59
288:438
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Trinity Place
[Added
11-12-2014 by
Ord. No.
14-16]
East Permit parking/
school days
North from Hillsdale
Avenue to the south
driveway of 58 Trinity
Place
Trinity Place
[Repealed
11-12-2014 by
Ord. No.
14-16]
Trinity Place
[Repealed
11-12-2014 by
Ord. No.
14-16]
Trinity Place
[Added
11-12-2014 by
Ord. No.
14-16]
West 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m./school
days
North from 58 Trinity
Place to Liberty Avenue
Washington
Avenue
Both 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
From a point 335 feet
east of Broadway to
Magnolia Avenue
Watson Place Both 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m./school
days
Entire length
Wierimus Lane Both 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
From Pascack Road west
to the west curbline of
Kenwood Drive
Willowbrook
Road
Both 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m./school
days
Entire length
Windham Road Both 4 hours; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays
North and east from
Hillsdale Avenue to the
west curbline of
Chadwick Road
§ 292-59 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 292-59
288:439
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Winkler Way West 1 hour; 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m./All
except Sundays
and holidays
Entire length
§ 292-60. Schedule XIX: Angle Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 292-29, no person shall park a
vehicle upon any of the streets or parts thereof described below, except as
designated:
Name of Street Side Location
Hillsdale Avenue North 250 feet west of Everdell Avenue
Magnolia Avenue West From Hillsdale Avenue to Liberty Avenue
Park Avenue North East from Broadway to Central Avenue
Park Avenue Both West from Broadway to Winkler Way
§ 292-61. Schedule XX: Loading Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 292-30, the following described
locations are hereby designated as loading zones:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 292-62. Schedule XXI: Taxi Stands.
In accordance with the provisions of § 292-31, the following described
locations are hereby designated as taxi stands:
Name of Street Side Location
West Broadway West From north side of the Erie-Lackawanna
Railroad station along the railroad rightof-
way to the south side of Hillsdale
Avenue
§ 292-63. Schedule XXII: Bus Stops.
In accordance with the provisions of § 292-32, the following described
locations are hereby designated as bus stops:
§ 292-59 HILLSDALE CODE § 292-63
288:440
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Location
Broadway North At Hillsdale Avenue
Broadway North At Lawrence Street
Broadway South At Hillsdale Avenue
Broadway South At Lawrence Street
Broadway South At Washington Avenue
Hillsdale Avenue East At Cedar Avenue
Hillsdale Avenue East At Colonial Boulevard
Hillsdale Avenue East At Ell Road
Hillsdale Avenue East At Kinderkamack Road
Hillsdale Avenue East At Magnolia Avenue
Hillsdale Avenue East At Patterson Street
Hillsdale Avenue West At Briarcliff Road
Hillsdale Avenue West At Broadway (25 feet east of railroad
crossing)
Hillsdale Avenue West At Kinderkamack Road
Hillsdale Avenue West At Magnolia Avenue
Hillsdale Avenue West At Pascack Road
Hillsdale Avenue West At Patterson Street
Hillsdale Avenue West At Saddle Ranch Lane
Hillsdale Avenue West At Saddlewood Drive
Kinderkamack Road North At Clinton Avenue
Kinderkamack Road North At Knickerbocker Avenue
Kinderkamack Road North At Liberty Avenue
Kinderkamack Road North At Large Avenue
Kinderkamack Road North At Piermont Avenue
Kinderkamack Road North At Ralph Avenue
Kinderkamack Road North At St. Nicholas Avenue
Kinderkamack Road South At Clinton Avenue
Kinderkamack Road South At Knickerbocker Avenue
Kinderkamack Road South At Large Avenue
Kinderkamack Road South At Piermont Avenue
Kinderkamack Road South At St. Nicholas Avenue
Pascack Road North At Ell Road
§ 292-63 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 292-63
288:441
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Location
Pascack Road North At Jolen Drive
Pascack Road North At Saddle Ranch Lane
Pascack Road North At Saddlewood Drive
Pascack Road North At Wierimus Lane
Pascack Road South At Ell Road
Pascack Road South At Hillsdale Avenue (near and far side)
Pascack Road South At Jolen Drive
Pascack Road South At Saddle Ranch Lane
Pascack Road South At Saddlewood Drive
Pascack Road South At Wierimus Lane
§ 292-64. Schedule XXIII: Temporary Parking Prohibition For Snow
Plowing and Removal.
In accordance with the provisions of § 292-36, whenever snow has fallen
and the accumulation is such that it covers the streets or highways, an
emergency shall exist, and no vehicle shall be parked on the streets or
highways or portions thereof indicated below:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 292-65. Schedule XXIV: Truck Routes to Transfer Station.
In accordance with the provisions of § 292-36.1, the routes noted in
Schedule XXIV below are hereby established as the sole route of ingress and
egress in and through the Borough of Hillsdale for solid waste and recycling
vehicles traveling to and from the solid waste transfer station located at 131
Patterson Street:
Description
Pascack Road, south of Hillsdale Avenue, Hillsdale Avenue, west of
Patterson Street; Patterson Street, between Hillsdale Avenue and Prospect
Place, west of Patterson Street or Brookside Place, west of Patterson
Street.
Broadway, between Westwood and to Hillsdale Avenue; Hillsdale Avenue,
between Broadway and Patterson Street; Patterson Street between
Hillsdale Avenue and Prospect Place, west of Patterson Street, or
Brookside Place, west of Patterson Street.
§ 292-63 HILLSDALE CODE § 292-65
288:442
Description
Broadway, north of Park View Drive, Park View Drive, between Broadway
and Patterson Street; Patterson Street; Knickerbocker Avenue, west of
Patterson Street; Prospect Place, west of Patterson Street; or Brookside
Place, west of Patterson Street.
§ 292-65 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 292-65
288:443
Chapter 294
VEHICLES, IDLING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Air pollution — See Ch. 329.
§ 294-1. Purpose.
It is the policy of Hillsdale to prevent the air pollution caused by the idling
of diesel powered motor vehicles that may jeopardize the health, welfare or
safety of the citizens or degrade the quality of life.
§ 294-2. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicated otherwise:
DIESEL BUS — Any diesel-powered autobus or motorbus of any size or
configuration, whether registered in this state or elsewhere, that is
designed or used for intrastate or interstate transportation of passengers
for hire or otherwise on a public road, street or highway or any public or
quasi-public property in this state, including but not limited to autobuses
under the jurisdiction of the New Jersey Department of Transportation
pursuant to Title 27 or 48 of the Revised Statutes; autobuses of the New
Jersey Transit Corporation and its contract carriers that are under the
inspection jurisdiction of the New Jersey Department of Transportation;
autobuses under the authority of the Interstate Commerce Commission or
its successor agency; school buses, as defined pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:1-1;
and hotel, casino, charter and special buses.
DIESEL ENGINE — A compression ignition type of internal combustion
engine.
DIESEL-POWERED — Utilizing a diesel engine.
ELEMENT OF DESIGN — Any part of system on a motor vehicle or a motor
vehicle engine pertaining to the vehicle's engine's certified configuration.
GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING or GVWR — The value specified by
the vehicle manufacturer as the maximum loaded weight of a single or
combination vehicle.
HEAVY-DUTY DIESEL VEHICLE — A diesel-powered motor vehicle, other
than a diesel bus, that has a GVWR exceeding 8,500 pounds and is designed
primarily for transporting persons or property.
IDLE — An operating mode where the vehicle engine is not engaged in gear
and where the engine operates at a speed at the revolutions per minute
specified by the engine or vehicle manufacturer.
§ 292-65 HILLSDALE CODE § 294-2
288:444
MOTOR VEHICLE — All vehicles propelled otherwise than by muscular
power, except motorized bicycles and such vehicles as run only upon rails
or tracks.
PERSON — Any individual or entity and shall include, without limitation,
corporations, companies, associations, societies, firms, partnerships and
joint stock companies, and shall also include, without limitation, all political
subdivisions of any states and any agencies or instrumentalities thereof.
QUASI-PUBLIC ROADWAY — Any roadway that, although under private
ownership or control, is accessible to the public. This term shall include but
not be limited to the New Jersey Turnpike, the Garden State Parkway and
the Atlantic City expressway, but shall not include shopping mall roadways
and parking lots, private business roadways, residential and nonresidential
parking lots and private driveways.
§ 294-3. Prohibited acts; exceptions.
A. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the engine of a dieselpowered
motor vehicle to idle for more than three consecutive minutes
if the vehicle is not in motion, with the following exceptions: [Amended
9-8-2015 by Ord. No. 15-17]
(1) A motor vehicle at the vehicle operator's place of business where
the motor vehicle is permanently assigned may idle for 30
consecutive minutes.
(2) A motor vehicle may idle for 15 consecutive minutes when the
vehicle engine has been stopped for three or more hours and only if
the temperature is below 25° F.
(3) Buses may idle while actively discharging or picking up passengers
for 15 consecutive minutes in a sixty-minute period.
(4) No idling is allowed in a parking space with available and
functioning electrification technology.
B. The provisions of Subsection A above shall not apply to: [Amended
9-8-2015 by Ord. No. 15-17]
(1) A motor vehicle stopped in a line of traffic.
(2) A motor vehicle whose primary power source is utilized, in whole or
part, for necessary and definitely prescribed mechanical
operations, such as refrigeration units for perishable loads,
hydraulic lifts, "cherry pickers," or similar equipment and other
than propulsion, passenger compartment heating or passenger
compartment air conditioning.
(3) A motor vehicle being or waiting to be examined by a state or
federal motor vehicle inspector.
(4) An emergency motor vehicle in an emergency situation.
§ 294-2 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 294-3
288:445
§ 294-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a
penalty for each offense not more than $2,500.
§ 294-5. Issuance of summons.
Local health officials, the Hillsdale Police Department and the local code
enforcement office shall be empowered to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 294-6. Other remedies.
No provision of this chapter shall be construed to impair any common law
or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy therefrom, of any person for
injury or damage arising from any violation of this chapter or from other
law.
Part III, Land Use Legislation
Chapter 305
CONTRIBUTION DISCLOSURE STATEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use — See Ch. 310.
(5) A motor vehicle while it is being repaired.
(6) A motor vehicle while it is engaged in the process of connection or
detachment of a trailer or of exchange of trailers.
(7) Operation of auxiliary or alternate power systems for cabin
comfort.
(8) A motor vehicle with a sleeper berth, equipped with a 2007 or
newer engine, or that has been retrofitted with a diesel particulate
filter while the driver is resting or sleeping in the sleeper berth.
Other idling is still prohibited.
C. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit any emission control
apparatus or element of design installed on any diesel-powered vehicle
or diesel engine to be disconnected, detached, deactivated or in any
other way rendered inoperable or less effective, in respect to limiting or
controlling emissions that it was designed to be by the original
equipment or vehicle manufacturer, except for the purposes of
diagnostics, maintenance, repair or replacements and only for the
duration of such operations.
§ 294-3 HILLSDALE CODE § 294-6
288:446
§ 305-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Contribution Disclosure Ordinance."
§ 305-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to enhance openness in government by
providing further guarantees for a fair and impartial variance application
process by requiring, via the municipal application checklist, for applicants
to list specified political contributions made by property owners, developers
and the professionals whose service they use in applications for zoning
applications.
§ 305-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICATION CHECKLIST — The list of submission requirements adopted
by ordinance and provided by the municipal agency to a developer pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3.
CONTRIBUTION — Every loan, gift, subscription, advance or transfer of
money or other things of value, including any item of real property or
personal property, tangible or intangible, (but not including services
provided without compensation, by individuals volunteering a part of their
time on behalf of a candidate, committee or organization, made to or on
behalf of any candidate, candidate committee, joint candidates committees,
political committee, continuing political committee or political party
committee and any pledge, promise of other commitment or assumption
of liability to make such transfer. For purposes of reports required under
the provisions of this chapter, any such commitment or assumption shall be
deemed to have been a contribution upon the date when such commitment
is made or liability assumed
CONTRIBUTION DISCLOSURE STATEMENT — A list specifying the
amount, date and the recipient of any and all contributions made to or on
behalf of any candidate, candidate committee, joint candidates committee,
political committee, continuing political committee or political party
committee of or pertaining to this municipality, made up to four years
prior to filing the variance application and/or during the pendency of the
application process, and required to be reported pursuant to N.J.S.A.
19:44-1 et seq.189
DEVELOPER — A developer as defined by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4, i.e., the legal
or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any land proposed to be included
in a proposed development, including the holder of a proprietary interest in
such land.
189. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 19:44-1 through 19:44-6 were repealed by L. 1973, c. 83, § 26,
effective 4-24-1973.
§ 294-6 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 305-3
288:447
PROFESSIONAL — Any person or entity whose principals are required to be
licensed by New Jersey law and who supplies legal representation, expert
testimony or written reports in support of an application. Professionals shall
include both any individuals supplying the representation testimonies or
reports and the firms or entities in which said individuals practice.
§ 305-4. Disclosure requirements; statement to be part of
application; availability of statement.
A. Disclosure requirements.
(1) Any applicant for all types of variances, except for applications
affecting a sole single-family dwelling and/or in the event the
contribution has been made in the amount equal to or less than
$300, shall include in the application contribution disclosure
statement for all developers, all associates of said developers who
would be subject to disclosure pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-48.1 or
40:44D-48.2, and all professionals who apply for or provide
testimony, plans, or reports in support of said variance and who
have an enforceable proprietary interest in the property or
development which is the subject of the application or whose fee in
whole or part is contingent upon the outcome of the application.
Regardless of whether the owner of the property which is the
subject of the variance application falls in any of the categories
established in the preceding sentence, the applicant shall include
in the application a contribution disclosure statement for said
owner. [Amended 10-4-2011 by Ord. No. 11-19]
(2) During the pendency of the application process until final site plan
approval is granted, any applicant for a variance shall amend its
contribution disclosure statements to include continuing disclosure
of all contributions within the scope of disclosure requirements of
the above subsection.
B. Inclusion of contribution disclosure statements as an element of the
application checklist.
(1) A contribution disclosure statement shall be submitted by the
applicant for each and every variance application, except for
applications affecting a sole single-family dwelling and/or in the
event the contribution has been made in an amount equal to or less
than $300. [Amended 10-4-2011 by Ord. No. 11-19]
(2) The Planning Board and Zoning Board shall amend their respective
application forms and checklists for variances to include the
contribution disclosure statement as specified herein to include the
contribution disclosure statement as specified in this chapter.
(3) An application shall not be deemed complete by any administrative
official or accepted for public hearing by the municipal agency or
§ 305-3 HILLSDALE CODE § 305-4
288:448
Chapter 310
LAND USE
board to which such application is made until the required
contribution disclosure statements are submitted.
(4) It shall be a condition of approval for each variance, except for
applications affecting a sole single-family dwelling and/or in the
event the contribution has been made in an amount equal to or less
than $400, granted that the applicant certifies that the contribution
disclosure statement submitted at the outset of the application is
complete and up to date.
C. Availability of the disclosure statement. All contribution disclosure
statements shall be available in the office of the Borough Clerk for
review by any member of the public.
§ 305-4 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 305-4
288:449

Part 1
General Provisions
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 310-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited and referred to as the "Hillsdale Land
Use Ordinance."
§ 310-2. Intent and purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to implement the intent and
purpose of the Municipal Land Use Law (P.L. 1975, c. 291, also known as
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.) as set forth in Article 1 thereof.
§ 310-3. Word usage.
For the purposes of this chapter, unless the context clearly requires a
different meaning, the following general terms shall be construed as
follows:190
§ 310-4. Definitions. [Amended 2-13-1980 by Ord. 80-1; 6-8-1983 by
Ord. No. 83-7; 5-8-1984 by Ord. No. 84-9; 7-10-1990 by Ord. No.
90-10; 6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 18-12; 9-4-18 by Ord. No. 18-09]
The specific terms hereinafter set forth shall have the following meanings:
ACCESSORY APARTMENT -- — A dwelling unit with a separate means of
ingress and egress containing separate kitchen, bathroom, and sleeping
facilities, that is (1) physically attached to or contained within an existing
single-family house or (2) occupies the second story of an existing garage
or accessory building on the same lot as the principal dwelling.[Added
9-4-2018 by Ord. No. 18-09]
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or building customarily
subordinate and incidental to the primary use or building on the same lot.
A. A term in the present, past or future tense includes either of the other
two tenses.
B. The verb "use" includes the phrase "or designed, intended or arranged
to be used."
C. The noun "use" shall include the actual or intended occupancy or other
employment of land or of a structure.191
190. Editor's Note: Original Subsections (a) and (b), which immediately followed this
subsection, were deleted 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8.
191. Editor's Note: Original Subsection (f), which immediately followed this subsection, was
deleted 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8.
§ 310-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-4
288:451
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The person, or the duly designated deputy
of the person, with whom applications are filed pursuant to this chapter. The
Administrative Officer for the issuance of a zoning permit shall be the Land
Use Officer. The Administrative Officer for the Planning Board shall be the
Secretary to the Planning Board.[Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
ADVERTISE — Giving, attempting to give or intending to give any notice or
information or any activity which gives, attempts to give or intends to give
notice, information or warning.[Added 10-4-2011 by Ord. No. 11-17]
AGE-RESTRICTED HOUSING DEVELOPMENT —
AGGREGATE SQUARE FOOTAGE — The total or collective amount of square
footage.[Added 10-4-2011 by Ord. No. 11-17]
ALTERATIONS — As applied to a building or a structure, a change or
rearrangement of structural parts or existing facilities, or any enlargement
or relocation, whether by extension of a front, rear or side or by increase in
height or in depth or by moving from one location or position to another.
APARTMENT UNIT — One of more rooms with private bath and kitchen
facilities constituting an independent self-contained dwelling unit in a
building containing another use or another dwelling unit.[Added 9-4-2018
by Ord. No. 18-09]
A residential community for permanent residents in which the
residential property and related open space are owned by a
condominium association or other homeowner's association or entity.
One hundred percent of the dwellings in an age-restricted housing
development are occupied by at least one person age 55 or over with
the following exceptions: [Added 2-6-2007 by Ord. No. 07-01]
One person under the age of 55 may reside in a dwelling unit if
the presence of such person is essential to the physical care of the
occupant that is age 55 or over.
(1)
A spouse under the age of 55 years may reside with the spouse that
is 55 years of age or over.
(2)
A child 18 years of age or over residing with his/her parents, when
at least one parent is age 55 or older and is the occupant of a unit
in an age-restricted housing development.
(3)
A.
The age-restricted housing development shall be established in
accordance with the laws of the State of New Jersey and shall qualify
for a "housing for older persons" exemption under the Fair Housing Act.
B.
The homeowner or condominium association shall own all common
spaces, including but not limited to open spaces, common areas,
recreation areas, road area and sidewalks. The association shall be
responsible for, at a minimum, collection of garbage and recyclable
material, snow removal, road and sidewalk maintenance, maintenance
of buffer area and other common landscape areas.
C.
§ 310-4 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-4
288:452
APPLICANT — A person submitting an application for
development.[Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required by ordinance in connection with any
development (as said term is hereinafter defined), including approval of
a subdivision plat, site plan, conditional use, zoning variance, permit for
construction within the bed of a mapped street or permit for construction of
a structure not having access or not related to a street.
ATTIC — That part of a building that is immediately below and wholly or
partly within the roof framing.[Added 9-13-2005 by Ord. No. 05-14]
AWNING — A roof-like covering of canvas or cloth that is attached to a
frame, which projects from the wall of a building and is supported entirely
by the building. Fixed awnings are permitted signage, roll-out awnings are
not.[Added 10-4-2011 by Ord. No. 11-17; amended 3-8-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-06]
AWNING SIGNS — Awning signs shall consist of the following two
types:[Added 10-4-2011 by Ord. No. 11-17]
BANNER — Any temporary sign applied to paper, plastic or fabric of any
kind which shall be permitted by the Code.[Added 10-4-2011 by Ord. No.
11-17]
BASEMENT — That portion of a building that is partly underground that
has more than 1/2 its interior height (measured from floor to bottom of
floor joists) above the average finished grade of the ground adjoining the
building.192
BOARDINGHOUSE — A dwelling unit or part thereof in which, for
compensation, lodging and meals are provided and personal and financial
services may be offered.[Added 9-4-2018 by Ord. No. 18-09]
BRACKET — The supporting frame of a sign.[Added 10-4-2011 by Ord.
No. 11-17]
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by arches, columns,
piers or walls. This term shall include tents, air-supported structures, lunch
wagons, mobile homes, trailers, dining cars, camp cars or other structures
on wheels or having other supports.
Type 1: A sign applied directly to a canvas-like, flexible covering that
is adjustable or retractable. The covering is supported entirely from
the exterior wall of a building and located over a window or door to
provide protection against the elements. The awning on which such
sign is located requires prior and separate approval by the Planning
Board.
A.
Type 2: A sign applied directly to a flexible translucent covering over a
rigid or fixed canopy-like frame that is affixed to a building facade.
B.
192. Editor's Note: The original of "Board of Adjustment," which immediately followed this
definition, was deleted 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8.
§ 310-4 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-4
288:453
BUILDING COVERAGE — Building coverage shall be computed by
determining the first floor area of any and all structures intended to be
used or occupied on a permanent or temporary basis, and shall include
but not be limited to, buildings, sheds, pool houses and garages.[Amended
4-13-2004 by Ord. No. 04-10; 9-13-2005 by Ord. No. 05-14]
BUILDING FACE OR FACADE — The side of the building where the main
entrance is located. The length along a ground-floor building front,
substantially parallel to the lot line of street or traveled way accessible from
a street, which is occupied by a separate and distinct use (see definition
below), or the length along a traveled way accessible from a street, that is
occupied by a separate and distinct use or by the same use that occupies
the front of said building.[Added 10-4-2011 by Ord. No. 11-17]
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from average
finished grade taken at a 5' offset from the perimeter of the Building to the
highest point of the roof.[Added 9-4-2018 by Ord. No. 18-09]
BUILDING LINE — A line formed by the intersection of a horizontal plane
that coincides with the exterior surface of the building on any side. In case
of a cantilevered or projected section of a building, the vertical plane will
coincide with the most projected surface.
CANOPY — A fixed metal frame with a fabric cover either fixed to a facade
or projecting from the facade and supported from grade.[Added 10-4-2011
by Ord. No. 11-17]
CARPORT — A roofed garage providing space for the parking of motor
vehicles, which may be open on not more than three sides.[Added
7-13-2010 by Ord. No. 10-08]
CELLAR — The portion of a building that is partly or completely
underground that has more than 1/2 interior height measured from floor to
finished ceiling below the average finished grade of the ground adjoining
the building.
CERTIFICATE AS TO APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION OF LAND — A
certificate issued by the Planning Board Secretary certifying:
COMMERCIAL DISTRICT — The area of the Borough located within the
C Commercial Zone as shown on the official Zoning Map.193[Added
10-4-2011 by Ord. No. 11-17]
A. That there is in the Borough a duly established Planning Board;
That there is in the Borough an ordinance controlling the subdivision of
land; and
B.
That a subdivision has or has not been approved by the Planning Board
for the land designated in the application for such certificate, and,
if approved, the date of such approval and any extensions and terms
thereof.
C.
193. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 310-4 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-4
288:454
COMMON OPEN SPACE — An open space area within a tract or related
to a site designated as a development, and designed and intended as
undisturbed open space or recreation for use or enjoyment of residents and
owners of the development. Passive recreation improvements, including but
not limited to walking paths, benches and tables, are permitted.[Added
2-6-2007 by Ord. No. 07-01]
COMPLETE APPLICATION — An application form completed as specified
by ordinance and the rules and regulations of the municipal agency and
all accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of the
application for development, including, where applicable, but not limited
to, a site plan or subdivision plat, provided that the municipal agency may
require such additional information not specified in the ordinance or any
revisions in the accompanying documents, as are reasonably necessary to
make an informed decision as to whether the requirements necessary for
approval of the application for development have been met. The application
shall not be deemed incomplete for lack of any such additional information
or any revisions in the accompanying documents so required by the
municipal agency. An application shall be certified as complete immediately
upon the meeting of all requirements specified in the ordinance and in
the rules and regulations of the municipal agency and shall be deemed
complete as of the day it is so certified by the Administrative Officer for
the purposes of the commencement of the time period for action by the
municipal agency.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE — Community residences for the
developmentally disabled, community shelters for victims of domestic
violence, community residences for the terminally ill, community residences
for persons with head injuries, and adult family care homes for elderly
persons and physically disabled adults shall be a permitted use in all
residential districts of a municipality, and the requirements therefor shall
be the same as for single family dwelling units located within such
districts.[Added 9-4-2018 by Ord. No. 18-09]
Community residence for the developmentally disabled means any
community residential facility licensed pursuant to P.L.1977, c.448
(C.30:11B-1 et seq.) providing food, shelter and personal guidance,
under such supervision as required, to not more than 15
developmentally disabled or mentally ill persons, who require
assistance, temporarily or permanently, in order to live in the
community, and shall include, but not be limited to: group homes,
halfway houses, intermediate care facilities, supervised apartment
living arrangements, and hostels. Such a residence shall not be
considered a health care facility within the meaning of the "Health
Care Facilities Planning Act," P.L.1971, c.136 (C.26:2H-1 et al.). In
the case of such a community residence housing mentally ill persons,
such residence shall have been approved for a purchase of service
contract or an affiliation agreement pursuant to such procedures as
shall be established by regulation of the Division of Mental Health
and Hospitals of the Department of Human Services. As used in this
act, "developmentally disabled person" means a person who is
A.
§ 310-4 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-4
288:455
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district if
there has first been a showing before the Planning Board and determination
by the Planning Board that such use in a specified location will comply with
the conditions and standards contained in Part 4 of this chapter for the
location or operation of such use.
CORNICE — Any continuous molded projection that crowns or finishes the
part to which it is affixed, such as a wall or door opening; most notably,
the exterior trim of a structure at the meeting of the roof and wall.[Added
10-4-2011 by Ord. No. 11-17]
developmentally disabled as defined in section 2 of P.L.1977, c.448
(C.30:11B-2), and "mentally ill person" means a person who is afflicted
with a mental illness as defined in R.S.30:4-23, but shall not include a
person who has been committed after having been found not guilty of a
criminal offense by reason of insanity or having been found unfit to be
tried on a criminal charge.
Community shelter for victims of domestic violence means any shelter
approved for a purchase of service contract and certified pursuant to
standards and procedures established by regulation of the Department
of Human Services pursuant to P.L.1979, c.337 (C.30:14-1 et seq.),
providing food, shelter, medical care, legal assistance, personal
guidance, and other services to not more than 15 persons who have
been victims of domestic violence, including any children of such
victims, who temporarily require shelter and assistance in order to
protect their physical or psychological welfare.
B.
Community residence for persons with head injuries means a
community residential facility licensed pursuant to P.L.1977, c.448
(C.30:11B-1 et seq.) providing food, shelter and personal guidance,
under such supervision as required, to not more than 15 persons with
head injuries, who require assistance, temporarily or permanently, in
order to live in the community, and shall include, but not be limited
to: group homes, halfway houses, supervised apartment living
arrangements, and hostels. Such a residence shall not be considered
a health care facility within the meaning of the "Health Care Facilities
Planning Act," P.L.1971, c.136 (C.26:2H-1 et al.).
C.
Person with head injury means a person who has sustained an injury,
illness or traumatic changes to the skull, the brain contents or its
coverings which results in a temporary or permanent physiobiological
decrease of mental, cognitive, behavioral, social or physical functioning
which causes partial or total disability.
D.
Community residence for the terminally ill means any community
residential facility operated as a hospice program providing food,
shelter, personal guidance and health care services, under such
supervision as required, to not more than 15 terminally ill persons.
E.
§ 310-4 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-4
288:456
COUNTY PLANNING BOARD — The Bergen County Planning Board as
defined in Section 1 of P.L. 1968, c. 285 (N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.1).[Amended
5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
DAYS — Calendar days.
DECK — An unroofed platform, either freestanding or attached to a building
or other improvement, that is supported by pillars, posts, walls or
foundations.[Added 7-13-2010 by Ord. No. 10-08]
DETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A building containing one
dwelling unit that is not attached to any other dwelling unit and is
surrounded by open space or yard.[Added 2-6-2007 by Ord. No. 07-01]
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels
or the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure or of any mine,
excavation or landfill and any use or change in the use of any building or
other structure or of land or extension of use of land, for which permission
may be required pursuant to this chapter.
DIRECTORY SIGN — Any sign that contains listings of two or more
commercial establishments that share a common entrance.[Added
10-4-2011 by Ord. No. 11-17]
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by
drains, grading or other means, including control of runoff to minimize
erosion and sedimentation during and after construction or development
and means necessary for water supply preservation or prevention or
alleviation of flooding.
DRAINAGEWAY — The lands required for the installation of stormwater
sewers or drainage ditches or required along a natural stream or
watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the flow of water
therein to safeguard the public against flood damage.194
DUPLEX — A building containing two single-family dwelling units totally
separated from each other by an unpierced wall extending from basement
to roof.[Added 2-6-2007 by Ord. No. 07-01]
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building designed or occupied as three or
more dwelling units for three or more families living independently of each
other.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — A detached building designed or occupied as a
dwelling unit for one family.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A detached building designed or occupied as
two dwelling units for two families living independently of each other.
DWELLING UNIT — A structure or portion thereof that is used exclusively
for human habitation.[Amended 9-4-2018 by Ord. No. 18-09]
194. Editor's Note: The former definition of "drive-in restaurant," added 5-13-1997 by Ord. No.
97-8, was repealed 10-8-2002 by Ord. No. 02-12.
§ 310-4 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-4
288:457
ELDERLY FAMILIES — The head of which either spouse is 62 years of age
or over.
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION — The Environmental Commission of the
Borough of Hillsdale created pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance, by public utilities or by governmental agencies, of
underground or overhead gas, electric, electronic, steam, water or sewage
transmission or distribution systems, including buildings, poles, wires,
antennas, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes,
police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and other similar equipment
and accessories in connection therewith, reasonably necessary for the
furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or municipal or
other governmental agencies or for the public health or safety or general
welfare.[Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
EXPANSION — Construction on an existing structure that results in new
floor area where none previously existed.[Added 4-13-2004 by Ord. No.
04-10; amended 9-13-2005 by Ord. No. 05-14]
FAMILY — A group of individuals, not necessarily related by blood,
marriage, adoption, or guardianship, living together in a dwelling unit as
a single housekeeping unit; but not including any society, club, fraternity,
sorority, association, lodge, federation, or like organization, or any group of
individuals who are in a group living arrangement as a result of criminal
offences.[Amended 12-14-1993 by Ord. No. 93-22; amended 9-4-2018
by Ord. No. 18-09]
FENCE SIGN — Any sign attached to a picket or board fence that has
received prior and separate approval from the Planning Board.[Added
10-4-2011 by Ord. No. 11-17]
FINAL APPROVAL — The official action of the Planning Board taken on
a major subdivision after preliminary approval or on a site plan after all
conditions, engineering plans and other requirements having been
completed or fulfilled and the required improvements have been installed
or guaranties properly posted for their completion or approval conditioned
upon the posting of such guaranties.
FINAL PLAT — The final map of all or a portion of the subdivision which
is presented to the Planning Board for final approval in accordance with
these regulations and meeting the requirements of § 310-92 and which, if
approved, shall have been filed with the proper county recording officer.
FLAG — Any fabric or bunting used as a symbol of government, political
subdivision, corporation or business or other entity.[Added 3-8-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-06]
FLAG SIGN — Any sign that is constructed of fabric. A flag sign shall
not include a national, state or local flag.[Added 10-4-2011 by Ord. No.
11-17]
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — The sum of the area of all floors of existing
or new buildings or structures, compared to the total area of the property
§ 310-4 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-4
288:458
on which the structures are located, expressed as a percentage. The
computation of floor area ratio includes the principal and all accessory
structures and buildings, such as sheds and garages located on the lot.
Habitable attic space as defined in this § 310-4 is included in the FAR
calculation. Basements, cellars, and uncovered decks and patios are not
included in the computation. Roofed and/or covered decks and patios are
considered buildings and included in the FAR calculations. FAR
computations shall be taken from the exterior face of outside walls, pillars
and/or columns and include the wall thickness.[Added 4-13-2004 by Ord.
No. 04-10; amended 9-13-2005 by Ord. No. 05-14; 7-13-2010 by Ord.
No. 10-08
FRONT ENTRANCE — The primary public entrance.[Added 10-4-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-17]
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A building or space accessory to a residence designed
or used for the storage of motor vehicles and in which no occupation,
business or service is conducted for profit.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — A building or part thereof, other than a private garage,
used for the storage, care or repair of motor vehicles for profit, including
any sale of motor vehicles, fuels or accessories or the keeping of such
vehicles for hire.
GRADE, FINISHED — The completed surfaces of lawns, landscaped areas,
driveways, walks and roads.
GROSS FLOOR AREA TOTAL — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of
every floor of a building, measured from the inside face of exterior walls or
from the center line of party or common walls, including:
GROUP HOME -- — No zoning ordinance shall, by any of its provisions or
by any regulation adopted in accordance therewith, discriminate between
children who are members of families by reason of their relationship by
blood, marriage or adoption, and resource family children placed with
such families in a dwelling by the Division of Youth and Family Services
in the Department of Children and Families or a duly incorporated child
care agency and children placed pursuant to law in single family dwellings
A. Basement space.
Attic space, whether or not a floor has been laid, over which there is
structural headroom of 7 1/2 feet or more.
B.
Floor space used for mechanical equipment, with structural headroom
of 7 1/2 feet or more.
C.
D. Elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor.
Roofed porches, breezeways, interior balconies and mezzanines and
penthouses.195
E.
195. Editor's Note: The former definition of "home professional office," which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 7-14-1998 by Ord. No. 98-11. See now the definition
of "residential professional office."
§ 310-4 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-4
288:459
known as group homes. As used in this section, the term "group home"
means and includes any single family dwelling used in the placement of
children pursuant to law recognized as a group home by the Department
of Children and Families in accordance with rules and regulations adopted
by the Commissioner of Children and Families provided, however, that no
group home shall contain more than 12 children.[Added 9-4-2018 by Ord.
No. 18-09]
HABITABLE ATTIC SPACE — An attic that has a stairway as a means of
access and egress and in which the ceiling area at a height of seven feet
above the attic floor is not more than 1/3 of the new floor below. Habitable
attic space is served by a heating system and includes attic space used
for living, sleeping, eating or cooking, as well as bathrooms and toilet
rooms. Unheated storage and utility spaces are not considered habitable
attic space.[Added 9-13-2005 by Ord. No. 05-14]
HOUSING UNIT — A room or group of rooms used by one or more
individuals living separately from others in the structure, with direct access
to the outside or to a public hall and containing separate bedroom,
bathroom and kitchen facilities.[Added 9-4-2018 by Ord. No. 18-09]
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — Impervious coverage shall include all of the
square footage under the definition of "building coverage," plus driveways,
decks that do not allow rain water to be directly absorbed by the ground,
patios, sidewalks, walkways, decking surrounding swimming pools, tennis
courts, basketball courts or other similar facilities constructed with an
impervious surface. Surfaces such as brick pavers, laid stones, slate or
timber with open joints shall all constitute 50% of impervious surface
coverage. Surfaces such as gravel, loose stones and special paver stones
with voids for grass shall constitute 25% impervious surface
coverage.[Added 4-13-2004 by Ord. No. 04-10; amended 9-13-2005 by
Ord. No. 05-14]
INTERESTED PARTY — In a criminal or quasi-criminal proceeding, any
citizen of the State of New Jersey; and in an administrative proceeding
before a municipal agency, any person, whether residing within or without
the municipality, whose right to use, acquire or enjoy property is or may
be affected by any action taken under this chapter or whose rights to use,
acquire or enjoy property under this chapter or under any law of this state
or of the United States have been denied, violated or infringed by an action
or a failure to act hereunder.
LAND USE OFFICER — The person or persons having the duty of
administering and enforcing the provisions of this chapter.
LIGHTING and ILLUMINATION[Added 10-4-2011 by Ord. No. 11-17;
amended 3-8-2016 by Ord. No. 16-06] —
A. Temporary signs shall not be illuminated.
Any permanent sign permitted by the provisions of this section may be
illuminated subject to the following limitations:
B.
§ 310-4 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-4
288:460
LINTEL — A horizontal architectural member supporting the weight above
an opening such as a window or a door.[Added 10-4-2011 by Ord. No.
11-17]
LOADING SPACE — Any off-street space available for the loading or
unloading of goods and having direct usable access to a street.
LOGO — Any symbol, shape, graphic or picture that a company uses to
represent itself as a branding tool.[Added 3-8-2016 by Ord. No. 16-06]
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
LOT AREA — The area of a lot expressed in square feet or acres. Any portion
of a lot included in a street shall not be included in calculating "lot area."
However, any portion of a lot dedicated to the Borough for other public use
shall not be deducted from the calculation of the "lot area."
LOT TYPES —
LOT DEPTH — The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines.
LOT FRONTAGE — The portion of the lot abutting the front lot line. In the
case of corner lots, the portion of the lot abutting the shorter of the two
street lines shall be considered as the frontage. If two street frontages of
a corner lot are the same length, the owner may, in the application for the
building permit, elect which street shall be the front lot line of the lot.
Flashing signs, highly reflective glass or fluorescent paint and
illuminated tubing outlining roofs, doors, windows or wall edges of
a building are prohibited.
(1)
(2) No action or moving illumination shall be permitted.
No illumination is permitted which may cause confusion or
interference with traffic control signs or lights of emergency
vehicles.
(3)
Internal illumination may be permitted provided it is shielded on all
sides and back creating forward illumination only.
(4)
(5) LED illumination is prohibited, except for "Open" signs.
CORNER- A lot located at the junction of two or more intersecting
streets or a lot located on one curved street if the curve constituting
the front lot line shall be a convex curve having a change of direction of
more than 45º.
A.
B. INTERIOR- A lot other than a corner lot, with only one front lot line.
THROUGH- A lot other than a corner lot with more than one front lot
line.
C.
§ 310-4 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-4
288:461
LOT LINE, FRONT — The line of a street on which a lot fronts or abuts the
street line.
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line (other than in the case of a through lot)
which is the farthest lot line from the street. In the case of a through lot or
where there is any question, the Land Use Officer shall designate the rear
lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE — The lot boundary line that connects a front lot line with
a rear lot line, including a lot line of an offset portion of a lot.
LOT WIDTH — The mean distance between the side lot lines.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY — Any security which may be accepted by
the Borough for the maintenance of any improvements required by this
chapter.[Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision.
MANSARD ROOF — A sloped roof around the perimeter of a building that
approaches the vertical.[Added 10-4-2011 by Ord. No. 11-17]
MASTER PLAN — A composite of mapped and written proposals
recommending the physical development of the Borough which shall have
been duly adopted by the Planning Board.
MINOR SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots which:
MINOR SUBDIVISION — A subdivision of land that does not involve:
MIXED USE — A lot or structure containing more than one principal zoning
use.[Added 6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 18-12]
Proposes new development consisting of an addition, alteration or
expansion of an existing structure involving nonresidential use of less
than 2,000 square feet of gross building area requiring less than a total
of 25 off-street parking spaces and meeting all of the requirements of
Part 4, Zoning, as amended;
A.
Does not involve planned development, any new street or extension of
any off-tract improvement which is to be prorated pursuant to Part 5 of
this chapter; or
B.
Involves a change of use to a permitted use in the zoning district
in which located and involving less than 5,000 square feet of gross
building area and involving less than a total of 25 off-street parking
spaces shall be deemed a minor site plan when the provisions of this
chapter require site plan approval for such use or premises.
C.
A. The creation of more than three lots;
B. A planned development;
C. Any new street; or
D. The extension of any off-tract improvement, pursuant to § 310-94.
§ 310-4 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-4
288:462
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION —
A building and premises designed or used primarily for the sale at retail
of gasoline, oil, grease, tires, batteries and accessories, together with
the furnishing of some or all of the following services and no others:
Sale and servicing of spark plugs, batteries and distributors and
distributor parts.
(1)
(2) Tire servicing and repair, but not recapping or regrooving
Replacement of mufflers and tail pipes, water hose, fan belts, brake
fluid, light bulbs, fuses, floor mats, seat covers, windshield wipers
and wiper blades, grease retainers, wheel bearings, mirrors and
the like.
(3)
Radiator cleaning and flushing and heater and air-conditioning
service.
(4)
Washing, polishing (but not as a primary service as in the case of
an auto laundry or car wash) and sale of automotive washing and
polishing materials.
(5)
(6) Greasing and lubrication.
(7) Providing and repairing fuel pumps, oil pumps and lines.
(8) Minor servicing and repair of carburetors.
(9) Emergency wiring repairs.
(10)Adjusting and repairing brakes.
Minor motor adjustments not involving removal of the head or
crankcase or racing the motor.
(11)
Sales of cold drinks, packaged foods, tobacco and similar
convenience goods for service filling station customers, as
accessory and incidental to principal operation.
(12)
Provision of road maps and other informational material to
customers; provision of rest room facilities to be installed and
maintained in accordance with Board of Health regulations.
(13)
A.
The term shall not include any premises at which there may be
performed any major mechanical and body work, straightening of body
parts, painting, welding, storage of automobiles not in operating
condition, renting of automobiles, trucks or trailers or work involving
noise, glare, fumes, smoke or other characteristics to an extent greater
than normally found in service filling stations, such as a repair garage
or a body shop.
B.
§ 310-4 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-4
288:463
MULTI-FAMILY HOUSING — A building containing three or more dwelling
units that share common horizontal and/or vertical separations.[Added
6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 18-12]
MUNICIPAL AGENCY — The Planning Board or the Borough Council,
whenever either of them shall be acting pursuant to this chapter.[Amended
5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot the area, dimension or location of which
does not conform with the regulations of this chapter for the district in
which it is located, but that was lawfully in existence before the effective
date of this chapter or that exists by virtue of a duly granted variance.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE OR USE — Any structure or use that does
not conform with the regulations of this chapter lawfully in existence before
the effective date of this chapter or that exists by virtue of a duly granted
variance.
NURSING, REST, CONVALESCENT HOME — A home for the aged,
chronically ill or incurable person where persons are housed or lodged and
furnished with board and nursing care for compensation.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted in accordance with Article 5 of the
Municipal Land Use Law.196
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — A sign that advertises or announces a use
conducted or goods available elsewhere than the lot or building where the
sign is located.[Added 10-4-2011 by Ord. No. 11-17]
OFF-SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but within
the property which is the subject of a development application or on a
contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
OFF-TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of a
development application nor on a contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
ON-PREMISES SIGN — A sign that advertises or announces a person
occupying the premises, a use conducted or goods available on the lot or
in the building where the sign is located.[Added 10-4-2011 by Ord. No.
11-17]
ON-SITE — Located on the lot in question.
ON-TRACT — Located on the property which is the subject of a development
application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
OWNER — Any person having sufficient proprietary interest in the land
sought to be developed to commence and maintain proceedings to develop
the same under this chapter. Such interest shall include an option or
contract to purchase or lease the land.
PARKING SPACE — A space for the parking of a motor vehicle within
a public or private parking area provided that such space shall have a
196. Editor's Note: See 40:55D-32 through 40:55D-36.
§ 310-4 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-4
288:464
minimum width of 9 feet and a minimum depth of 18 feet, exclusive of
maneuvering areas, passageways, driveways and loading spaces
appurtenant thereto.[Amended 9-4-2018 by Ord. No. 18-09]
PARTY IMMEDIATELY CONCERNED — Any applicant for development, the
owners of the subject property and all owners of property and government
agencies entitled to notice under this chapter.
PATIO — A level, landscaped, and/or surface area located at grade level that
is not covered by a roof.[Added 7-13-2010 by Ord. No. 10-08]
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Any security which may be accepted by the
Borough, including cash; provided that the Borough shall not require more
than 10% of the total performance guaranty in cash.
PERMIT, BUILDING — A certificate issued pursuant to Chapter 124,
Construction Codes, Uniform, for the construction, reconstruction,
remodeling, alteration or repair of a structure in accordance with plans and
specifications accompanying the application for the permit.
PERMIT, CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY — A certificate issued
by the Land Use Officer upon the proper completion of the work for which
a building permit has been issued or upon a change in the nature of the
occupancy or use of a building or land, which certifies that all requirements
of this chapter or such variance therefrom as has been granted by the
Planning Board have been met and that the purpose for which the structure
or land is to be used is in conformance with the uses permitted and all
other requirements under this chapter for the zone in which it is
located.[Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED — Person confined to a wheelchair or persons
deemed disabled under rules and regulations promulgated by the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development.197
PLAT — The map or maps of a subdivision or site plan.
PLYWOOD — Permitted plywoods for sign construction when edge banded
includes APA medium-density overlay ("MDO") (plywood manufactured with
a smooth, opaque, resin-treated fiber overlay providing an ideal base for
paint on one or both sides); or APA marine plywood.[Added 10-4-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-17]
PORTABLE SIGN — A freestanding sign not permanently affixed, anchored
or secured to the ground or a structure on the lot it occupies or any sign
mounted on wheels, excluding signs affixed to or painted on a vehicle whose
primary purpose is other than to be a sign. Includes sandwich boards and
blackboards.[Added 10-4-2011 by Ord. No. 11-17]
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — Rights conferred pursuant to this chapter
prior to final approval after specific elements of a development plan have
been agreed upon by the Planning Board and applicant.
197. Editor's Note: The original definition of "Planning Board," which immediately followed
this definition, was deleted 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8.
§ 310-4 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-4
288:465
PRELIMINARY PLAT — The preliminary map indicating the proposed layout
of the subdivision which is submitted to the Secretary of the Planning Board
for its consideration and tentative approval and meeting the requirements
of § 310-89 of this chapter.
PRIMARY USE — A principal use permitted in the district.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A building used for a primary use.
PROJECTING SIGN — A projecting sign is supported by a building wall
and projects perpendicularly from the wall.[Added 10-4-2011 by Ord. No.
11-17]
PUBLIC AREAS — Publicly owned or controlled lands, including:
PUBLIC ENTRANCE — The ingress and egress location into a commercial
or business establishment commonly used by the public.[Added 10-4-2011
by Ord. No. 11-17]
PUBLIC UTILITY — As herein used, this term shall have the meaning set
forth in N.J.S.A. 48:2-13.
QUORUM — The majority of the full authorized membership of the Planning
Board or the Borough Council, as provided by law.198[Amended 5-13-1997
by Ord. No. 97-8]
RESTAURANT — Any establishment, however designated, at which food
is sold for consumption within the principal structure, but not including a
snack bar or refreshment stand accessory to a public area if such bar or
stand is operated by or with the approval of the agency having control of the
public area and is primarily for the convenience of persons lawfully within
the public area.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN — An establishment where patrons are served
food, soft drinks, ice cream and similar confections primarily for
consumption on the premises but other than within the principal structure.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-THROUGH — A restaurant from which patrons may
purchase food and beverages ready for consumption received via a motor
vehicle drive-through window located in the principal structure or
accessory structure. Consumption of the food and beverages is designed
to occur outside the confines of the property on which the restaurant is
located.[Added 10-8-2002 by Ord. No. 02-12199]
A. Playgrounds, parks, trails, paths and other recreational areas.
B. Parking lots and other public open spaces.
C. Scenic and historic sites,
D. Sites for schools and other public buildings and structures.
198. Editor's Note: The former definition of "residential professional office," added 7-14-1998
by Ord. No. 98-11, which immediately followed this definition, was repealed 8-13-2002 by
Ord. No. 02-09.
199. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that drive-through restaurants are a
prohibited use in all zone districts in the Borough of Hillsdale.
§ 310-4 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-4
288:466
RETAINING WALL — A structure separating varying ground levels.
SATELLITE ANTENNA — Any apparatus which is designed for the purpose
of receiving and transmitting television, radio, microwave, satellite or
similar signals, with the exception of conventional television antennas.
SCHOOL, COMMERCIAL OR BUSINESS — A training institution operated
on a profit or nonprofit basis offering instruction in stenographic,
secretarial, accounting, data processing and related skills associated with
the conduct of a commercial business or administrative office.
SCHOOL, TRADE OR VOCATIONAL — A training institution operated on
a profit or nonprofit basis offering instruction and/or experience training
to students, journeymen, apprentices or comparable categories of persons
in the operation of industrial, construction or electronics machinery or
equipment, construction, trades or similar skills.
SENIOR CITIZEN HOUSING — Any new rental structure developed,
erected and operated by a nonprofit corporation of the State of New Jersey,
under the Senior Citizen Housing Loan Program, authorized by Section
202 of the Federal Housing Act of 1959 (or any comparable federal, state
or county program), for the purpose of providing nonprofit rental housing
for low- and moderate-income elderly or physically handicapped persons,
including equipment, facilities or other real or personal property which is a
necessary, convenient or desirable appurtenant thereto.
SETBACK, FRONT — The distance in feet from the street line to the nearest
portion of the principal building.
SETBACK, REAR — The distance in feet from the rear lot line to the nearest
portion of the principal building.
SETBACK, SIDE — The distance in feet from the side lot line to the nearest
portion of the principal building.
SIGN — Any object, device, display or structure, or part thereof, situated
outdoors or indoors, permanent or temporary in nature, which is used to
advertise, identify, display, direct or attract attention to an object, person,
institution, organization, business, product, service, event or location by any
means, including words, letters, figures, design, symbols, logos, fixtures,
colors, illumination or projected images.[Amended 10-4-2011 by Ord.
No. 11-17; 3-8-2016 by Ord. No. 16-06]
SIGN AREA — The entire space within a single continuous perimeter
enclosing the extreme limits of a sign or where a sign consists of individual
letters or logos, the space bounded by the maximum horizontal and vertical
dimensions of the lettering/logo. For double-sided identical signs, only one
side constitutes total sign area. See example to the right:[Amended
10-4-2011 by Ord. No. 11-17; 3-8-2016 by Ord. No. 16-06]
§ 310-4 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-4
288:467
SIGN, AWNING — A sign that is painted, screened or applied onto an
awning.[Added 3-8-2016 by Ord. No. 16-06]
SIGN, BANNER — A temporary sign applied to paper, flexible plastic or
fabric of any kind.[Added 3-8-2016 by Ord. No. 16-06]
SIGN, BILLBOARD — A sign which directs attention to and/or provides
advertising for a business, commodity, service or entertainment which is
conducted, sold or offered at a location other than the premises on which
the sign is located. A billboard may also direct attention to and provide
information regarding noncommercial and/or nonprofit organizations or
messages where the noncommercial and/or nonprofit organization is not
located on the premises on which the sign is located.[Added 3-8-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-06]
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL — On-site signage that provides direction or
information to pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic that is related to the
movement of pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic on the premises (e.g.,
"entrance", "exit", "no parking", "one-way" and the like).[Added 3-8-2016
by Ord. No. 16-06]
SIGN, DIRECTORY — Any sign that contains listings of two or more
commercial establishments that share a common entrance.[Added
3-8-2016 by Ord. No. 16-06]
SIGN, FEATHER FLAG — A freestanding sign that is comprised of a pole
and flag that is typically taller than wider. The sign is lightweight and
portable. An example of the variations of feather flags is shown
below.[Added 3-8-2016 by Ord. No. 16-06]
SIGN, FENCE — Any sign attached to a chain link, picket or board
fence.[Added 3-8-2016 by Ord. No. 16-06]
§ 310-4 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-4
288:468
SIGN, FREESTANDING — A nonmovable sign not affixed to a building or
structure. Freestanding signs can be mounted directly to the ground, where
the entire bottom is in contact or close to the ground (monument sign), or
can be mounted to a pole or poles.[Added 3-8-2016 by Ord. No. 16-06]
SIGN, INCIDENTAL — A sign not exceeding one square foot attached to a
building, wall or door that provides information (e.g., "Employee Entrance",
"Receiving", etc.). Incidental signs may be externally illuminated with
downward focused light sources.[Added 3-8-2016 by Ord. No. 16-06]
SIGN, MENU BOX — A weather-tight box used to display menus, which is
mounted to the building facade and projects no more than three inches from
the building facade. See the example to the right.[Added 3-8-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-06]
SIGN, OFF-PREMISES — A sign that advertises or announces a use
conducted or goods available elsewhere than the lot or building where the
sign is located.[Added 3-8-2016 by Ord. No. 16-06]
SIGN, ON-PREMISES — A sign that advertises or announces a person
occupying the premises, a use conducted or goods available on the lot or
in the building where the sign is located.[Added 3-8-2016 by Ord. No.
16-06]
SIGN, OPEN — A sign not exceeding two square feet, attached to a door
or window, which states "Open". Said sign may be illuminated. These signs
shall be counted when calculating the maximum permitted area for window
signs.[Added 3-8-2016 by Ord. No. 16-06]
SIGN, POLITICAL — A temporary sign announcing or supporting political
candidates or issues in connection with any national, state or local
election.[Added 3-8-2016 by Ord. No. 16-06]
SIGN, PORTABLE — A freestanding sign not permanently affixed, anchored
or secured to the ground or a structure on the lot it occupies or any sign
mounted on wheels, excluding signs affixed to or painted on a vehicle.
Includes sandwich boards and blackboards.[Added 3-8-2016 by Ord. No.
16-06]
SIGN, PROJECTING — A sign that is wholly or partly supported by a
building wall and projects perpendicularly 12 or more inches from the
§ 310-4 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-4
288:469
building wall. Examples of projecting signs are shown below:[Added
3-8-2016 by Ord. No. 16-06]
SIGN, STREET ADDRESS — Any sign denoting the street address of the
premises on which it is attached or located.[Added 3-8-2016 by Ord. No.
16-06]
SIGN, TEMPORARY — A sign or advertising display that is not permanently
mounted and is constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric, plywood or other light
material and designed or intended to be displayed for a short period of time.
Temporary signs shall not be illuminated.[Added 10-4-2011 by Ord. No.
11-17]
SIGN, VEHICLE — A sign or signs where the total sign area covers more
than 10 square feet of the vehicle.[Added 3-8-2016 by Ord. No. 16-06]
SIGN, VENDING MACHINE — Any sign displayed on all or part of a vending
machine.[Added 3-8-2016 by Ord. No. 16-06]
SIGN, WALL — All flat signs of solid-face construction and/or individual
letters which are placed against a building or other structure and attached
to the exterior front, rear or side wall of any building or other structure, so
that the display surface is parallel with the plane of the wall. Signs painted
on an exterior wall shall be deemed to be wall signs subject to all applicable
requirements.[Added 3-8-2016 by Ord. No. 16-06]
§ 310-4 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-4
288:470
SIGN, WINDOW — A window sign is any sign temporarily or permanently
affixed to the glass of a window or door of a business or that is visible
through a window or door and placed on a permanent basis within two feet
of the glass.[Added 3-8-2016 by Ord. No. 16-06]
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which are shown:
STORY — A story is that part of a building between the surface of any floor
and the next floor above it, or, in its absence, then the finished ceiling or
roof above it. A split-level story shall be considered a second story if its floor
level is six feet or more above the level of the line of the finished floor (other
than a cellar floor) next below it. If a sloping roof has a ridge pole which is
seven feet or more above the plane of a top plate and if the topmost floor is
two feet or more below the plane of the top plate, then the space enclosed
shall be considered a "story," but if the said floor is less than two feet below
the top plate, the space shall be considered a half-story.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct,
alley or other way:
The existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but not
necessarily limited to topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains,
marshes and waterways;
A.
The location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives, parking
spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities,
utility services, landscaping, structures and signs, lighting, screening
devices; and
B.
Any other information that may be reasonably required in order to
make an informed determination pursuant to review and approval
powers exercised by the Planning Board or the Borough Council under
this chapter. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
C.
A. Which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway;
B. Which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law;
C. Which is approved by official action; or
Which is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the
County Recording Officer prior to the appointment of a Planning Board
and the grant to such Board of the power to review plats and includes
the land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved,
and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, parking
areas and other areas within the street lines. For the purpose of this
chapter, "streets" shall be classified as follows:
ARTERIAL STREETS Those which are used primarily for fast and
heavy traffic.
(1)
COLLECTOR STREETS Those which carry traffic from minor street
to the major system of arterial streets, including the principal
(2)
D.
§ 310-4 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-4
288:471
STREET LINE — The dividing line between a lot and a street; the front lot
line.
STRUCTURE — An assembly of materials forming a construction for
occupancy or use, including (among others and without intending to limit
the generality of the foregoing) buildings, stadiums, meeting or circus
tents, reviewing stands, platforms, stagings, observation towers, radio and
television towers and antennas, water tanks, trestles, piers, wharves, open
sheds, coal bins, shelters, fences, nonportable flagpoles, swimming pools
and signs.
SUBDIVIDER — Any applicant for approval of a subdivision of land pursuant
to this chapter.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or
more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development.
The following shall not be considered subdivisions within the meaning of
this chapter, if no new streets are created;
entrance streets of a residential development and streets for
circulation within such a development.
MINOR STREETS Those which are used primarily for access to the
abutting properties.
(3)
MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS Streets which are generally parallel
with and adjacent to arterial streets and highways and which
provide access to abutting properties and protection from through
traffic.
(4)
ALLEYS Minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular service
access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a
street.
(5)
Divisions of land found by the Planning Board or subdivision committee
thereof to be for agricultural purposes where all resulting parcels are
five acres or larger in size. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
A.
B. Divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions.
Divisions of property upon court order, including but not limited to
judgments of foreclosure.
C.
D. Consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded instrument.
The conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels of
land, owned by the same person or persons and all of which are
found and certified by the administrative officer to conform to the
requirements of the municipal development regulations and are shown
and designated as separate lots, tracts or parcels on the tax map or
atlas of the municipality. The term "subdivision" shall also include the
term "resubdivision."
E.
§ 310-4 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-4
288:472
SUBDIVISION APPLICATION — The application for approval of a
subdivision pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law (P.L. 1975, c. 291;
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.) or an application for approval of a planned unit
development pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law (P.L. 1975, c. 291;
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.).
SUBSTANTIALLY DAMAGED OR DESTROYED — As it pertains to a
nonconforming sign: 50% or more of the upright supports of a sign
structure are physically damaged such that normal repair practices of the
sign industry would call for, in the case of wooden structures, replacement
of the broken supports and, in the case of a metal sign structure,
replacement of at least 25% of the length above ground of each broken, bent
or twisted support; or more than 50% of the area of a projecting or wall sign
is physically damaged such that normal repair practices of the sign industry
would call for the same to be replaced or repaired.[Added 3-8-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-06]
SWIMMING POOL — A body of water artificially constructed in whole or
in part, having a depth at any point of more than 18 inches, whether
above, below or level with the ground or area surrounding it, and designed,
established, constructed, maintained or used as an accessory use to a
residence for the private swimming, bathing or wading purposes of a
person, the members of his or her household or their guests.
SYMBOL SIGN — A symbol sign is a three-dimensional representation of
a product or service that a business sells.[Added 10-4-2011 by Ord. No.
11-17]
TEMPORARY STORAGE CONTAINER — Any device, container, enclosure or
structure, either wheeled trailers or containers carried on motor vehicles or
trailers, commonly used to store home furnishings and other personal items
on a temporary basis during a time of home repair, construction, renovation
or relocation. Temporary storage containers do not include self-propelled
registered motor vehicles and shall not be used for habitation for humans or
animals, or for the storage of commercial/industrial materials. Containers
are only permitted on a lot containing a lawfully existing residential
dwelling.[Added 10-7-2008 by Ord. No. 08-13]
TRACT — Any areas, parcel, site, piece of land, or property that is the
subject of a development application.[Added 2-6-2007 by Ord. No.
07-01]
TRANSCRIPT — A typed or printed verbatim record of the proceedings and
reproduction thereof.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING -- — A single building containing two dwelling
units.[Added 9-4-2018 by Ord. No. 18-09]
USE — The purpose for which land or building is arranged, designed or
intended and for which either land or a building is or may be occupied or
maintained.[Added 10-4-2011 by Ord. No. 11-17]
VENDING MACHINE SIGN — Any sign displayed on all or part of a vending
machine.[Added 10-4-2011 by Ord. No. 11-17]
§ 310-4 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-4
288:473
WALL SIGNS — All flat signs of solid-face construction and/or individual
letters which are placed against a building or other structure and attached
to the exterior front, rear or side wall of any building or other structure, so
that the display surface is parallel with the plane of the wall. Signs painted
on an exterior wall shall be deemed to be wall signs subject to all applicable
requirements.[Added 10-4-2011 by Ord. No. 11-17]
WINDOW SIGN — A window sign is any sign temporarily or permanently
affixed to the glass of a window or door of a business or that is visible
through a window or door and placed on a permanent basis within two feet
of the glass. For the purposes of this definition, "permanent basis" shall be
defined as any time longer than 15 days.[Added 10-4-2011 by Ord. No.
11-17]
YARD, FRONT — An open unoccupied space on the same lot as the principal
building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the street
line and the front building line.
YARD, REAR — An open space on the same lot as the principal building,
extending the full width of the lot and situated between the rear lot line and
the rear building line.
YARD, SIDE — An open space between the side line of the lot and the side
building line, extending from the front yard or the rear yard.
ZONING PERMIT — A document signed by the Land Use Officer that:
§ 310-5. Terminology.
Whenever in the administration of this chapter it shall be necessary or
desirable to define a term that has not hereinbefore been defined, reference
shall be made to the definition (if any) of such term in:
Is required as a condition precedent to the proposed development of a
parcel of land; and
A.
Certifies that such proposed development complies with the provisions
of Part 4 of this chapter.
B.
A. The Municipal Land Use Law;
B. The State Uniform Construction Code Act and the regulations
promulgated pursuant thereto;
C. Chapter 27 of Title 40 of the Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey
entitled "County Planning;"
D. Chapter 16A of Title 58 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey entitled
"Flood Control" and the regulations issued pursuant thereto;
E. The Code of the Borough of Hillsdale; and
F. The State of New Jersey Revised Statutes, Cumulative Supplement and
New Jersey Statutes.
§ 310-4 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-5
288:474
Part 2
Boards
ARTICLE II
Planning Board
§ 310-6. Board established; classes.
There is hereby established a Planning Board of nine members consisting of
the following four classes:
§ 310-7. Terms.
A. Class I. The Mayor.
B. Class II. One of the officials of the municipality other than a member of
the governing body to be appointed by the Mayor. [Amended
5-13-1997by Ord. No. 97-8]
C. Class III. A member of the Borough Council to be appointed by it.
D. Class IV. Six other citizens of the municipality to be appointed by the
Mayor. The members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal office,
except that one may be a member of the Board of Education. A member
of the Environmental Commission who is also a member of the Planning
Board as required by law shall be a Class IV member. [Amended
5-13-1997by Ord. No. 97-8]
A. The term of the Class I member shall correspond with his or her official
tenure.
B. The terms of Class II and Class III members shall be for one year or
shall terminate at the completion of their respective terms of office,
whichever occurs first, except for a Class II member who is also a
member of the Environmental Commission.
C. The term of a Class II or a Class IV member who is also a member of the
Environmental Commission shall be for three years or shall terminate
at the completion of his or her term of office as a member of the
Environmental Commission, whichever occurs first.
D. The term of a Class IV member who is also a member of the Board of
Education shall terminate whenever he or she is no longer a member of
such other body or at the completion of his or her Class IV term,
whichever occurs first.200 [Amended 5-13-1997by Ord. No. 97-8]
E. The term of the first Class IV member shall be for four years.
[Amended 5-13-1997by Ord. No. 97-8]
200. Original Subsection (e), which immediately followed this subsection, was deleted
5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8.
§ 310-6 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-7
288:475
§ 310-8. Vacancies.
Vacancies occurrence otherwise than by expiration of term, in any class,
shall be filled for the unexpired term only. Such appointments shall be made
in the same manner as full term appointments are made.
§ 310-9. Organization of Board.
The Planning Board shall elect a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from the
members of Class IV and select a Secretary, who may be either a member of
the Planning Board or a municipal employee designated by it.
§ 310-10. Planning Board Attorney.
There is hereby created the office of Planning Board Attorney. The Planning
Board may annually appoint, fix the compensation of or agree upon the rate
F. All terms shall commence on January 1 of the year in which the
appointment is made.
G. Alternate members.
(1) The Mayor shall appoint two alternate members of the Planning
Board who shall meet the qualifications of Class IV members.
Alternate members shall be designated at the time of appointment
by the Mayor as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." The terms
of the alternate members shall be for two years, except that the
terms of the alternate members shall be such that the term of not
more than one alternate member shall expire in any one year;
provided, however, that in no instance shall the terms of the
alternate members first appointed exceed two years. [Amended
5-13-1997by Ord. No. 97-8]
(2) No alternate member shall be permitted to act on any matter in
which he or she has either directly or indirectly any personal or
financial interest. An alternate member may, after public hearing if
he or she requests one, be removed by the governing body for
cause.
(3) Alternate members may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member of any class. A vote shall not
be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an
alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to
which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
(4) Alternate members shall be required to meet the certification
standards of § 310-31E. In all matters before the Board, the
alternate members, when qualified to vote in the place of a regular
member, shall be required to meet the same standards as a regular
member of the Board.
§ 310-7 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-10
288:476
of compensation of the Planning Board Attorney, who shall be an attorney
other than the Municipal Attorney.
§ 310-11. Experts and staff.
The Planning Board may also employ or contract for and fix the
compensation of such experts and other staff and services as it may deem
necessary. The Board shall not authorize expenditures that exceed,
exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the governing body
for its use.
§ 310-12. Powers and duties. [Amended 2-13-1980 by Ord. No. 80-1;
11-12-1996 by Ord. No. 96-12201]
§ 310-13. Rules and regulations.
The Board shall adopt bylaws governing procedures, together with such
rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter as may be necessary
to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this chapter.203
A. The Planning Board shall have all of the powers and duties listed and
enumerated in the Municipal Land Use Law.202
B. In addition, upon the request of the Mayor and Council, the Planning
Board shall make written recommendation on any matter which is
referred to it for consideration.
C. In addition, the Planning Board shall exercise, to the same extent and
subject to the same restrictions, all the powers and duties of a Board of
Adjustment listed and enumerated in the Municipal Land Use Law;
provided, however, that the Class I and the Class III members shall not
participate in the consideration of applications for development which
involve relief pursuant to Subsection d of Section 57 of P.L. 1975, c. 291
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d).
201. Editor's Note: Section 5 of this ordinance also provided as follows: "This ordinance shall
take effect immediately upon final passage and publication as required by law and upon
filing with the Planning Board of the County of Bergen; provided, however, that with
respect to any application for development or other application which has been filed with
the Board of Adjustment prior to the effective date of this ordinance and for which public
notice of a hearing before the Board of Adjustment has previously been given or for which
a hearing has already commenced, the Board of Adjustment shall retain jurisdiction of
such application and shall continue to exist with respect to such application until final
decision is rendered thereon. All applications for developments and other applications of
the Municipal Land Use Law filed on or after the effective date hereof, or any application
before the Board of Adjustment for which public notice has not been given or a hearing
held thereon prior to the effective date hereof shall be referred to the Planning Board."
202. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
203. Editor's Note: Original Chapter 2, Board of Adjustment, which immediately followed this
section, was deleted 11-12-1996 by Ord. No. 96-12. Section 5 of Ord. No. 96-12 also
provided as follows: "This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon final passage and
publication as required by law and upon filing with the Planning Board of the County of
Bergen; provided, however, that with respect to any application for development or other
application which has been filed with the Board of Adjustment prior to the effective date
of this ordinance and for which public notice of a hearing before the Board of Adjustment
has previously been given or for which a hearing has already commenced, the Board of
Adjustment shall retain jurisdiction of such application and shall continue to exist with
§ 310-10 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-13
288:477
respect to such application until final decision is rendered thereon. All applications for
developments and other applications of the Municipal Land Use Law filed on or after the
effective date hereof, or any application before the Board of Adjustment for which public
notice has not been given or a hearing held thereon prior to the effective date hereof shall
be referred to the Planning Board."
§ 310-13 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-13
288:478
ARTICLE III
Administrative Officers
§ 310-14. Administrative officers.
§ 310-15. Land Use Officer.
The Land Use Officer shall:
§ 310-16. Planning Board Secretary.
For all development applications addressed to the Planning Board, the
Planning Board Secretary shall:
A. For purposes of administration and enforcement of this chapter, the
following offices are hereby created and the persons appointed thereto
are hereby designated as Administrative Officers:
(1) The Land Use Officer.
(2) The Planning Board Secretary.204
B. Each such officer shall have the powers and duties hereinafter set forth
in this Article.
C. The Land Use Officer shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the Council, for a term of one year.
D. The Planning Board Secretary shall be appointed by the respective
Board as hereinbefore provided. [Amended 5-13-1997by Ord. No.
97-8]
E. Nothing herein shall prevent the appointment of one person to one or
more of the aforesaid offices.
A. Issue any and all zoning permits and certificates of use and occupancy
or conditional use permits required by this chapter if, as and when the
prerequisites set forth in this chapter for the issuance of such permits
and certificates have been met.
B. Enforce all provisions of this chapter.
A. Receive and file such applications.
B. Make and certify a list from the current tax duplicates of the names and
addresses of the persons to whom the applicant is required to give
notice pursuant to this chapter.
C. Keep and file the minutes and resolutions of the Planning Board.
204. Editor's Note: Original Section 2.201(c), Board of Adjustment Secretary, which
immediately followed this subsection, was deleted 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8.
§ 310-14 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-16
288:479
§ 310-17. (Reserved)205
§ 310-18. Deputies.
Whenever any of the administrative officers shall require assistance for the
performance of his or her duties or whenever he or she shall be absent
or unable to act, the municipal agency hereinbefore authorized to appoint
him or her shall have the power to designate and appoint a deputy, and
such deputy, for and during the period specified by the appointing municipal
agency, shall have all the powers, authority and duties of the administrative
officer whose deputy he or she has been named.
D. Mail decisions of the Planning Board to the persons entitled by this
chapter to receive such decisions.
E. Arrange for publication of the decisions of the Planning Board.
F. Issue a certificate as to approval of subdivision of land within 15 days
after receipt of a written application therefor containing a diagram
showing the location of the land to be covered by the certificate and the
name of the owner thereof and accompanied by the requisite fee.
G. Perform such other clerical duties as the Planning Board shall direct.
205. Editor's Note: Former § 310-17, Board of Adjustment Secretary (original Section 2.204),
was deleted 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8.
§ 310-16 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-18
288:480
Part 3
Administration And Enforcement
ARTICLE IV
Enforcement
§ 310-19. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the
Land Use Officer of the Borough or his or her designated assistant. In no
case shall a permit be granted for the construction or alteration of any
building or other structure if the proposed construction, alteration or use
thereof would be in violation of any provision in this chapter. It shall be the
duty of the Land Use Officer or his or her designated assistant to cause any
building or other structure, lands or premises to be inspected or examined
and to order, in writing, the remedying of any conditions found to exist in
violation of any provision of this chapter. He or she shall have the right in
accordance with law to enter any building or premises during reasonable
daytime hours in the course of his or her duties. It shall also be the duty
of the members of the Police, Fire, Public Works Departments, the Board of
Health and the Environmental Commission to report to the Land Use Officer
any violations they may observe.
§ 310-19 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-19
288:481

ARTICLE V
Permits and Certificates
§ 310-20. Permits and certificates.
All permits and certificates required under this chapter shall be issued by
the Land Use Officer unless the provisions of this chapter expressly direct
their issuance by another person or agency. No permit or certificate issued
pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to be in lieu of or to supersede
any permit or certificate required under Chapter 124, Construction Codes,
Uniform, or under the applicable provision of any other board, body or
agency of the federal, state, county or Borough government.
§ 310-21. Site plan approval: when required for zoning permit.
[Amended 5-13-1997by Ord. No. 97-8]
No zoning permit shall be issued for the construction of any new building,
the alteration, addition to or change in use of an existing building, a
conditional use, a use or building permitted by variance or a nonconforming
use, unless, when so required, a final site plan shall have first been
approved by the Planning Board in accordance with the terms of this
chapter.
§ 310-22. Certificate of use and occupancy.
§ 310-22.1. Residential continuing certificate of inspection. [Added
12-4-2018 by Ord. No. 18-18]
A. New uses. No building or land shall be occupied or used unless the
Land Use Officer shall have issued a certificate of use and occupancy
certifying that such building or other structure or use is in conformance
with the provisions of this chapter. A certificate of use and occupancy,
once granted, shall continue in effect so long as there is no change in
the kind or nature of such use, regardless of change in the identity of
the tenant or occupant. [Amended 4-13-1993 by Ord. No. 93-5]
B. Existing uses. Upon proper application, accompanied by the fee
prescribed in Chapter 138, Fees, from the owner, tenant, occupant or
purchaser under contract of any building or other structure or any use
thereof lawfully in existence at the time of such application, the Land
Use Officer, after inspection, shall issue a certificate of use and
occupancy for the continued use and occupancy of such building,
structure or use.
A. Purpose. There is a need to have an inspection requirement of all
residences upon sale, transfer or change of ownership, vacancy and
reoccupancy, re-rental or re-lease of one and two family dwellings.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
§ 310-20 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-22.1
288:483
CHANGE IN USE — Any change in use defined by Hillsdale Zoning
Code or New Jersey Uniform Construction Code.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL — A person who has to be appointed
by the Mayor and Council to enforce the municipal ordinances of
Hillsdale.
RESIDENTIAL CONTINUING CERTIFICATE OF INSPECTION — A
certificate issued by the Enforcement Code Official to indicate that
all the conditions outlined herein for continued residential use or
occupancy have been met.
USE — As defined by the Hillsdale Zoning Code and the New Jersey
Uniform Construction Code.
C. Residential certificate required; responsibility of owners. No person
shall occupy, rent, lease, transfer title, or inhabit as a tenant or tenants
or occupy as a new owner of any residential use unless and until the
current owner has applied for and secured a CCI from the Building
Department of the Borough of Hillsdale. The owner, landlord or agent of
all residential premises shall be responsible for notification to the
Hillsdale Building Department of pendency of any new tenancy or
ownership and for obtaining the required certificate of continued
occupancy.
D. Conditions. A Certificate of Smoke Detector and Carbon Monoxide
Alarm Compliance (CSDCMAC) and Residential Fire Extinguisher
Compliance for One and Two-Family Dwellings shall be issued by the
Hillsdale Fire Prevention Bureau before a CCI may be issued. Proper
installation and placement of all smoke detectors, carbon monoxide
alarms and fire extinguishers are required before a CCI shall be issued
as per the NJ Uniform Fire Code. An inspection shall be conducted by
the Code Enforcement Official or his designee to ensure that there are
no violations of law or orders of the Code Enforcement Official pending
and it is established after inspection and investigation of available
municipal records that the alleged use of the building and structure has
lawfully existed. The inspection shall also ensure that the sump pump, if
any, is redirected out of sanitary sources. Any construction work for
which a Uniform Construction Code permit was issued shall be
inspected and closed.
E. Application. The current owner, landlord or agent of any residential
premises, about to be sold or newly occupied, as indicated, shall apply
on forms provided by the Hillsdale Building Department for a CCI. All
information requested shall be provided to be a complete application.
Upon receipt and review of said complete application by the Code
Enforcement Official or his/her designee, shall, within 10 days, either
issue a CCI or a written report of the reason for denial.
F. Temporary continuing certificate of inspection. A temporary CCI may
be issued at the request of the current owner with money held in
escrow as established to cover any and all requested conditions for a
§ 310-22.1 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-22.1
288:484
§ 310-23. Site plan approval: when required for certificate of use
and occupancy.
Except as hereinafter expressly provided, no certificate of use and
occupancy shall be issued for any new building, for any addition or
alteration to an existing building or for any change in use of a building
unless the building and its appurtenances conform in all respects to an
approved site plan or an approved amendment to an approved site plan.
§ 310-24. Exceptions.
Notwithstanding the provisions of §§ 310-21 and 310-23, no site plan
approval shall be required prior to the issuance of a zoning permit or a
certificate of use and occupancy for any building or addition if such building
or addition is used or to be used solely as a single- or two-family dwelling or
as an accessory thereto.
§ 310-25. Records.
It shall be the duty of the Land Use Officer to keep a record of all
applications for permits and certificates of use and occupancy which he or
she countersigns, together with a notation of all special conditions involved.
He or she shall file and safely keep copies of all plans and applications
submitted. They shall form a part of the records of his or her office and shall
be available for the use of the Borough Council and of other officials of the
Borough of Hillsdale. The Land Use Officer shall prepare monthly reports
for the Borough Council summarizing all permits issued and certificates
countersigned, all complaints of violations and the action taken thereon. A
copy of each such report shall be filed with the Borough Tax Assessor at the
same time it is filed with the Borough Council.
permanent CCI. Escrow monies will be held in accounts of attorneys of
record, as agreed. The term of temporary certificate will not exceed 90
days unless extenuating circumstances can be shown or no occupancy
may take place during the term and the temporary CCI.
G. Enforcement. The Code Enforcement Official or his/her designee shall
enforce the provisions of this section.
H. Fees. A nonrefundable fee is required at time of application for
inspection to be scheduled and a certificate to be issued as specified in
Chapter 138, Fees and Deposits.
I. Violations and Penalties. Any person or entity that violates any of the
provisions of this section, upon conviction therefor, shall be subject to a
penalty as set forth in Chapter 226, Penalties, of this Code.
§ 310-22.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-26
288:485
§ 310-26. Certificate as to approval of subdivision of land.
[Amended 5-13-1997by Ord. No. 97-8]
The certificate as to approval of subdivision of land as set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-56 et seq. shall be issued by the Secretary of the Planning Board
upon proper application accompanied by payment of a fee as provided in
Chapter 138, Fees, for each certificate.
§ 310-26 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-26
288:486
ARTICLE VI
Meetings
§ 310-27. Meetings.
§ 310-28. Minutes.
Minutes of every meeting shall be kept and shall include the names of the
persons appearing and addressing the Board and of the persons appearing
by attorney or agent, the action taken by the Board, the findings, if any,
made by it and reasons therefor. The minutes shall thereafter be made
available for public inspection during normal business hours at the office
of the Borough Clerk. Any interested party shall have the right to compel
production of the minutes for use as evidence in any legal proceeding
concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such interested party may
be charged a fee for reproduction of the minutes in accordance with the fee
schedule set forth in § 310-29.208
A. Meetings of the Planning Board shall be scheduled not less frequently
than once a month, and any meeting so scheduled shall be held as
scheduled unless canceled for lack of applications for development to
process. [Amended 5-13-1997by Ord. No. 97-8]
B. Special meetings of the Planning Board may be called by its
Chairperson and shall be called at the request of any two Board
members. Such meetings shall be held on notice to the members and
the public in accordance with law. [Amended 5-13-1997by Ord. No.
97-8]
C. No action shall be taken at any meeting unless a quorum shall be
present.
D. All actions shall be taken by majority vote of a quorum except as
otherwise required by any provisions of this chapter, specifically but not
limited to the Municipal Land Use Law (P.L. 1975, c. 291 as amended206
[Amended 5-13-1997by Ord. No. 97-8]
E. All meetings, regular and special, shall be called, noticed and
conducted in accordance with the requirements of the Open Public
Meetings Act.207
206. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
207. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
208. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 138, Fees.
§ 310-27 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-28
288:487

ARTICLE VII
Fees and Deposits
§ 310-29. Fees. [Amended 2-13-1980 by Ord. No. 80-1; 3-25-1980 by
Ord. No. 80-3; 3-10-1981 by Ord. No. 81-6; 4-28-1981 by Ord. No.
81-07; 2-8-1983 by Ord. No. 83-1; 4-24-1984 by Ord. No. 84-7;
5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
§ 310-30. Applications. [Amended 5-13-1997by Ord. No. 97-8]
A. Unless otherwise provided by law or elsewhere in this chapter, the fees
and deposits in connection with applications or rendering of any service
by the Planning Board shall be as provided in Chapter 138, Fees.
B. All deposits shall be on account of such engineering, inspection, legal,
advertising and other costs as may be incurred by the Board in
connection with any application up to the point of final action thereon
by the Board. Prior to final action on any application, the Board shall
compute all engineering, inspection, legal, advertising and other costs
actually incurred by the Board in connection with the application up to
the point of final action. If the aggregate amount of such costs shall
exceed the deposits for costs, the applicant shall, on demand, pay the
amount of such excess. If the aggregate amount of such costs shall be
less than the deposit for costs, the excess shall be refunded to the
applicant.
A. The Planning Board shall, by resolution, prescribe forms for
applications.
B. All applications to the Planning Board shall be filed with the Board
Secretary, who shall stamp the date of filing thereon.
C. An application shall be complete (and shall be referred to as a complete
application) when:
(1) The prescribed application form fully completed and duly executed
has been filed with the Board;
(2) All documents, in the requisite number and in the form prescribed
by this chapter, shall have been filed with the Board;
(3) A certificate from the Tax Collector shall have been filed with the
Board Administrative Officer, stating whether any taxes or
assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent;
(4) All fees prescribed by this chapter shall have been paid;
(5) In the event that this chapter shall require that the documents be
referred to other persons or bodies, the affidavit of service thereof
shall have been filed with the Board; and
§ 310-29 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-30
288:489
(6) The Board, or its administrative officer, shall have certified, within
45 days after filing thereof with the Board, that the application is a
complete application.
§ 310-30 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-30
288:490
ARTICLE VIII
Hearings
§ 310-31. Hearings. [Amended 2-13-1980 by Ord. No. 80-1]
§ 310-32. Notice requirements for hearing. [Amended 2-13-1980 by
Ord. No. 80-1]
Whenever a hearing is required on an application for development pursuant
to this chapter, the applicant shall give notice thereof as follows:
A. Oaths. The officer presiding at a hearing of the Planning Board, or such
person as he or she may designate, shall have power to administer
oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and
the production of relevant evidence, including witnesses and
documents presented by the parties; and the provisions of the County
and Municipal Investigations Law209 shall apply to such hearings.
[Amended 5-13-1997by Ord. No. 97-8]
B. Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer, and the right of cross-examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
C. Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the
hearing, but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.
D. Records. Each Board shall provide for the recording of the proceedings
by either stenographer, mechanical or electronic means. The Board
shall furnish a transcript or duplicate recording in lieu thereof on
request to any interested party upon prior payment by such party of the
estimated fee therefor. Said fee shall be subject to adjustment upon
ascertainment of the actual amount thereof. [Amended 5-13-1997by
Ord. No. 97-8]
E. Vote of absentee member. When any hearing before Board shall carry
over two or more meetings, a member of the Board who was absent for
one or more of the meetings shall be eligible to vote on the matter upon
which the hearing was conducted, notwithstanding his or her said
absence; provided, however, that such member has available to him or
her a transcript or recording of the meetings from which he or she was
absent and certifies, in writing, to the Board that he or she has read
such transcript or listened to such recording. [Amended 5-13-1997by
Ord. No. 97-8]
209. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.
§ 310-31 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-32
288:491
A. Public notice shall be given by publication as required by law at least 10
days prior to the date of the hearing.
B. Notice.
(1) Notice shall be given to the owners of all real property, as shown on
the current tax duplicate, located within 200 feet in all directions of
the property which is the subject of such hearing and whether
located within or without the municipality in which applicant's land
is located. Such notice shall be given by:
(a) Serving a copy thereof on the owner as shown on the said
current tax duplicate or his or her agent in charge of the
property; or
(b) Mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the property owner
at his or her address as shown on the said current tax
duplicate. A return receipt is not required.
(2) Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service upon any
partner. Notice to a corporate owner may be made by service upon
its president, a vice president, secretary or other person authorized
by appointment or by law to accept service on behalf of the
corporation. Notice to a condominium association, horizontal
property regime, community trust or homeowners association
because of its ownership of common elements or areas located
within 200 feet of the property which is the subject of the hearing,
may be made in the same manner as to a corporation without
further notice to unit owners, co-owners or homeowners on
account of such common elements or areas.
C. Notice of all hearings on applications for development involving
property located within 200 feet of an adjoining municipality shall be
given by personal service or certified mail to the Clerk of such
municipality.
D. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the Bergen
County Planning Board of a hearing on an application for development
of property adjacent to an existing county road or proposed road shown
on the official county map or on the county master plan, adjoining other
county land or situate within 200 feet of a municipal boundary.
E. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to a state highway.
F. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Director of the Division of State and Regional Planning in the
Department of Community Affairs of a hearing on an application for
development of property which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling
units. Such notice shall include a copy of any maps or documents
§ 310-32 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-32
288:492
§ 310-33. List of property owners furnished. [Amended 2-13-1980
by Ord. No. 80-1]
Upon the written request of an applicant, the administrative officer shall,
within seven days, make and certify a list from said current tax duplicates
of names and addresses of owners to whom the applicant is required to
give notice pursuant to § 310-32B. The applicant shall be entitled to rely
upon the information contained in such list, and failure to give notice to any
owner not on the list shall not invalidate any hearing or proceeding.
required to be on file with the Secretary of the Board. [Amended
5-13-1997by Ord. No. 97-8]
G. All notices hereinabove specified in this section shall be given in the
manner required by law at least 10 days prior to the date fixed for
hearing. The applicant shall file a copy of the notice so served annexed
to an affidavit proving service on all parties entitled thereto, with the
Board holding the hearing on the application for development.
H. Any notice made by certified mail as hereinabove required shall be
complete upon mailing.
I. All notices required to be given pursuant to the terms of this chapter
shall state the date, time and place of the hearing, a fair statement of
the nature of the matters to be considered, the sections of this chapter
from which the applicant seeks any relief, identification of the property
proposed for development by abutting street name or street address, if
any, or by reference to lot and block numbers as shown on the current
tax duplicate in the municipal tax assessor's office and location and
times at which any maps and documents for which approval is sought
are available as required by law.
§ 310-32 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-33
288:493

ARTICLE IX
Time Limitations
§ 310-34. Time for decisions. [Amended 2-13-1980 by Ord. No.
80-1]
A. Applications.210
(1) The Planning Board shall render its decision not later than 45 days
from the filing of a complete application in the following matters:
(a) Minor subdivision and minor site plans.
(b) Preliminary approval of a major subdivision of 10 or fewer lots
and not involving a conditional use.
(c) Final approval of a major subdivision and not involving a
conditional use.
(d) Preliminary approval of a site plan for 10 acres of land or less
and not involving a conditional use.
(e) Final approval of a site plan for 10 acres of land or less and not
involving a conditional use.
(2) The Planning Board shall render its decision not later than 95 days
from the filing of a complete application in the following matters:
(a) Any subdivision or site plan that involves conditional use
approval.
(b) Preliminary approval of a major subdivision involving more
than 10 lots or of a site plan involving more than 10 acres.
(c) Any subdivision plat, site plan or conditional use that involves
exercise by the Planning Board of its power to grant variances
or authorizations pursuant to § 310-12G of this chapter or
pursuant to law.
B. Extension of time. The time within which the Planning Board is required
to act may be extended with the consent of the developer.
C. Failure of the Board to act within time.
(1) Failure of the Planning Board to render its decision within the
applicable time period set forth in this section shall constitute an
approval of the application and, at the request of the applicant, a
certificate shall be issued by the Secretary of the Board, certifying
that the Board has failed to act, which shall be sufficient in lieu of
the written endorsement or other evidence of approval herein
required and shall be so accepted by the County Recording Officer
210. Editor's Note: Original Section 3.015(a), Applications to Board of Adjustment, which
immediately preceded this subsection, was deleted 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8.
§ 310-34 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-34
288:495
§ 310-35. Decisions. [Amended 2-13-1980 by Ord. No. 80-1]
for purposes of filing subdivision plats. [Amended 5-13-1997by
Ord. No. 97-8]
(2) Whenever review or approval of the application by the County
Planning Board is required by Section 5 of P.L. 1968, c. 285
(N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3), in the case of a subdivision, or Section 8 of P.L.
1968, c. 285 (N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.6), in the case of a site plan, the
Municipal Planning Board shall condition any approval that it
grants upon timely receipt of a favorable report on the application
by the County Planning Board or approval by the County Planning
Board by its failure to report thereon within the required time
period.
D. Expiration of approvals.
(1) Minor subdivision. A minor subdivision approval shall expire 190
days from the date of Planning Board approval unless within such
period a plat in conformity with the approval and with the Map
Filing Law211, or a deed clearly describing the approved
subdivision, is filed by the developer with the Bergen County Clerk,
the Borough Engineer and the Borough Tax Assessor.
(2) Major subdivision. Final approval of a major subdivision shall
expire 95 days from the date of signing the plat unless within such
period the plat shall have been duly filed by the developer with the
Bergen County Clerk. The Planning Board may, for good cause
shown, extend the period for recording for an additional period not
to exceed 190 days from the date of signing of the plat.
(3) Variance. Any variance granted by the Planning Board permitting
the erection or alteration of any structure or structures or
permitting a specified use of any premises shall expire unless such
construction or alteration shall have been actually commenced on
each and every structure permitted by said variance, or unless such
permitted use has actually been commenced, within one year from
the date of the determination of the Board; except, however, that
the running of the period of limitation herein provided shall be
tolled from the date of filing an appeal from the decision of the
Board to the governing body or to a court of competent jurisdiction,
until the termination in any manner of such appeal or proceeding.
[Amended 5-13-1997by Ord. No. 97-8]
A. All decisions of the Planning Board on an application for development
shall be by written resolution which shall set forth findings of fact and
legal conclusions based thereon. [Amended 5-13-1997by Ord. No.
97-8]
211. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 310-34 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-35
288:496
B. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Board within 10 days of the
date of decision to the applicant, or, if represented, then to his or her
attorney, without separate charge. A copy of the decision shall also be
mailed to all persons who have requested it and who have paid the fee
prescribed in Chapter 138, Fees. A copy of the decision shall also be
filed in the office of the Secretary of the Board, who shall make a copy
of such filed decision available to any interested party upon payment of
a fee calculated in the same manner as those established for copies of
other public documents in the municipality. (See § 310-29, Fees.212)
[Amended 5-13-1997by Ord. No. 97-8]
C. Any approval or other relief granted by the Board shall be conditioned
upon either the prompt payment of due or delinquent taxes or
assessments or the making of adequate provision for the payment
thereof in a manner that will adequately protect the municipality.
[Amended 5-13-1997by Ord. No. 97-8]
D. Failure of a motion to approve an application for development to receive
the number of votes required for approval shall be deemed an action
denying the application.
(1) The municipal agency may provide such written decision and
findings and conclusions either on the date of the meeting at which
the municipal agency takes to grant or deny approval or, if the
meeting at which such action is taken occurs within the final 45
days of the applicable time period for rendering a decision on the
application for development, within 45 days of such meeting by the
adoption of a resolution of memorialization setting forth the
decision and the findings and conclusions of the municipal agency
thereon. An action resulting from the failure of a motion to approve
an application shall be memorialized by resolution as provided
above, notwithstanding the time at which such action occurs within
the applicable time period for rendering a decision on the
application.
(2) The adoption of a resolution of memorialization pursuant to this
subsection shall not be construed to alter the applicable time
period for rendering a decision on the application for development.
Such resolution shall be adopted by a vote of a majority of the
members of the municipal agency who voted for the action
previously taken, and no other member shall vote thereon. The vote
on such resolution shall be deemed to be a memorialization of an
action of the municipal agency and not to be an action of the
municipal agency; except that failure to adopt such a resolution
within the forty-five-day period shall result in the approval of the
application for development, notwithstanding any prior action
taken thereon.
212. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 138, Fees.
§ 310-35 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-35
288:497
§ 310-36. Publication of decision. [Amended 5-13-1997by Ord. No.
97-8]
A brief notice of every final decision shall be published as required by law.
Such publication shall be arranged by the Secretary of the Planning Board,
as the case may be, without separate charge to the applicant. Within 10
days of the date of such decision, said notice shall be sent to a newspaper
of general circulation in the municipality for publication.
(3) Whenever a resolution of memorialization is adopted in accordance
with this subsection, the date of such adoption shall constitute the
date of the decision for purposes of the mailings, filings and
publications required by Subsection B above and § 310-36 of this
chapter.
§ 310-35 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-36
288:498
ARTICLE X
(Reserved)213
§ 310-37. (Reserved)
§ 310-38. (Reserved)
§ 310-39. (Reserved)
§ 310-40. (Reserved)
§ 310-41. (Reserved)
§ 310-42. (Reserved)
§ 310-43. (Reserved)
§ 310-44. (Reserved)
§ 310-45. (Reserved)
213. Editor's Note: Former Art. X, Appeals, was repealed 2-6-2007 by Ord. No. 07-01.
§ 310-37 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-45
288:499

Part 4
Zoning
ARTICLE XI
General Provisions
§ 310-46. General purpose.
The general intent of this Part 4 is to establish a comprehensive, precise
and detailed zoning plan regulating the use of land and structures in the
Borough of Hillsdale. It is based on the Master Plan of the Borough of
Hillsdale, as amended and supplemented, and is enacted to promote and
to protect the public health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience and the
general welfare.
§ 310-47. Specific purposes.
The specific purposes of this Part 4, which shall be liberally construed to
promote and advance such specific purposes, are as follows:
A. To guide and regulate the orderly growth, development and
redevelopment of the Borough of Hillsdale in accordance with a
comprehensive plan and with long-term objectives, principles and
standards deemed beneficial to the interest and welfare of the people.
B. To preserve and enhance the social and economic well-being of both
private and public property.
C. To promote, in accordance with the public interest, the utilization of
land for the purpose for which it is most appropriate.
D. To secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other dangers and to provide
adequate light, air and convenience of access.
E. To prevent overcrowding of land or buildings and to avoid undue
concentration of population.
F. To lessen and, where possible, to prevent traffic congestion on public
streets and highways.
G. To conserve and enhance the value of buildings and land throughout the
Borough.
H. To preserve and enhance the visual character and natural beauty of the
land comprising the Borough of Hillsdale.
§ 310-46 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-47
288:501

ARTICLE XII
Zones Established
§ 310-48. Districts. [Amended 6-8-1983 by Ord. No. 83-7; Added
2-12-1991 by Ord. No. 91-1; Added 6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 18-12;
Added 6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 18-13]
For the purpose of this Part 4, the Borough of Hillsdale is divided into the
following districts:
R-1 Residential
R-2 Residential
R-3 Residential
R-4 Residential
REC Recreational
C Commercial
I Industrial
SC Senior Citizen Housing
T/C Townhouse Complex
MU-1 Mixed-Use 1
MU-2 Mixed-Use 2
§ 310-49. Zoning Map. [Amended 2-12-1991 by Ord. No. 91-1]
The boundary lines of all districts shall be as shown on the map included as
an attachment to and made part of this chapter, known as the Zoning Map of
the Borough of Hillsdale, dated January 2, 1991. Said map and all notations
and references thereon are hereby incorporated herein and declared to be
a part of this chapter.
§ 310-50. Senior citizen housing: special regulations. [Added
6-8-1983 by Ord. No. 83-7]
A. Zoning Map amendments.
(1) Ord. No. 18-12: The Official Zoning Map shall be changed for Block
1201, Lot 11 to create the MU-1 District.
(2) Ord. No. 18-13: The Official Zoning Map shall be changed for Block
1102, Lots 2, 3, 4 to create the MU-2 District.
A. For the purpose of this section, "SC" (Senior Citizen Housing District)
as heretofore established under Subsection B shall be deemed to mean
one or more dwelling units intended and specifically designed to
§ 310-48 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-50
288:503
provide well-constructed and adequate housing for elderly persons
having low or moderate income, which housing shall conform to all
the requirements and guidelines established by the U.S. Department
of Housing and Urban Development and/or the New Jersey Housing
and Finance Agency, whichever are the more stringent with respect
to cost limitation, construction, rental costs, selling prices and other
standards for low- and moderate-income senior citizens housing; and
further provided that the applicant for construction of such housing
shall participate in federal and/or state subsidy programs for such
housing in order that shelter costs shall be initiated and maintained
at the lowest feasible amounts. Such housing shall be occupied by
individuals 62 years of age or older. One person under age 62 may
reside in a dwelling unit with an elderly person or persons as permitted
above if the presence of such person is essential to the physical care
or economic support of the elderly person or persons. Each dwelling
unit shall consist of complete living accommodations and individual
bathroom facilities.
B. In addition, such a housing project may contain, as necessary accessory
uses thereto recreational facilities, workshop facilities, living and
dining areas for the common use of project residents, central kitchen
facilities where food may be prepared for serving either in a common
dining area or for distribution to individual dwelling units, stores, shops
and offices for the sale of goods or rendering of services only to
residents of the project, provided that such business uses shall not be
noticeable beyond lot lines and no outside advertising shall be
permitted. Such accessory uses shall be subject to prior written
approval of the Planning Board of the Borough of Hillsdale.
C. Procedure.
(1) The applicant shall obtain site plan approval from the Planning
Board of the Borough of Hillsdale in accordance with this chapter.
(2) The application for a site plan approval for a development within
the SC District shall be on forms provided by the Planning Board.
(3) At the time of filing said application, the applicant shall pay the
normal major site plan fee unless waived by the Planning Board.
(4) The Planning Board shall thereupon conduct a hearing on the
application and shall determine if in its judgment the use will meet
the intent and objectives of senior citizen housing as defined
therein and will not be detrimental to the health, safety and general
welfare of the Borough of Hillsdale.
(5) The Planning Board shall have the authority to require the
applicant to furnish such other information necessary to show
proper assurance and guaranties to the Borough that the proposed
project will be developed, constructed and maintained in the
manner, form and within the limitations set forth in the application,
plans, specifications, conditions and regulations governing and as
§ 310-50 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-50
288:504
§ 310-51. Townhouse development in recreational zone. [Added
2-28-1989 by Ord. No. 89-4]
may be required for the protection of the health, welfare and safety
of the citizens of the Borough. The Planning Board may require
such documents or information as it may deem necessary to show
proper compliance by the said applicant with all of the standards,
regulations and provisions of the Borough ordinance or such of
them as may be applicable.
(6) The Borough may require the applicant to furnish a performance
guaranty for the purpose of assuring the completion of streets,
drainage facilities and areas, storm sewers, installation of water
and sewer, sidewalks, landscaping, monuments, street signs, fire
hydrants, internal fire alarm boxes, parking areas, driveways,
walkways, lighting, lakes and dams and all other improvements
required by the Planning Board within the boundaries of the
project on the lands of the applicant or public lands or on public
roadways for the insurance of adequate safety, health and welfare
of the citizens of the Borough and the citizens to occupy the
project. The Borough may also require performance guaranties for
off-tract drainage facilities, roadways, sidewalks, curbs and
waterway improvements as it shall deem necessary due to the
impact upon said facilities or the necessity for said facilities
created or caused by the construction of and use and occupancy of
the project.
(7) The Planning Board may attach such conditions for such a project
as it may deem necessary to ensure delivery of proper water supply,
disposal of waste, garbage, trash, junk and other unhealthful
accumulations, drainage, police of the project, assurance of ingress
and egress by the police, health and fire inspection officials of the
Borough to guarantee the maintenance of facilities to be used by
the residents of the said project.
(8) No building permit shall be issued for any such project until and
unless the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Hillsdale have, by
resolution or ordinance, executed and approved an enforceable
contract for contributions in lieu of taxes, unless said building is to
be fully assessable as a ratable within the Borough of Hillsdale.
D. It is the express intent that the foregoing regulations specifically apply
to the SC District (Senior Citizen Housing) and are in addition to the
requirements set forth under § 310-89, Site plan and major subdivision
plat details: preliminary approval, regulations which are deemed
applicable to this District.
A. Definitions.
DEVELOPMENT AREA — The entire tract area not including areas
dedicated for future public roadway widening by deed or easement.
§ 310-50 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-51
288:505
IMPERVIOUS AREA — That area covered by bituminous concrete,
Portland cement concrete, buildings or any other surface which is
commonly assigned a runoff coefficient of 0.70 or higher.
TOWNHOUSE BUILDING — A building containing three to six dwelling
units in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside,
no unit is located over another unit and each unit is separated from any
other unit by one or more fire-resistant walls.
TOWNHOUSE COMPLEX — One or more townhouse buildings on an
entire development site.
B. Area and yard requirements.
(1) Minimum tract size for a townhouse complex development shall be
six acres. A minimum of 200 feet of frontage on one arterial or
collector street shall be required. All plans shall delineate the
boundaries of the portion(s) of the tract devoted to each use.
(2) Front yard setback. The minimum front yard setback along a
municipal or county road on which the lot abuts shall be 50 feet.
The minimum front yard along all other streets shall be 30 feet.
(3) Side yard setback. The minimum width of a side setback yard shall
not be less than 20 feet unless the side yard abuts a single-family
residential use or zoning district line. In such cases the side yard
requirement shall be increased to 25 feet.
(4) Rear yard setback. The minimum width of a rear yard shall not be
less than 25 feet unless the rear yard abuts a single-family
residential use or zoning district line. The rear yard requirement
shall be 50 feet.
(5) Minimum yard areas. The total minimum distance between
townhouse buildings shall be at least the sum of two abutting yard
areas. No townhouse building, as measured radially from any
corners, shall be closer to any other building corner than the
combined distances of the side yard requirements for each
townhouse building. The combined distance of two side yards shall
exclude any driveway or vehicular access, such driveway or
vehicular access width being in addition to the combined side yard
width.
(6) Recreation areas and facilities. Land area equal to at least 560
square feet for each dwelling unit shall be specified on the site plan
and improved by the developer as active recreation areas for use by
the residents of the development. Such areas shall be an integral
part of the development, and each shall be at least 1/2 acre and at
least 100 feet wide. Active recreation areas shall include facilities
such as residential swimming pool(s), regulation doubles tennis
courts, tot-lots and playgrounds. The reviewing municipal agency
may consider other recreational facilities to be constructed in lieu
of and as alternative equivalents of the aforesaid pool and tennis
§ 310-51 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-51
288:506
facilities, provided that they would seem to be appropriate
substitutes thereof.
C. Townhouse buildings. No townhouse complex shall be constructed in
the Borough unless the complex is part of an approved site plan and
unless the following minimum standards are met, in addition to Part 5,
Subdivision and Site Plan Review, of this chapter:
(1) No development shall exceed six dwelling units per acre of
development area.
(2) No building shall exceed 25 feet in height or 2.5 stories.
(3) No dwelling unit shall be less than 24 feet wide. Building coverage
shall not exceed 20% of the development area.
(4) Impervious area shall not exceed 40% of the area development,
except pavers with open/sand joints.
(5) More than one principal building is permitted on the site.
(6) All utilities within the townhouse site shall be installed
underground.
(7) Each townhouse complex shall provide for the private removal of
trash, garbage and recyclables. Dwelling units shall be designed to
provide for storage of trash, garbage and recyclables subject to
municipal agency approval.
(8) Architectural treatments.
(a) Each townhouse building in the complex shall have a
compatible architectural theme with variations in design to
provide attractiveness to the development, which shall include
consideration of landscaping techniques, building orientation
to the site and to other structures, topography, natural features
and individual dwelling unit design, such as varying widths,
staggering unit setbacks, providing different exterior
materials, changing rooflines and roof designs, altering
building heights and changing types of windows, shutters,
doors, porches, colors and vertical or horizontal orientation of
the facades, singularly or in combination for each dwelling
unit. The reviewing body shall have the ultimate power to
approve the architectural plans.
(b) There shall be at least three different ridge line heights in each
townhouse building, which shall vary by at least three feet. In
any townhouse building, no more than two adjacent dwelling
units shall have the same setback. Setbacks shall vary by at
least five feet.
(9) All signs installed within the development area shall be
aesthetically pleasing and designed with a consistent theme. The
§ 310-51 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-51
288:507
design theme should incorporate letter style, construction material
and type of pole. The color of the letters and background should
be carefully considered in relation to the color of the townhouse
buildings, without violating regulatory sign colors as set forth in
the current edition of the Federal Manual of Uniform Traffic
Control Devices.
(10) After the general layout and location of roads and buildings has
been established, but before preliminary approval has been
obtained, a meeting shall be held between the Environmental
Commission and the applicant to develop a landscaping theme that
is acceptable to the Borough.
(11) Each principal or accessory building shall contain a single master
television antenna system which shall serve all dwelling units
within the building. Outdoor television antennas are prohibited.
(12)Common mail collection facilities shall be provided at the ratio of
one for every two townhouse buildings.
(13)No outside area or equipment shall be provided for the hanging of
laundry or the outside airing of laundry in any manner. Each
dwelling unit shall have specific areas allocated with enough floor
space to contain a washing machine and a dryer.
(14) Garages.
(a) Garages shall be provided for each dwelling unit, shall have a
floor area of not less than 240 square feet and shall be attached
to the dwelling unit.
(b) Garages and other accessory buildings shall be approved on an
individual basis as to type, placement and style and shall be no
more than one story in height. The architectural design and
materials used in the construction thereof shall conform to the
design and building materials used in the construction of the
townhouse buildings. No part of any garage or other accessory
building shall be used for living purposes.
(15) Parking shall be prohibited on all access and interior roads of the
site. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided as follows:
Minimum Average
Spaces Per
Dwelling Unit
(including
garages)
Minimum Number
of Garages
Required
1-bedroom unit 2 1
2-bedroom unit 2.5 2
3-bedroom unit 3.5 2
§ 310-51 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-51
288:508
D. Accessory uses and buildings permitted in a townhouse development
complex. The following are permitted accessory uses and buildings:
(1) One swimming pool, to be operated by the townhouse complex.
(2) Off-street parking.
(3) Fences and walls.
(4) Signs.
(5) One building, to provide facilities for management of a townhouse
complex, and/or a community clubhouse.
(6) No accessory uses or buildings are permitted other than those set
forth above.
(7) Accessory buildings shall meet all dimensional and aesthetic
requirements applied to principal buildings.
(8) The height of accessory buildings shall not exceed 15 feet.
E. Appurtenant requirements.
(1) The Planning Board shall have the authority to require the
applicant to furnish such other information necessary to show
proper assurance and guaranties to the Borough that the proposed
project will be developed, constructed and maintained in the
manner, form and within the limitations set forth in the application,
plans, specifications, conditions and regulations governing and as
may be required for the protection of the health, welfare and safety
of the citizens of the Borough. The Planning Board may require
such documents or information as it may deem necessary to show
proper compliance by the said applicant with all of the standards,
regulations and provisions of the Borough ordinance or such of
them as may be applicable.
(2) All roadways in the townhouse complex shall be constructed,
maintained and be the responsibility of the townhouse complex
association. This includes but is not limited to snow removal, leaf
collection, street cleaning, resurfacing, repair and storm drainage.
(3) Post-development stormwater runoff rate shall not exceed the
predevelopment runoff rate.
(4) Impact assessment. The applicant or developer shall, as part of the
submission of a townhouse development to the Planning Board and
in compliance with an application for preliminary approval of major
or minor subdivision or site plan approval, submit an
environmental impact statement relative to the proposed project
submitted for approval to the Planning Board. The purpose of
requiring an environmental impact statement is to permit the
Planning Board and the Borough of Hillsdale to assess the impact
§ 310-51 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-51
288:509
of the proposed project upon the environment, especially with
respect to water and air resources, pollution of all kinds, drainage,
waste disposal, the landscape or any other pertinent or
environmental factors.
(5) In reviewing an environmental impact statement, the Planning
Board shall take into consideration the effect of the applicant's
proposal upon all aspects of the environment. The Planning Board
shall submit the environmental impact statement for review and
comment to the Environmental Commission and to such other
governmental bodies and to such consultants as it may deem
appropriate. The Planning Board shall approve the environmental
impact statement only if it determines that the proposed
development has been designed with adequate safeguards as
needed to protect the environment.
(6) Assessment of the anticipated impact of project. The assessment
shall include an analysis of the public costs, including but not
limited to the costs of additional schools, roads, police, fire
protection, water supply, sewage disposal and other similar direct
and indirect costs of the project, including the effect on
recreational facilities, open space and other similar municipal
services. The assessment shall include supporting data, the source
of the data and the basis for assumptions, and, when possible, it
shall describe the anticipated impacts with reference to standards
as may be determined by federal, state and local statutes.
F. Homeowners' association.
(1) There shall be established in the townhouse development a
homeowners' association which shall own open spaces, common
areas and recreational open space areas and facilities for the
purposes of owning and maintaining such areas designated within
the development, provided that the Planning Board and the Mayor
and Council of the Borough of Hillsdale are satisfied between the
association and each property owner in the form of a covenant,
with each agreeing to liability for his or her pro rata share of the
association's costs.
(2) The association shall maintain the common property and all
facilities thereon, and, in case of a default by the association, the
Borough of Hillsdale shall have the power to maintain the common
property, open spaces, recreational open space areas and facilities
in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43.
(3) Said homeowners' association shall not be dissolved and shall not
dispose of any common areas, open spaces, recreational open
spaces areas and facilities by sale, conveyance or otherwise, except
to an organization conceived and established to own and maintain
the open spaces, common areas, recreational open spaces areas
and facilities for the benefit of such development, and thereafter
§ 310-51 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-51
288:510
§ 310-52. District boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to any boundaries shown on said map, the
following rules shall apply:
such organization shall not be dissolved or dispose of any of its
common areas, open spaces, recreational open space areas and
facilities without first offering to dedicate the same to the Borough
of Hillsdale; provided, however, that the Borough of Hillsdale
agrees to accept such.
A. District boundary lines are generally intended to follow existing lines,
such as the center lines of streets, railroad rights-of-way, streams and
lot lines as they exist of record at the time of passage of this chapter,
unless such boundary lines are fixed by dimensions shown on the
Zoning Map.
B. If such boundary lines are not fixed on the Zoning Map by dimensions
and they approximately follow lot lines and they do not scale more than
10 feet distant therefrom, such lot lines shall be construed to be such
boundary lines.
§ 310-51 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-52
288:511

ARTICLE XIII
Use Schedule
§ 310-53. Schedule of uses and requirements.
The schedule of uses of all zoning districts shall be as shown on the current
Schedule of Uses and Requirements214included as an attachment and made
part of this chapter shown on the reverse side of the Zoning Map of
the Borough of Hillsdale.215 Said Schedule of Uses and all notations and
references thereon are hereby incorporated herein and declared to be a
part of this chapter.
§ 310-53.1. Mixed-Use 1 District. [Added 6-12-2018 by Ord. No.
18-12]
A. Schedule amendments.
(1) The Schedule of Uses and Requirements shall be amended as
follows: [Added 9-4-2018 by Ord. No. 18-09]
Permitted Floor Area Ratio in the R-1 Zone shall be 22%.
Permitted Floor Area Ratio in the R-2 Zone shall be 27%.
Permitted Floor Area Ratio in the R-3 Zone shall be 30%.
Permitted Floor Area Ratio in the R-4 Zone shall be 35%.
Building Height in all R-1 zone shall be 35 feet.
Building Height in all R-2 zone shall be 35 feet.
Building Height in all R-3 zone shall be 35 feet.
Building Height in all R-4 zone shall be 33 feet.
A. Principal permitted uses.
(1) Professional offices.
(2) Retail businesses and personal service establishments in
accordance with the Commercial (C) District.
(3) Offices, banks, and fiduciary institutions.
(4) Restaurants, except drive-in and drive-thru restaurants.
(5) Medical and dental offices.
(6) Multi-family housing above the ground floor.
(7) Any combination of the above permitted uses.
B. Permitted accessory uses.
214. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Uses and Requirements is on file in the Borough offices
and is included as an attachment to this chapter.
215. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 310-53 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-53.1
288:513
(1) Surface parking, limited to the rear of the building.
(2) Signs.
(3) Fences and walls.
(4) Outdoor dining.
C. Bulk requirements.
(1) Building heights (maximum) - 3 stories and 40 feet.
(2) Building Coverage (maximum) - 65%.
(3) Lot Area (minimum) - 2 acres.
(4) Front yard (minimum) - 10 feet.
(5) Front yard (maximum) - 15 feet.
(6) Side yard (minimum) - 25 feet.
(7) Rear yard (minimum) - 25 feet.
(8) Impervious coverage (maximum) - 80%.
(9) Residential density (maximum) - 20 units per acre.
(10) Retaining walls, sidewalks, walkways, fences, above-ground and
underground utilities shall be permitted within the setbacks.
D. Landscaping.
(1) Any areas not paved shall be landscaped with a mix of deciduous
and evergreen trees and low ground cover.
(2) Parking areas with more than 20 spaces require one landscaped
island for every 15 parking spaces, planted with trees and low
ground cover.
(3) A landscaped buffer of dense evergreen plantings no less than six
feet in height and five feet in depth, and/or a six-foot-tall board-onboard
fence shall be required on all lot lines to adjacent residential
uses or zones and shall be used to screen off-street parking.
E. Lighting — Subject to § 310-110. Lighting shall not exceed 0.2
footcandles at any property line.
F. Refuse — Subject to § 310-109. Refuse and recycling must be located
either interior to a building in a designated refuse storage area, or
located in a side or rear yard setback area, no closer than 10 feet to any
adjacent lot line, enclosed on all four sides, and screened using wood
fencing or other attractive material.
G. Architectural Requirements.
§ 310-53.1 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-53.1
288:514
(1) The architectural treatment of the front facade shall be continued
in its major features around all visibly exposed sides of a building.
All sides of a building facing a public street shall be architecturally
designed to be consistent with regard to style, materials, colors and
details.
(2) Fenestration shall be architecturally compatible with the style,
materials, colors and details of the building. Windows shall be
vertically proportioned.
(3) All entrances to a building shall be defined and articulated by
architectural elements such as lintels, pediments, pilasters,
columns, porticoes, porches, overhangs, railings, etc.
(4) All rooftop mechanical equipment, inclusive of solar equipment,
shall be screened from view from all vantage points at grade or
below the roof.
(5) Buildings shall avoid long, monotonous, uninterrupted walls or roof
planes. Building wall offsets, including projections such as canopies
and recesses shall be used in order to add architectural interest
and variety and to relieve the visual effect of a simple, long wall.
Similarly, in the case of a pitched roof, roofline offsets, dormers or
gables shall be provided in order to provide architectural interest
and variety to the massing of a building and to relieve the effect of a
single, long roof.
(6) The maximum spacing between building wall offsets shall be 50
feet.
(7) The minimum projection or depth of any individual vertical offset
shall be 1.5 feet.
(8) The maximum spacing between roof offsets shall be 50 feet.
(9) All ground-level retail and service uses that face a public space
shall have clear glass on at least 60% of their facades between two
and eight feet above grade.
H. Multi-family residential standards.
(1) Residential units shall have the following minimum unit sizes:
(a) One-bedroom — 700 square feet
(b) Two-bedroom — 850 square feet
(c) Three-bedroom — 1,100 square feet
(2) A maximum of 20% of the market-rate units may be three-bedroom
units.
I. Affordable housing requirements.
§ 310-53.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-53.1
288:515
§ 310-53.2. Mixed-Use 2 District. [Added 6-12-2018 by Ord. No.
18-13]
(1) If the residential units are rental, 15% of the units shall be reserved
for affordable households. If the units are for-sale, 20% of the units
shall be reserved for affordable households.
(2) The affordable units shall have a minimum 30-year deed restriction.
Any such affordable units shall comply with UHAC, applicable
COAH affordable housing regulations, the Fair Housing Act, any
applicable order of the Court, and other applicable laws.
(3) The units shall meet the bedroom distribution required by the
Uniform Housing Affordability Controls.
(4) The units shall meet the low/moderate income split required by the
Uniform Housing Affordability Controls and provide at least 13% of
the units as very-low-income units as mandated by the Fair Housing
Act.
(5) The developer shall be responsible for retaining a qualified
Administrative Agent at the developer's sole cost and expense for
the lifetime of the deed restriction. This shall include the initial
rental/sale of the unit and the ongoing compliance. The developer
shall utilize the Borough's Administrative Agent or a Boroughapproved
equivalent.
(6) The affordable units shall be family affordable units.
(7) The developer shall be responsible for paying the required
development fees as outlined by the Statewide Non-Residential
Development Fee Act applicable to the non-residential portion of
the development.
(8) Development shall comply with Chapter 310, Article XXXIII
Affordable Housing Regulations.
A. Principal permitted uses.
(1) Professional Offices.
(2) Retail businesses and personal service establishments in
accordance with the Commercial (C) District.
(3) Offices, banks, and fiduciary institutions.
(4) Restaurants, except drive-in and drive-thru restaurants.
(5) Medical and dental offices.
(6) Multi-family housing above the ground floor.
(7) Any combination of the above permitted uses.
§ 310-53.1 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-53.2
288:516
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Surface parking, limited to the rear of the building.
(2) Signs.
(3) Fences and walls.
(4) Outdoor dining.
C. Bulk requirements.
(1) Building heights (maximum) - 3 stories and 40 feet.
(2) Building Coverage (maximum) - 70%.
(3) Lot Area (minimum) - 30,000 square feet.
(4) Lot Frontage and width (minimum) - 100 feet.
(5) Front yard (minimum) - 5 feet.
(6) Front yard (maximum) - 15 feet.
(7) Side yard (minimum) - 5 feet.
(8) Rear yard (minimum) - 25 feet.
(9) Impervious coverage (maximum) — 90%.
(10) Residential density (maximum) - 20 units per acre.
(11) Retaining walls, sidewalks, walkways, fences, above-ground and
underground utilities shall be permitted within the setbacks.
D. General requirements.
(1) Multiple principle structures shall be permitted on a single site.
(2) Buildings shall be at least 20 feet apart.
(3) All street frontages, regardless of building orientation, shall be
treated as front yards with regard to setback requirements and
parking prohibitions.
E. Landscaping.
(1) Any areas not paved shall be landscaped with a mix of deciduous
and evergreen trees and low ground cover.
(2) Parking areas with more than 20 spaces require one landscaped
island for every 15 parking spaces, planted with trees and low
ground cover.
(3) A landscaped buffer of dense evergreen plantings no less than six
feet in height and five feet in depth, and/or a six-foot-tall board-on-
§ 310-53.2 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-53.2
288:517
board fence shall be required on all lot lines to adjacent residential
uses or zones and shall be used to screen off-street parking.
F. Lighting — Subject to § 310-110. Lighting shall not exceed 0.2
footcandles at any property line.
G. Refuse — Subject to § 310-109. Refuse and recycling must be located
either interior to a building in a designated refuse storage area, or
located in a side or rear yard setback area, no closer than 10 feet to any
adjacent lot line, enclosed on all four sides, and screened using wood
fencing or other attractive material.
H. Parking.
(1) No curb cuts shall be permitted from Broadway. All parking shall be
accessed from driveways along either Orchard Street and/or Park
Avenue.
(2) In the absence of lot consolidation, permanent access easements
for all parcels must be created for parking lot access.
I. Architectural requirements.
(1) The architectural treatment of the front facade shall be continued
in its major features around all visibly exposed sides of a building.
All sides of a building facing a public street shall be architecturally
designed to be consistent with regard to style, materials, colors and
details.
(2) Fenestration shall be architecturally compatible with the style,
materials, colors and details of the building. Windows shall be
vertically proportioned.
(3) All entrances to a building shall be defined and articulated by
architectural elements such as lintels, pediments, pilasters,
columns, porticoes, porches, overhangs, railings, etc.
(4) All rooftop mechanical equipment, inclusive of solar equipment,
shall be screened from view from all vantage points at grade or
below the roof.
(5) Buildings shall avoid long, monotonous, uninterrupted walls or roof
planes. Building wall offsets, including projections such as canopies
and recesses shall be used in order to add architectural interest
and variety and to relieve the visual effect of a simple, long wall.
Similarly, in the case of a pitched roof, roofline offsets, dormers or
gables shall be provided in order to provide architectural interest
and variety to the massing of a building and to relieve the effect of a
single, long roof.
(6) The maximum spacing between building wall offsets shall be 50
feet.
§ 310-53.2 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-53.2
288:518
(7) The minimum projection or depth of any individual vertical offset
shall be 1.5 feet.
(8) The maximum spacing between roof offsets shall be 50 feet.
(9) All ground-level retail and service uses that face a public space
shall have clear glass on at least 60% of their facades between two
and eight feet above grade.
J. Multi-family residential standards.
(1) Residential units shall have the following minimum unit sizes:
(a) One-bedroom — 700 square feet
(b) Two-bedroom — 850 square feet
(c) Three-bedroom — 1,100 square feet.
(2) A maximum of 20% of the market-rate units may be three-bedroom
units.
K. Affordable housing requirements.
(1) If the residential units are rental, 15% of the units shall be reserved
for affordable households. If the units are for-sale, 20% of the units
shall be reserved for affordable households.
(2) The affordable units shall have a minimum 30-year deed restriction.
Any such affordable units shall comply with UHAC, applicable
COAH affordable housing regulations, the Fair Housing Act, any
applicable order of the Court, and other applicable laws.
(3) The units shall meet the bedroom distribution required by the
Uniform Housing Affordability Controls.
(4) The units shall meet the low/moderate income split required by the
Uniform Housing Affordability Controls and provide at least 13% of
the units as very-low-income units as mandated by the Fair Housing
Act.
(5) The developer shall be responsible for retaining a qualified
Administrative Agent at the developer's sole cost and expense for
the lifetime of the deed restriction. This shall include the initial
rental/sale of the unit and the ongoing compliance. The developer
shall utilize the Borough's Administrative Agent or a Boroughapproved
equivalent.
(6) The affordable units shall be family affordable units.
(7) The developer shall be responsible for paying the required
development fees as outlined by the Statewide Non-Residential
Development Fee Act applicable to the non-residential portion of
the development.
§ 310-53.2 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-53.2
288:519
(8) Development shall comply with Chapter 310, Article XXXIII
Affordable Housing Regulations.
§ 310-53.2 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-53.2
288:520
ARTICLE XIV
General Regulations
§ 310-54. General exceptions. [Added 9-6-2011 by Ord. No. 11-16]
Exceptions to the requirements of this Part 4 are permitted under the
following terms and conditions:
A. Height. The height limitations of this Part 4 shall not apply to church
spires; belfries; cupolas; chimneys; ventilators; skylights; television and
radio receiving and transmitting antennas or towers, provided,
however, that no antenna or tower shall exceed by more than 15 feet
the height of the principal building upon the lot; water tanks,
bulkheads; and similar necessary appurtenances usually rising above
the roof level. Such structure and appurtenance shall in no event have a
height greater than is necessary to accomplish the purpose it is
designed to serve. Nothing herein shall prevent the erection of a
windowless parapet wall or ornamental cornice extending not more
than five feet above the maximum building height set forth in the
Schedule of Uses and Requirements.216
B. Existing lots of record. Any lawfully created lot having an area or
dimension less than that prescribed for a lot in the district in which
such lot is located may nevertheless be used as a lot for any purpose
permitted in that district:
(1) If all other regulations prescribed for that district are complied
with; if the owner of such parcel does not own any adjoining land;
and if the lot has not less than 75 feet in frontage or less than 7,500
square feet of area; or
(2) If such lot was included in a subdivision plat which was either
granted final approval under the Municipal Planning Act of 1953
prior to the effective date of this chapter or was granted tentative
approval under said Act prior to the effective date of this chapter
and granted final approval after the effective date of this chapter
but within three years from the date of such tentative approval,
provided that the final subdivision plat in either instance shall have
been duly filed in the Office of the County Clerk within the time
required by law.
C. In the R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Zones, roofed and unroofed front porches,
entry platforms and/or associated stoops and steps shall be permitted
to encroach into the required front yard setback area a maximum of
eight feet. The area of the porch, platform, stoops or steps that is
permitted to encroach in the front yard setback area shall not exceed
40 square feet. The roofed or unroofed front porch, entry platform and/
or associated steps must be attached to a one-family dwelling that
216. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Uses and Requirements is on file in the Borough offices
and is included as an attachment to this chapter..
§ 310-54 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-54
288:521
§ 310-55. Regulations applicable to all districts. [Amended
12-13-1977 by Ord. 77-14; 7-10-1990 by Ord. No. 90-10]
Except as hereinafter provided, the following general regulations shall
apply in all districts:
meets the required front yard setback. The eight-foot encroachment
shall only be permitted where the one-family dwelling meets the
required front yard setback for the zone in which it is located. Where
such an encroachment is proposed, the structure or improvement that
is projecting into the front yard setback area shall not have a width in
excess of 10 feet. The improvement that is encroaching into the front
yard setback area shall be a one-story structure. There shall not be a
story above the improvement or a basement or cellar beneath it.
A. General. No building shall hereafter be erected and no existing building
shall be moved, structurally altered, rebuilt, added to or enlarged,
unless it shall conform to the requirements of this chapter. No land shall
be used for any purpose other than for a permitted use under this
chapter and in conformity with the requirements of the Schedule of
Uses and Requirements.217 No yard or other required open space
contiguous to any building shall be encroached upon or reduced in any
manner, except in conformity to the setbacks, lot area, building
location, percentage of lot coverage, off-street parking space and all
other regulations designated in the said Schedule and this chapter for
the district in which it is located. Any unlawful encroachment or
reduction shall constitute a violation of this chapter, and any building
permit, use permit and any other permit granted therefor shall, upon
determination of such violation, be void.
B. Frontage on public street. No building shall be built upon a lot that does
not abut a street conforming to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-35 or a street the
improvement of which has been insured by the posting of a
performance guaranty pursuant to the provisions of Part 5 of this
chapter.
C. Principal building. No lot in any Residence District shall have erected
upon it more than one principal building. No yard or other required
parking or other open space provided about any building in any district
for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be
considered in determining compliance with the yard or open space
requirements hereof for any other building.
D. Moving of soil. Soil moving operations shall be subject to the
requirements and provisions of the applicable ordinances of the
Borough of Hillsdale relating to said subject.218
217. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Uses and Requirements is on file in the Borough offices
and is included as an attachment to this chapter.
218. Editor's Note: See Ch. 248, Soil Movement.
§ 310-54 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-55
288:522
E. Swimming pools. All swimming pools shall be enclosed in accordance
with the requirements and provisions of the applicable ordinances of
the Borough of Hillsdale relating to said subject.219 No swimming pool
shall be constructed other than as an accessory use to a dwelling. No
swimming pool shall be located nearer than 10 feet to any rear lot line
or side lot line or nearer to any street line than the principal building to
which it is an accessory. The foregoing distances shall be measured
from the pool water line or any portion of the above the ground
structure, whichever is nearest the property line.
F. Visual obstructions at intersections of streets. At the intersection of two
or more streets, no hedge, fence, wall or other obstruction to vision
(other than a single post or tree not exceeding one square foot in crosssection)
which is higher than four feet above curb level shall be
permitted in the area formed by the intersecting street lines and a line
joining points each 25 feet distant from said intersection along said
street lines.
G. Conflict with master plan or official map. If a building lot has frontage
upon a street which on the master plan or official map of the Borough of
Hillsdale is proposed for right-of-way widening, the required front
setback shall be measured from such proposed right-of-way line.
H. Accessory structures and uses.
(1) No detached accessory building shall be closer to any principal
building than a distance equal to the height of such accessory
building, but in no event closer than 10 feet to the principal
building.
(2) Except as otherwise herein provided, no accessory structure shall
exceed a height of 15 feet.
(3) No accessory structure other than a conforming sign, flagpole or
fence shall be located in a required front yard.
(4) Accessory structures and uses. [Amended 5-5-2009 by Ord. No.
09-09]
(a) An accessory structure other than a fence may be located in
any required rear yard, provided that it is set back from all lot
lines a distance not less than the height of such structure;
provided, however, that in the case of a corner lot, it shall also
conform.
(b) Notwithstanding Subsection H(4)(a) above, in the R-3 and R-4
Zones only, any detached accessory structure with a maximum
size of 100 square feet and a maximum height of eight feet may
have a four-foot setback from the rear and side property lines.
Any detached accessory structure that is larger in size than
219. Editor's Note: See Ch. 264, Swimming Pools, Private.
§ 310-55 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-55
288:523
100 square feet or has a height in excess of eight feet must
meet the setback requirements contained in § 310-55H(4)(a).
(5) Patios, unroofed porches and unroofed decks less than four feet
above finished grade which are less than 20% of the gross principle
dwelling area footprint may extend into required side and rear
yards but not closer than 10 feet to any lot line. Deck area shall
include stairs. The deck height shall exclude hand railings and
guards. [Amended 5-11-1999 by Ord. No. 99-11]
(6) The floor area of all accessory buildings shall not exceed 10% of the
total gross floor area of the principal building on that lot, except
that a private garage may have a floor area not greater than 25% of
the total gross floor area of the dwelling to which it is accessory.
(7) The grade of any driveway shall not exceed 10% as measured from
the street line.
(8) No accessory building in any district shall be used for residence
purposes. [Amended 12-8-1998 by Ord. No. 98-21]
(9) No accessory building to be constructed or used for the housing or
shelter of any animal other than a dog or cat shall be located within
250 feet of any lot or street line.
(10) A tennis court, paddle ball, racquet ball or similar court shall be
permitted only as an accessory use to a dwelling on any lot,
provided that:
(a) Such court shall not be located within a required front yard nor
within a required side yard abutting a street in the case of a
corner lot;
(b) The paved surface of any court shall be located no closer than
10 feet to any lot line;
(c) Any excavation, fill, retaining walls or paving of such court
shall require submission to the Borough Engineer of plans
showing finished grades and drainage for review and approval;
(d) Any lighting of such court shall be arranged to prevent glare on
adjacent properties;
(e) Any fence enclosing such court shall not be located within 15
feet of the dwelling on such lot.
(11) Residential professional offices, defined as the office, studio or
occupational room of any licensed professional person such as a
physician, surgeon, dentist, architect, engineer, or lawyer engaged
in direct personal services, are permitted accessory uses in the R-4
Zone, provided there is compliance with the following: [Added
8-13-2002 by Ord. No. 02-09]
§ 310-55 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-55
288:524
(a) Such use is conducted entirely within a dwelling that is the
bona fide residence of the principal practitioner.
(b) The use is ancillary to the main residential use of the premises.
(c) The principal practitioner engages not more than one
employee on the premises.
(d) Such use does not occupy more than 35% of the gross floor
area of the dwelling.
(e) Impervious coverage shall not exceed 35% of the entire site.
(f) There is no display of goods or advertising other than an
identification sign not to exceed 150 square inches.
(g) There shall be no change to the exterior of buildings or
structures because of the use, and no outside appearance of a
business use, including, but not limited to, parking, storage,
signs, or lighting.
(h) The use operates no equipment or process that creates noise,
vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical or electronic
interference, including interference with telephone, radio or
television reception, detectable by neighboring residents.
(i) The use does not require any increased or enhanced electrical
or water supply.
(j) The quantity and type of solid waste disposal is the same as
other residential uses in the zone district.
(k) The property owner shall register the residential professional
office use with the Borough Building Department and pay a
one-time registration fee of $100.
(12) Regulations as to Sheds. Garden Type Utility Sheds shall be no
greater than 120 square feet, and shall be located no closer than
three feet from any property line and shall comply with any
relevant fire codes. [Added 9-4-2018 by Ord. No. 18-09]
I. Prohibited uses. Any use not specifically permitted in a district
established by this chapter is hereby specifically prohibited in that
district. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing prohibition and
by way of example of the uses intended to be prohibited, the following
uses are specifically prohibited in all districts in the Borough of
Hillsdale:
(1) All signs not expressly related to the business being conducted on
the premises or otherwise specifically permitted by this Part 4.
(2) Storage of boats, trailers, campers or motor homes in the front yard
of any lot that is situated in a Residential District or in the front
yard of any lot that is immediately adjacent to a Residential
§ 310-55 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-55
288:525
District. In the case of a corner lot, all portions of the lot that
lie between the street lines and the nearest building lines of the
principal building on the lot shall, for the purpose of this section,
be deemed front yards.
(3) Quarries or the removal from any lot of soil or mineral deposits in
any form other than as specifically permitted by any other
ordinance.
(4) The use of any building or premises in such a manner that the
health, morals, safety or welfare of the community may be
endangered.
(5) Auction markets.
(6) Any use that has the character of or is similar to a carnival, circus,
bazaar, carousel, roller coaster, merry-go-round, Ferris wheel, pony
or train rides, midway, sideshow, miniature golf course and golf
driving range, concerts, exhibits and any show or performance or
other place of business where an amusement is provided and for
which an entrance fee is charged, except that such use may be
permitted for a period not to exceed one week when operated by
and for the benefit of a public, semipublic, civic, educational,
charitable or religious organization. [Amended 5-13-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-8]
(7) Drive-in restaurants.
(8) Motels, cabins for hire or trailer or mobile home parks.
(9) Outdoor storage or display of new or used motor vehicles, trailer
coaches or mobile homes, except as an accessory use to and in
conjunction with an authorized new car dealership.
(10) Junkyards, automobile wrecking or disassembly yards or yards for
the sorting or baling of scrap metal, paper, rags or other scrap or
waste material.
(11) Pool halls, bowling alleys or other establishments for the playing of
games of skill or chance, except that such uses may be permitted
for a period not to exceed one week when operated by and for the
benefit of a public, semipublic, civil, educational, charitable or
religious organization.
(12) Commercial radio and television transmitting stations, closedcircuit
radio and television transmitting and receiving antennas
and community antenna systems.
(13) Commercial car wash facilities.
(14) Concrete manufacturing or mixing plants.
§ 310-55 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-55
288:526
(15) Certain uses relating to marijuana prohibited. [Added
12-11-2018 by Ord. No. 18-21]
(a) The operation of retail marijuana establishments, which
includes retail marijuana stores, retail marijuana cultivations
facilities, retail marijuana products, manufacturing facilities,
and retail marijuana testing facilities, and the operation of
retail marijuana social clubs are prohibited within the Borough
of Hillsdale and, therefore, all activities related to the above
mentioned retail uses such as, but not limited to, cultivation,
extraction, manufacturing, processing, storing, laboratory
testing, labeling, transporting, delivering, dispensing,
transcending and distributing either recreational or medicinal
marijuana are expressly prohibited within the Borough of
Hillsdale. For purposes of this section, "hookah lounges" and
similar establishments in which a primary use is the use of a
shared smoking device shall be considered a retail marijuana
establishment regardless of whether marijuana is used or
consumed through such smoking device. This shall also
prohibit businesses selling, distributing, cultivating, growing
and/or facilitating the sale and/or use of marijuana, including
any ancillary or related paraphernalia.
(b) To the extent that the State of New Jersey permits a
municipality to opt out of any State legislation permitting any
use set forth in paragraph (a) above, the Borough of Hillsdale
does hereby so opt out.
J. Temporary storage containers. Temporary storage containers are
permitted as defined in § 310-4. Property owners and occupants of
residential properties may apply for a permit to allow for storage
containers on their properties in residential zones and/or on residential
uses in nonresidential zones within the Borough of Hillsdale.
Restrictions for the use and placement of storage containers are as
follows: [Added 10-7-2008 by Ord. No. 08-13]
(1) No person shall place upon any premises in the Borough a
temporary storage container unless a permit is acquired from the
Borough Zoning Officer.
(2) Temporary storage containers are permitted in the R-1, R-2, R-3
and R-4 Zone Districts, and on properties improved with a singlefamily
detached dwelling in the C/Commercial and I/Industrial
Zone Districts.
(3) No more than one temporary storage container shall be placed on
an individual lot at one time.
(4) Temporary storage containers shall not exceed eight feet wide, 10
feet high, or 20 feet long.
§ 310-55 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-55
288:527
(5) The storage container shall be located on an existing paved
driveway, but when not placed on an existing driveway shall be
located in the rear or front yard of the lot but no closer than 10 feet
to the front lot line. In the event that the Zoning Official determines
that it is not reasonably possible to place the temporary storage
container at least 10 feet from the front lot line, the owner, with the
approval of the Zoning Official, may place the container in a paved
driveway closer than 10 feet to the lot line. The temporary storage
container shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic flow,
obstruct sight distances and sight triangles at intersections of
public streets, or be located within the public right-of-way.
(6) Temporary storage containers shall not be placed on a lot more
than 180 days cumulatively within a twelve-month period. The start
date of the time period shall be the date of container delivery,
which must be provided on the permit application. The delivery
ticket must be supplied to the Zoning Officer upon request.
(7) A temporary storage container permit shall expire 180 days from
the permit issuance date. Not less than 30 days prior to the
expiration of the one-hundred-eighty-day time period, if additional
storage time is required, the applicant must submit an informal
application with requisite fee to the Planning Board on forms
provided by the Board Secretary. The applicant shall make an
informal presentation to the Planning Board; thereafter, the Board
shall provide the Zoning Officer with guidance as to whether a
permit time extension is warranted, and the length of time for the
extension, where appropriate.
(8) Applications for temporary storage containers shall be in writing on
forms provided by the Borough and state the following:
(a) Name and address of the owner of the property.
(b) Name and address of the applicant.
(c) Description of the temporary storage container, including size
and dimension of temporary storage container and zone
district in which the property is located.
(d) A notarized statement indicating that the applicant
understands and agrees that the temporary storage container
is temporary in nature and the applicant understands and has
read the ordinance regulating same.
(e) Applications shall be reviewed by the Zoning Officer for
completeness and thereafter shall issue said permit within
seven calendar days of filing.
(9) The permit application and review fee shall be $50.
§ 310-55 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-55
288:528
(10) This Subsection may be enforced by the Borough of Hillsdale Police
Department, Zoning Officer, Construction Code Official, or such
other employee or department of the Borough as designated by the
Borough Administrator.
(11) Any person, corporation and/or entity violating or neglecting to
comply with any provision of this Subsection J shall be subject to a
fine of up to $500. Each and every week such violation or
noncompliance exists shall constitute a separate offense and an
additional fine shall be imposed.
(12) All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent or in conflict
with this Subsection J are hereby repealed as to said
inconsistencies and conflicts.
(13) If the provisions of any section, part of any section, or clause or
phrase of this Subsection J are for any reason held to be invalid or
unconstitutional, said decision shall not affect the remaining
provisions of this Subsection J.
(14) This Subsection J shall take effect immediately upon passage and
publication as required by law.
§ 310-55 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-55
288:529

ARTICLE XV
Special Regulations
§ 310-56. Fences.
A. No fence in any district shall exceed four feet in height above the curb
level when located within 25 feet of the intersection of two street lines.
For the purposes of this article, any outdoor wall other than a retaining
wall shall be deemed a fence.
B. No fence in any residential district or on a lot in any other district on
which residential buildings are erected shall exceed four feet in height
above ground level when located at a distance closer to any street line
than the front setback line prescribed for said district, nor shall any
such fence exceed six feet in height above ground level when located at
a distance equal to or greater than the front setback line prescribed for
said district. [Amended 5-5-2009 by Ord. No. 09-09]
C. No fence in any commercial district shall exceed a height of six feet
above ground level, except as noted in § 310-56A and B.
D. No fence in an industrial district shall exceed a height of eight feet
above ground level, except as noted in § 310-56A and B.
E. The restrictions set forth in the Article shall not prevent the erection of
an open wire fence not exceeding eight feet in height above ground
level anywhere within a public park, public playground or public school
property. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the erection of a
retaining wall.
F. The following fences and fencing materials at any location which a
dwelling is situated are specifically prohibited: barbed-wire fences,
sharp-pointed metal fences, canvas, cloth, electrically-charged fences,
temporary fences, expandable fences or collapsible fences; provided,
however, that nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent the erection of
suitable windbreaks for the winter protection of trees, shrubs and other
vegetation.
G. All fences shall be within property lines. No fence shall encroach upon a
street. All fences must be erected such that the posts or other materials
supporting the fence and/or fence fabric are located on the inside of the
fence facing the property being enclosed or protected. [Amended
5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
H. Every fence shall be maintained in a safe, sound and upright condition
and shall be subject to the inspection of the Hillsdale Construction Code
Agency.
I. If the Hillsdale Construction Code Agency, upon inspection, shall
determine that any fence or retaining wall, or portion of any fence or
retaining wall, is not being maintained in a safe, sound, upright
condition, it shall notify the owner of the lot, in writing, of its findings
§ 310-56 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-56
288:531
§ 310-56.1. Towers and antennas. [Added 7-2-1997 by Ord. No.
97-14]
and order such fence or retaining wall or portion of such fence or
retaining wall to be repaired or removed within 15 days from the date
of such written notice to the owner.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings set forth below:
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE — Structures that camouflage or
conceal the presence of antennas or towers.
ANTENNA — Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on
a tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiate
or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio
frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications
signals or other communication signals.
BACKHAUL NETWORK — The lines that connect a provider's towers/
cell sites to one or more cellular telephone switching offices, and/or
long distance providers, or the public switched telephone network.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
HEIGHT — When referring to a tower or other structure, the distance
measured from the finished grade of the parcel to the highest point on
the tower or other structure, including the base pad and any antenna.
INTERNET — The international computer network of both federal and
nonfederal interoperable packet switched data networks.[Added
7-13-2004 by Ord. No. 04-16]
PREEXISTING TOWERS AND PREEXISTING ANTENNAS — Any
towers or antennas for which a building permit or special use permits
have been properly issued prior to the effective date of this section,
including permitted towers or antennas that have not yet been
constructed so long as such approval is current and not expired.
TOWER — Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for
the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio
and similar communication purposes, including self-supporting lattice
towers, guyed towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio
and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier
towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and the
like. The term includes the structure and any support thereto.
B. Applicability.
(1) New towers and antennas. All new towers or antennas in the
Borough of Hillsdale shall be subject to these regulations, except as
provided in Subsection B(2) through (4), inclusive.
§ 310-56 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-56.1
288:532
(2) Amateur radio station operators/receive-only antennas. This
section shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any
antenna that is under 70 feet in height and is owned and operated
by a federally-licensed amateur radio station operator or is used
exclusively for receive-only antennas.
(3) Preexisting towers and antennas. Preexisting towers and
preexisting antennas shall not be required to meet the
requirements of this section, other than the requirements of
Subsection C(6) and (7).
(4) AM array. For purposes of implementing this section, an AM array,
consisting of one or more tower units and supporting ground
system which functions as one AM broadcasting antenna, shall be
considered one tower. Measurements for setbacks and separation
distances shall be measured from the outer perimeter of the towers
included in the AM array. Additional tower units may be added
within the perimeter of the AM array by right.
(5) Nonprofit Internet access. This section shall not apply to antenna
constructed and maintained without providing legal consideration
to the landlord or tenant occupying the site and functioning for the
sole purpose of providing free Internet access to the public at
Borough-owned or -operated property. The antenna must otherwise
comply with permit requirements and restrictions applicable to
structures, including but not limited to, height as set forth under
§ 310-54. [Added 7-13-2004 by Ord. No. 04-16]
C. General requirements.
(1) Principal or accessory use. Antennas and towers may be considered
either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use of an
existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation
of an antenna or tower on such lot.
(2) Lot size. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a
tower or antenna complies with district development regulations,
including but not limited to setback requirements, lot-coverage
requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the
entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or towers may be
located on leased parcels within such lot.
(3) Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for an antenna and/or
tower shall provide to the Zoning Officer an inventory of its existing
towers, antennas, or sites, approved for towers or antennas, that
are either within the jurisdiction of the Borough of Hillsdale or
within one mile of the border thereof, including specific
information about the location, height, and design of each tower.
The Zoning Officer may share such information with other
applicants applying for administrative approvals or special use
permits under this section or other organizations seeking to locate
§ 310-56.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-56.1
288:533
antennas within the jurisdiction of the Borough of Hillsdale;
provided, however, that the Zoning Officer is not, by sharing such
information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites
are available or suitable.
(4) Aesthetics. Towers and antennas shall meet the following
requirements:
(a) Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or,
subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a
neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
(b) At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related
structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors,
textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend towers
and related structure into the natural setting and surrounding
buildings.
(c) If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the
antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment
must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely
compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to
make the antenna and related equipment as visually
unobtrusive as possible.
(5) Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by
the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the
lighting alternatives and design chosen must cause the least
disturbance to the surrounding views.
(6) State or federal requirements. All towers must meet or exceed
current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any
other agency of the state or federal government with the authority
to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations
are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed
by this section shall bring such towers and antennas into
compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six
months of the effective date of such standards and regulations,
unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the
controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring towers and
antennas into compliance with such revised standards and
regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or
antennas at the owner's expense.
(7) Building codes: safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity
of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in
compliance with standards contained in applicable state or local
building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are
published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended
from time to time. If, upon inspection, the Borough of Hillsdale
concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and
standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then
§ 310-56.1 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-56.1
288:534
upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner
shall have 30 days to bring such tower into compliance with such
standards. Failure to bring such tower into compliance within said
30 days shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or
antenna at the owner's expense.
(8) Measurement. For purposes of measurement, tower setbacks and
separation distances shall be calculated and applied to facilities
located in the Borough of Hillsdale irrespective of municipal and
county jurisdictional boundaries.
(9) Not essential services. Towers and antennas shall be regulated and
permitted pursuant to this section and shall not be regulated or
permitted as essential services, public utilities or private utilities.
(10) Franchises. Owners and/or operators of towers or antennas shall
certify that all franchises required by law for the construction and/
or operation of a wireless communication system in the Borough of
Hillsdale have been obtained and shall file a copy of all required
franchises with the Zoning Officer.
(11) Signs. No signs shall be allowed on an antenna or tower.
(12) Multiple antenna/tower plan. The Borough of Hillsdale encourages
the users of towers and antennas to submit a single application for
approval of multiple towers and/or antenna sites.
D. Permitted uses.
(1) General. The uses listed in this subsection are deemed to be
permitted uses and shall not require administrative approval or a
conditional use permit.
(2) Permitted uses. The following uses are specifically permitted:
(a) Antennas, towers or alternate tower structure located on
property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the Borough
of Hillsdale, provided that a license or lease authorizing such
antenna or tower has been approved by the Borough of
Hillsdale.
E. Area, bulk and yard requirements shall be as follows:
(1) Minimum front yard setback: 50 feet or the height of the structure,
whichever is greater.
(2) Minimum rear yard setback: 50 feet or the height of the structure,
whichever is greater.
(3) Minimum side yard setback: five feet.
(4) Maximum height of tower: 130 feet.
(5) Maximum height of associated structures: eight feet.
§ 310-56.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-56.1
288:535
(6) Maximum square footage of associated structures: 150 square feet.
F. Additional requirements.
(1) All facilities shall be suitably secured and enclosed in a fence of not
less than six feet high.
(2) Site plan approval by the Hillsdale Planning Board shall be
required, and the following information shall be provided:
(a) A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and
height of the proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning,
adjacent land uses and zoning within 200 feet (including when
adjacent to other municipalities), Master Plan classification of
the site and all properties within the applicable separation
distances set forth in Subsection E, adjacent roads, proposed
means of access, setbacks from property lines, elevation
drawings of the proposed means of access, setbacks from
property lines, elevation drawings of the proposed tower and
any other structures, topography, parking and other
information deemed by the Zoning Officer to be necessary to
assess compliance with this section.
(b) Legal description of the parent tract and leased parcel (if
applicable).
(c) The setback distance between the proposed tower and the
nearest residential unit or residentially zoned properties,
whether platted or unplatted.
(d) The separation distance from other towers shall be shown on
an updated site plan or map. The applicant shall also identify
the type of construction of the existing tower(s) and the owner/
operator of the existing tower(s), if known.
(e) A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials.
(f) Method of fencing, finished color, if applicable, and methods of
camouflage and illumination.
(g) A description of compliance with this section and all applicable
federal, state or local laws.
(h) A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether
construction of the tower will accommodate collocation of
additional antennas for future users.
(i) Identification of the entities providing the backhaul network
for the tower(s) described in the application and other cellular
sites owned or operated by the applicant in the municipality.
(j) A description of the suitability of the use of existing towers,
other structures or alternative technology not requiring the
§ 310-56.1 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-56.1
288:536
use of towers or structures to provide the services to be
provided through the use of the proposed new tower.
(k) A description of the feasible location(s) of future towers or
antennas within the Borough of Hillsdale based upon existing
physical, engineering, technological or geographical
limitations in the event the proposed tower is erected.
(3) In the event that a communication tower is abandoned or not
operated for a period of one year, the same shall be removed, at the
option of the Borough, at the sole expense of the operator.
(4) Noise levels generated by the operation of the antenna operation at
any property line shall be not more than 50 decibels.
(5) Site lighting used to illuminate tower shall be oriented inward
toward the tower to minimize spillage and glare onto adjacent
properties.
(6) The tower and antennae shall be designed in accordance with the
current edition of the Building Officials and Code Administrators
National Building Code.
(7) Any generator located on the site shall be within an equipment
structure. All fuel shall be contained in accordance with NJDEP
requirements.
(8) Site clearing shall be minimized to preclude the removal of
vegetation beyond that necessary to install and maintain the
facility.
(9) Communication towers shall not cause a disruption to, or interfere
with other radio, communications, or television transmissions or
equipment. If such disruption or interference is found to be caused
by the operation of the communication tower, the subscribers and/
or leasees shall modify their equipment, operations to abate the
deficiencies.
G. Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or alternative
technology. No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant
demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the Planning Board that
no existing tower, structure or alternative technology that does not
require the use of towers or structures can accommodate the
applicant's proposed antenna. An applicant shall submit information
requested by the Planning Board related to the availability of suitable
existing towers, other structures or alternative technology. Evidence
submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower, structure or
alternative technology can accommodate the applicant's proposed
antenna may consist of any of the following:
(1) No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic
area which meet applicant's engineering requirements.
§ 310-56.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-56.1
288:537
(2) Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet
applicant's engineering requirements.
(3) Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural
strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related
equipment.
(4) The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic
interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures,
or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause
interference with the applicant's proposed antenna.
(5) The fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the owner in
order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing
tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding
new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable.
(6) The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors
that render existing towers and structures unsuitable.
(7) The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology that
does not require the use of towers or structures, such as a cable
microcell network using multiple low-powered transmitters/
receivers attached to a wireline system, is unsuitable. Costs of
alternative technology that exceed new tower or antenna
development shall not be presumed to render the technology
unsuitable.
§ 310-56.1 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-56.1
288:538
ARTICLE XVI
Parking Regulations
§ 310-57. Off-street parking. [Amended 6-23-1987 by Ord. No.
87-11; 9-11-1990 by Ord. No. 90-12; 3-10-1992 by Ord. No. 92-2]
A. Off-street parking space shall be provided as specified in this article
and shall be furnished with necessary maneuvering areas, passageways
and driveways. All such space shall be deemed to be required space on
the lot on which the use it serves is situated and shall not be
encroached upon or reduced in any manner.
B. The collective provision of off-street parking areas by two or more
buildings or uses located on adjacent lots shall be permitted, provided
that the total of such facilities shall not be less than the sum required of
the various buildings or uses computed separately, and further provided
that the land upon which the collective facilities are located shall be
owned by one or more of the collective users.
C. Except as herein otherwise provided, no vehicle other than a passenger
automobile, motorcycle or passenger automobile of recreation design
(Winnebago or mobile homes of similar type) shall be parked in a
Residential District between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. or on
Sunday. The only exceptions to this provision shall be as follows:
(1) One vehicle used for the transportation of goods, materials or
commercial transportation of people may be regularly parked or
stored on a lot in a Residential District, provided that the gross
registered weight shall be less than 10,000 pounds, the height of
the vehicle shall not exceed eight feet and the vehicle shall not have
more than four wheels.
(2) Any vehicles other than those as described and permitted in
Subsection C(1) must be parked or stored in enclosed garages in
Residential Zones.
(3) The Code Compliance officer of the Borough of Hillsdale may
permit commercial vehicles or equipment to remain on residential
property between the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. or on Sunday
if, in the judgment of the Code Compliance Officer, such vehicles
are necessary in the course of construction activities at the site.
Such permit may not be issued prior to issuance of a building
permit nor continue beyond the date on which a certificate of
occupancy for the premises is issued.
D. No display vehicles or trailer devices for selling, offering for sale or
storage of goods or providing services therefrom shall be permitted in
any district for longer than a twenty-four-hour period.
E. The Land Use Officer or his or her designee shall have the power to
enforce the provisions of Part 4, Article XVI, § 310-57 of the Code of the
Borough of Hillsdale.
§ 310-57 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-58
288:539
§ 310-58. Parking areas in commercial and industrial districts.
[Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
Every parcel of land used as a public or private parking area in a
commercial or industrial district shall be developed and maintained in
accordance with the following requirements:
§ 310-58.1. Off-street parking Mixed-Use Districts. [Added
6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 18-12]
§ 310-59. Required off-street parking spaces. [Added 6-12-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-12; Amended 6-8-1983 by Ord. 83-7; 7-11-1989 by Ord.
No. 89-18]
Provision for off-street parking areas shall be made in accordance with the
following minimum standards:
A. Parking areas may be located in any yard space, but shall not be closer
than 10 feet to any street line.
B. For commercial and all nonresidential uses in business districts,
required parking shall be provided on the site.
C. The provisions of this section may be met by participation in a
community parking program designed to serve a larger area, provided
that plans for such community parking have been approved by the
Planning Board in connection with site plan approval.
A. No parking shall be permitted between a street right-of-way and the
primary street-facing façade wall.
B. All parking areas shall be well screened to a minimum height of four
feet by the use of appropriate plantings of sufficient height and density
so as to obscure the view of such parking areas from all streets and
adjacent properties.
C. Where a parking lot or area abuts a residential use or zone, no parking
shall be located closer than 10 feet to said zone boundary.
D. All required parking must be provided on-site.
E. Parking shall be subject to additional requirements per § 310-59.
A. One-family detached dwellings: one parking space per dwelling unit.
B. Barber- and beauty shops: two spaces per chair plus one additional
space for each employee.
C. Banks, financial, executive and professional business offices: one
parking space for every 150 square feet of building area or major
fraction thereof; provided, however, that with respect to professional
offices of practitioners of the healing arts there shall be established a
§ 310-58 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-59
288:540
minimum requirement of five spaces for each practitioner. [Amended
5-13-1997by Ord. No. 97-8]
D. Retail and service stores, except when otherwise specifically provided
herein: one parking space for every 150 square feet of building area or
major fraction thereof.
E. Home professional office: three spaces per practitioner, plus one
additional space for each practitioner and each employee.
F. Auditoriums, stadiums, assembly halls, union halls, community centers
and similar places of public and quasi-public assembly: one parking
space for every five persons who may legally be admitted therein at one
time under the state statutes or Borough ordinances.
G. Hospitals, nursing homes and similar institutional uses for care of the ill
or aged: one parking space for every four beds, plus one additional
parking space for every two employees and members of the staff in the
largest working shift.
H. Mortuaries and funeral homes: two parking spaces for every 50 square
feet of floor area in the slumber rooms, parlors or individual funeral
service rooms.
I. Laundromats: one parking space for every two washing machines.
J. Motor vehicle sales and service: one parking space for every 150 feet of
building area or fraction thereof.
K. Restaurants and diners (indoor service only): one parking space for
every four seats for customers, plus one space for every two employees.
L. Public utility installations: one parking space per employee using the
facilities.
M. Parks and other outdoor recreation site: five parking spaces for each
acre of land up to 50 acres and one parking space per gross acre of land
above 50 acres.
N. Industrial uses, laboratories and related offices: one parking space for
each 300 square feet of building area. Such parking area shall not be
located within a buffer area as required by this chapter. [Amended
5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
O. Public and private schools: one space for each ten pupils plus adequate
space for busses and delivery vehicles.
P. Commercial, business, trade or vocational schools: one for each staff
member or employee plus one space for each two pupils.
Q. Senior citizen housing: minimum of one space for every four dwelling
units or such other increased space as deemed necessary by the
Planning Board of the Borough of Hillsdale.
§ 310-59 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-59
288:541
§ 310-60. Off-street loading and unloading.
R. Multi-family housing: Residential Site Improvement Standards.
A. Every building, structure or part thereof of more than 5,000 square feet
of gross building area erected and/or occupied for commerce, hospital,
laundry, dry-cleaning, places of public and quasi-public assembly,
industry and other similar uses involved in the receipt and distribution
by vehicles of supplies, materials or merchandise shall be provided with
at least one permanently maintained adequate space for truck standing,
loading and unloading services on the premises. One additional truck
space shall be provided for every additional 20,000 square feet or
fraction thereof of gross area in the building.
B. Access to truck standing, loading and unloading space shall be provided
directly from a public street or alley or from any right-of-way that will
not interfere with public convenience and will permit orderly and safe
movement of truck vehicles.
C. The space required by this section for off-street loading and unloading
shall be provided in addition to required off-street parking space.
§ 310-59 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-60
288:542
ARTICLE XVII
Signs
[Amended 12-13-1994 by Ord. No. 94-17; 6-6-1996 by Ord. No. 96-5;
11-12-1996 by Ord. No. 96-13; 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8;
4-14-1998 by Ord. No. 98-3; 10-4-2011 by Ord. No. 11-17; 3-8-2016
by Ord. No. 16-06]
§ 310-61. General Provisions.
A. General provisions applicable to all signs within the Borough of
Hillsdale.
(1) No sign may be positioned on a structure so that it obscures any
architectural feature, including, but not limited to, windows,
transoms, cornices, trim, porch railings, etc.
(2) No sign shall be erected in such a way as to obstruct a door,
window or fire escape of the building to which the sign is affixed.
(3) No sign as regulated by this chapter shall be erected at or near an
intersection of any street in such a manner as to obstruct free and
clear vision, nor at any location where, by reason of the position,
shape or color, it may interfere with, obstruct the view of or be
confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device, or which
makes use of the words "stop", "look", "danger" or any other word,
phrase, symbol or character in such manner as to interfere with,
mislead or confuse traffic.
(4) Obscene matter prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to
display upon any sign any obscene, indecent or immoral matter.
(5) All signs shall be constructed of quality materials and shall
complement the building's architecture.
(6) All freestanding signs shall be set back 10 feet from all property
lines unless otherwise stated in this chapter.
(7) All signs shall be maintained in good condition and not allowed to
become dilapidated. All signs and their supports shall be kept in
continual repair, including cleaning, painting, replacing of
defective parts and otherwise maintaining a presentable condition.
B. Prohibited signs within the Borough of Hillsdale.
(1) The following signs and sign types are prohibited within the
Borough and shall not be erected. Any lawfully existing permanent
sign or sign type which is among the prohibited signs listed below
shall be deemed a nonconforming sign subject to the provisions of
§ 310-61C:
(a) Billboards.
§ 310-61 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-61
288:543
(b) No freestanding signs shall be at any point more than eight
feet above the ground level.
(c) Signs with flashing, moving or intermittent lighting of any
kind, except for carnivals or special events, which have
received authorization from the governing body. Also exempt
are "Open" signs which may flash.
(d) LED illuminated signs, except for "Open" signs.
(e) Portable signs.
(f) Temporary signs tacked, posted or painted to benches, barrels,
buildings, posts, trees, sidewalks, curbs, rocks or any
structure.
(g) Signs that list the names of developers, contractors,
subcontractors, engineers or architects on a job site beyond
the duration of construction activities or issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.
(h) Signs placed on a public sidewalk or public property, except for
signs erected by the Borough or with authorization of the
Mayor and Council.
(i) Roof signs, including signs mounted on mansard roofs.
(j) Signs painted on the window or the facade of the building,
excluding water-soluble paints for seasonal displays.
(k) Flashing or steady-burning ornamental lights displayed within
one foot of a window that are visible to the public for the
purpose of enhancing or supplementing the visual attraction to
a commercial business. Such lights are permitted for seasonal
use to the extent that they are not displayed for longer than 60
days per year and do not create a hazard to safety in the
judgment of the Police Department.
(l) Signs that emit smoke, visible vapor or smoke, sound, odor or
visible particles.
(m) Signs that obstruct, conceal, hide or otherwise obscure from
view any official traffic or governmental sign, signal or device.
(n) Signs within a sight triangle that obstruct a clear view of
pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic.
(o) Signs which contain or consist of balloons, blimps, streamers,
feather flags, spinners or other similar moving devices.
Feather flags without letters or logos are also prohibited.
Pennants, when not in conjunction with permitted grand
opening signs.
(p) Signs with more than two faces.
§ 310-61 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-61
288:544
(q) Vehicle signs when the vehicle is not regularly used in the
conduct of the business or activity located on the property; and
where the vehicle is visible and parked within 50 feet of a
street right-of-way.
C. Nonconforming signs and removal of certain signs.
(1) Nonconforming signs. A nonconforming sign that was lawfully
erected may continue to be maintained until the nonconforming
sign is substantially damaged or destroyed. At such time that the
nonconforming sign is substantially damaged or destroyed, the
nonconforming sign must either be removed or be brought into
conformity with this chapter and with any other applicable law or
regulation.
(a) Routine maintenance. Routine maintenance is intended to
include such activities as cleaning, replacement of light bulbs,
fasteners, etc., removal of rust and corrosion and repainting.
Specifically prohibited is the replacement of the sign structure,
in whole or in part.
(b) Alteration of nonconforming sign use. Any sign which is
nonconforming shall not be enlarged, extended, relocated or
altered in any manner.
(2) Removal of certain signs.
(a) When a single-occupancy business ceases operation for more
than 60 days:
[1] Any sign face identifying or advertising such business shall
be immediately removed.
[2] If the sign is a preexisting nonconforming sign, the sign
and all its supporting structures shall be immediately
removed.
(b) When an owner entity, such as a shopping center or multitenant
building, changes and the owner's name is on the sign,
then within 90 days the sign shall be removed and replaced if it
is nonconforming.
(c) Business owners will be notified of any violations of
Subsections C(2)(a) and (b) above, which exist beyond the
above-established time periods and will be given 30 days to
comply with the notice before fines are imposed. Failure to
remedy the violation will result in fines not to exceed $50 per
violation per day.
D. Exempt signs. The provisions and regulations of this chapter, including
§ 310-61E shall not apply to the following signs:
§ 310-61 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-61
288:545
(1) Street address signage shall be provided on each building or for
each building tenant. Street address signage may be placed on the
facade, the door or on a permitted freestanding sign. A corner
building may have street address signage on both street-facing
facades.
(2) Signs not exceeding one square foot in area and bearing only
names of occupants of premises or other identification of premises
not having commercial connotations.
(3) Flags of any government entity are permitted within the Borough.
However, residential parcels shall be limited to one flagpole, which
shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from all property lines. A
flagpole shall not exceed 20 feet in height.
(4) Traffic or other municipal signs, legal notices, identification,
informational or directional signs erected or required by
governmental bodies.
(5) Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings, except
letters, trademarks, moving parts or moving lights. This shall
include names of buildings and date of erection.
(6) Directional signs. On-site directional signs, not exceeding three
square feet in area and three feet in height shall be permitted as
needed for safety. Directional signs may bear the company's logo,
which may be a maximum of one square foot. On-site directional
signs may be internally illuminated.
(7) Parking lot markers. Parking lot markers may include paint
stenciled on the pavement and freestanding pole signs that are
maximum height of six feet and have an area no greater than two
square feet. Parking lot markers including signs denoting
handicapped spaces, the numbering of spaces, words such as
"Reserved" and the like shall be permitted as needed.
(8) Political signs. A political sign may be displayed as a freestanding
sign. A political sign shall be removed within seven calendar days
following the election to which it pertains.
(9) Open signs. For each permitted non-residential establishment, one
open sign is permitted. See § 310-4, Definitions for parameters.
(10) Temporary construction signs. Temporary construction signs shall
be permitted identifying the owner, architect, builder, realtor and/
or contractor on the premises on which a building is being
constructed, altered or repaired, subject to the following
limitations:
(a) For each residential parcel, one temporary construction sign
shall be permitted. For commercial and industrial parcels two
signs are allowed.
§ 310-61 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-61
288:546
(b) Temporary construction signs shall not exceed five square feet
in area and four feet in height.
(11) Temporary real estate signs, subject to the following limitations:
(a) For each parcel, one temporary real estate sign for each street
frontage may be displayed.
(b) For a parcel in residential use, the temporary real estate sign
shall not exceed six square feet in area and three feet in height.
For a parcel in nonresidential use, the sign shall not exceed 20
square feet in area and five feet in height.
(c) Temporary real estate signs shall be removed within seven
days following the closing or settlement of a sale, lease or
rental of the real estate that was offered for sale, lease or rent.
(12) Temporary window signs. Where window signs are permitted,
temporary window signs advertising special sales or events shall be
permitted, subject to the following limitations:
(a) One or more temporary window signs may be displayed at the
same time.
(b) Temporary window signs shall not cover more than 25% of the
glass surface.
(c) Temporary window signs shall not be displayed for a period
longer than 20 days.
E. Permits.
(1) No person shall erect, alter, locate or relocate or reconstruct within
the limits of the Borough of Hillsdale any sign or signs without first
having obtained and paid for and having in force and effect a
zoning permit for the location of such sign or signs from the Zoning
Official of the Borough of Hillsdale.
(2) Permit procedures and guidelines.
(a) Any sign not exempt under § 310-61D must receive approval
from the Zoning Official.
(b) Permit review.
[1] Applications for new signs or alterations to existing signs
shall be prepared by the applicant and submitted to the
Zoning Official.
[2] Applications and copies of the regulations for signage are
available from the Borough.
[3] Questions about the regulations may be addressed to the
Zoning Official.
§ 310-61 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-61
288:547
§ 310-62. Signs permitted for specific uses.
The following uses are permitted within certain districts within the
Borough. The signs in this section are required to obtain permits. In
addition to the signs that are permitted pursuant to § 310-61D, the following
signs shall be permitted for each of the following specific uses:
[4] Sign design should take into account how it will be
constructed, where it will be located and how it will be
mounted. Signs shall not be constructed until approval is
obtained from the Zoning Official.
(c) Application description. An application must include the
following to be considered complete:
[1] A completed application form.
[2] An accurately scaled, fully dimensioned drawing that is
legible, clear and prepared to a scale, of the proposed sign
and supporting frame, construction, details, copy,
illumination, etc.
[3] A scaled drawing or photograph of the building for which
the sign is proposed, with the location of the sign
accurately indicated.
(3) Fee schedule. All applications will require a zoning review fee and a
permit fee. Fees shall be as provided in Chapter 138, Fees.
(4) Upon issuing a sign permit, the Land Use Officer shall furnish
duplicates thereof to the Zoning Officer of the Borough of Hillsdale
and to the Hillsdale Construction Code Agency.
(5) Building Code compliance. All signs and all parts thereof, including
but not limited to framework, supports, background, anchors and
wiring system, shall be constructed and maintained in compliance
with the applicable building, electrical and fire prevention codes of
the Borough.
(6) Relocation of signs. Any sign that is moved to a new location, either
on the same structure or to other premises, shall be considered a
new sign and a permit shall be secured for any work performed in
connection therewith, and it shall be in conformance with the
requirements herein.
(7) Enforcement. Enforcement of all sign regulations shall conform to
the general enforcement powers conferred by statute and
conditions set forth by the Zoning Official.
(8) Commercial signs in residential zones. In the event that the
Planning Board grants a variance to permit a commercial use in a
residential zone, the signage for said use shall conform to
regulations provided for commercial zones in § 310-65.
§ 310-61 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-62
288:548
A. For parcels containing a permitted public park or public building, the
following signs are permitted:
(1) One illuminated permanent freestanding sign per public street
frontage. The maximum sign area shall be 16 square feet.
(2) Public buildings shall be permitted wall signs and incidental signs
as needed for identification purposes as determined by the
Borough.
(3) Temporary freestanding or banner signs may be erected for the
purpose of advertising local charitable or non-profit events. Each
parcel is permitted a maximum of one temporary freestanding or
banner sign. Said sign shall not exceed 12 square feet in area and
five feet in height. Said sign shall not be displayed for a period
longer than 21 days.
B. For parcels containing a conditionally-permitted public or private
nonprofit school, the following signs are permitted:
(1) One illuminated permanent freestanding sign per public street
frontage. The maximum sign area shall be 20 square feet. Said sign
may be digital.
(2) One wall sign per public entrance. The maximum sign area shall be
32 square feet for each permitted wall sign. Said signs may be
externally illuminated.
(3) Incidental signs are permitted as needed and determined by the
school and Zoning Official.
C. For parcels containing a conditionally-permitted place of worship, the
following signs are permitted:
(1) One illuminated permanent freestanding sign per public street
frontage. The maximum sign area shall be 16 square feet. Said sign
may be digital.
(2) One wall sign per street frontage. The maximum sign area shall be
32 square feet for each permitted wall sign. Said sign may be
externally illuminated.
(3) One freestanding bulletin board, which may or may not have
changeable letters. Said sign shall not exceed 15 square feet in
area and six feet in height. The sign shall be set back at least 20
feet from all property lines. The sign may be illuminated.
(4) A maximum of two incidental signs are permitted.
(5) Temporary religious banners may be erected by places of worship
for the purpose of advertising meeting dates or special events for
said institution. Each place of worship is permitted a maximum of
one temporary religious banner. Said sign shall not exceed 15
§ 310-62 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-62
288:549
§ 310-63. Signs permitted in residential districts only.
In addition to the signs that are permitted pursuant to § 310-61D, the
following signs shall be permitted in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, TC and SC
Districts:
§ 310-64. Signs permitted in the Industrial District.
In addition to the signs that are permitted pursuant to § 310-61D, the
following signs shall be permitted in the Industrial District:
square feet in area and five feet in height. A temporary religious
sign shall not be displayed for a period longer than 21 days.
D. Public service and charitable organization signs. Nonbusiness related
signs, which provide notice of local charitable or nonprofit events, may
be displayed as temporary window signs where temporary window
signs are permitted within the Borough. These signs shall be counted in
the maximum area permitted for temporary window signs. Said signs
may be displayed a maximum of 21 days prior to the event and shall be
removed immediately thereafter. If the building's windows are not
transparent, the public service and/or charitable organization sign may
be hung on the exterior of the building.
A. One wall sign indicating a permitted home professional office in the R-4
District, where a home professional office is permitted by ordinance
and/or registered with the Borough, provided that such sign shall not
exceed two square feet in area. Said sign may be externally illuminated.
B. Freestanding signs for permitted townhouse or senior citizen
communities, where permitted by ordinance, subject to the following
limitations:
(1) One freestanding sign shall be permitted per public street frontage.
(2) The maximum sign area shall be 16 square feet.
(3) The maximum sign height, including structure and sign area, shall
be six feet above the existing grade.
(4) Freestanding signs may be externally illuminated.
A. Wall signs, subject to the following limitations:
(1) One wall sign shall be permitted per business/tenant per public
street frontage.
(2) Each permitted wall sign shall have a maximum sign area of 90% of
the linear business frontage in feet, with a maximum area of 32
square feet. For example, if the linear business frontage is 25 feet,
the maximum sign area shall be 22.5 square feet.
§ 310-62 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-64
288:550
§ 310-65. Signs Permitted in the Commercial and Mixed-Use
Districts. [Amended 6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 18-12]
In addition to the signs that are permitted pursuant to § 310-61D, the
following signs shall be permitted within the Commercial District:
(3) The sign shall not project more than 12 inches from the building
facade.
(4) The top edge of a wall sign shall not be installed more than 20 feet
above the ground and shall not extend beyond the top of the
building.
(5) Wall signs may be illuminated.
B. Freestanding signs, subject to the following limitations:
(1) Properties with two or more businesses/tenants may have a
freestanding sign.
(2) A maximum of one freestanding sign is permitted per parcel.
(3) Freestanding signs shall not exceed 30 square feet in area and
eight feet in height.
C. Directory signs, subject to the following limitations:
(1) Where a building has upper story nonresidential uses, one
directory sign shall be permitted per entrance to said upper story
establishments. Said sign shall be located next to the exterior
entrance to the upper story establishments.
(2) The maximum sign area shall be three square feet.
(3) Directory signs may be illuminated by downward focused lights,
such as gooseneck lights.
D. Flagpoles. One flagpole is permitted on each nonresidential parcel. A
flagpole shall not exceed 25 feet in height and shall be set back a
minimum of 15 feet from all property lines and from any other
structure. Each flagpole is limited to one flag, not greater than 15
square feet in area.
E. Incidental signs. A maximum of three incidental signs are permitted per
business/tenant.
A. A permitted ground floor use may have a wall or projecting or awning
sign. A business wishing to have a combination of the aforementioned
signs shall be required to obtain a variance. The standards for wall,
projecting and awning signs are as follows:
(1) Wall signs, subject to the following limitations:
§ 310-64 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-65
288:551
(a) One wall sign shall be permitted per ground floor use per
public street frontage.
(b) The following types of wall signs shall be permitted:
[1] Individually internally illuminated channel letters.
Example shown below.
[2] Individual externally illuminated raised letters. Example
shown below.
[3] Back-lit raised letters with concealed ballast, which
creates a halo effect. Example shown below.
[4] Internally lit raised letters with concealed ballast. Example
shown below.
§ 310-65 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-65
288:552
[5] Signage board with or without gooseneck lighting.
Example shown below.
(c) The horizontal dimension of the sign shall not exceed 80% of
the width of the building frontage occupied by the use.
(d) Each permitted wall sign shall have a maximum sign area of
95% of the linear business frontage in feet, with a maximum
area of 24 square feet. For example, if the linear business
frontage is 20 feet, the maximum sign area shall be 19 square
feet.
(e) Wall signs shall not project more than 12 inches from the
building facade.
(f) The top edge of a wall sign shall not be installed above the
bottom of any second floor windows or within one foot of the
top of a parapet.
(2) Projecting signs, subject to the following limitations:
(a) One projecting sign shall be permitted per ground floor use per
public street frontage.
(b) The maximum sign area shall be 10 square feet.
(c) The lower edge of a projecting sign shall be at least eight feet
above the sidewalk or grade. The highest edge of a projecting
sign shall be no more than 14 feet above the sidewalk or grade.
(d) A projecting sign shall be attached to its support so that it does
not swing.
(3) Awning signs, subject to the following limitations:
(a) One awning sign shall be permitted for each business on the
first floor of a commercial building.
(b) The maximum sign area shall be 90% of the linear business
frontage in feet, with a maximum area of 20 square feet. For
§ 310-65 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-65
288:553
example, if the linear business frontage is 20 feet, the
maximum sign area shall be 18 square feet.
(c) The horizontal dimension of the text/logo shall not exceed 90%
of the width of the awning.
(d) The lower edge of an awning sign shall be at least eight feet
above the sidewalk or grade. No roll-out type of awning may
extend greater than six feet beyond the building facade or
within 18 inches of the curb face. All fixed awnings shall extend
no farther than three-and-one-half feet beyond the building
facade.
(e) Awnings may be illuminated with downward lighting, such as
gooseneck lighting.
B. Supplemental wall signs, subject to the following limitations:
(1) One externally illuminated wall sign is permitted on a rear facade
with a business entrance facing a parking area.
(2) The maximum sign area shall be six square feet.
(3) The sign shall not project more than six inches from the building
facade.
(4) The sign shall be located next to the business entrance and the top
edge of the sign shall be no higher than 10 feet above the sidewalk
or grade.
C. Directory signs, subject to the following limitations:
(1) Where a building has upper story nonresidential uses, one
directory sign shall be permitted per entrance to said upper story
establishments.
(2) The maximum sign area shall be four square feet.
(3) Directory signage shall be located next to the exterior entrance to
the upper story establishment(s). The top edge of the sign shall be
no higher than seven feet above the sidewalk or grade.
D. Freestanding signs, subject to the following limitations:
(1) Properties where the building is set back 60 feet or more from the
right-of-way may have a freestanding sign.
(2) There shall be no more than one freestanding sign per property.
(3) Freestanding signs shall not exceed 25 square feet in area and
eight feet in height.
(4) Freestanding signs may be internally or externally illuminated.
E. Window signs, subject to the following limitations:
§ 310-65 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-65
288:554
(1) Permitted ground floor and upper story nonresidential uses may
have window signs.
(2) Window signs shall not exceed 25% of the area of the glass surface,
but in no event shall they exceed a total of 36 square feet; the more
restrictive limitation shall apply. Window signs on doors shall not
exceed 10% of the glass area of the door on which they are affixed.
(3) All window signs shall be neat, clean and professional-looking.
Window signs shall pertain only to the establishment occupying the
premises where the window is located.
(4) Illuminated interior signs located within six feet of the window
glass or door glass of a building shall be considered a window sign
and shall meet all applicable requirements for window signs.
(5) Indirectly illuminated interior signs located within two feet of the
window glass or door glass of a building shall also be considered a
window sign and shall meet all applicable requirements for window
signs.
F. Menu boxes. One menu box is permitted for each restaurant, which
shall not exceed a maximum of three square feet. The front of the box
shall be comprised of clear safety glass, plastic or similar materials.
G. Flagpoles. One flagpole is permitted on each nonresidential parcel. A
flagpole shall not exceed 25 feet in height and shall be set back a
minimum of 15 feet from all property lines and from any other
structure. Each flagpole is limited to one flag, not greater than 15
square feet in area.
H. Temporary grand opening signs, subject to the following limitations:
(1) One temporary grand opening or coming soon sign may be
displayed for the grand opening of a business, relocation of a
business or to announce the approaching arrival of a new business.
Additionally, a maximum of two strings of pennants may be hung in
conjunction with the sign. Said pennants shall not be attached to
public or private trees or public street lights. No words or logos are
permitted on pennants.
(2) Said sign shall not exceed a maximum of 20 square feet.
(3) Said sign shall be located within the window of the commercial
establishment or on the exterior of the building no higher than the
roofline.
(4) A temporary grand opening sign shall not be displayed for a period
longer than 45 days.
§ 310-65 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-65
288:555

ARTICLE XVIII
Conditional Uses
§ 310-66. Guiding principles.
It is recognized that certain uses, activities and structures may be necessary
to serve the needs and convenience of the public. However, it is also
recognized that such uses may be or become inimical to the public health,
safety and general welfare if their establishment and maintenance are
permitted without proper consideration being given to existing conditions
and the character of the surrounding area. Such uses are hereby designated
as conditional uses. The Planning Board is hereby granted original
jurisdiction and discretionary power to grant a permit for conditional use
under the following terms, conditions, stipulations and guiding principles:
§ 310-67. Conditional uses. [Amended 5-8-1984 by Ord. No. 84-9;
10-8-1985 by Ord. No. 85-16; 7-11-1989 by Ord. 89-18; 12-12-1989
by Ord. No. 89-23]
A. The use for which application is made shall be one that is specifically
authorized as an exception use in the Schedule of Uses and
Requirements220 of this chapter for the district in which located.
B. The proposed design, arrangement and nature of the particular use
shall be such that the public health, safety and welfare will be protected
and reasonable consideration afforded to the:
(1) Character of the neighborhood and district.
(2) Conservation of property values.
(3) Potential congestion of vehicular traffic or creation of undue
hazard.
(4) Health and safety of residents or workers on adjacent properties
and in the surrounding neighborhood.
(5) Principles and objectives of this chapter and the master plan of the
Borough of Hillsdale.
C. The Planning Board shall, before granting the conditional use permit,
make a finding and determination that the particular use applied for
will, in the judgment of the Board, meet the minimum standards
specified for the particular use in § 310-67 and comply with such
additional conditions and safeguards as, in the opinion of Planning
Board, will tend to carry out the intent and objectives of this chapter.
D. The Planning Board shall hear and decide the application in accordance
with the procedure set forth in this chapter.
220. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Uses and Requirements is on file in the Borough offices
and is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 310-66 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-67
288:557
A. Motor vehicle service stations. Motor vehicle service stations may be
permitted in an commercial district if: [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-8]
(1) A site plan meeting the requirements of this chapter shall be filed
with the Planning Board showing, in addition to any other
requirements for a site plan, the exact location of the motor vehicle
service station, the number and location of fuel tanks to be
installed, the dimensions and capacity of each tank, the depth at
which the tanks will be placed below the ground, the number and
location of pumps to be installed, the type of structure and
accessory buildings to be constructed, the number of automobiles
which may be garaged and a description of the nature and extent of
the proposed use.
(2) The requirements of the commercial district set forth in this
chapter shall be complied with.
(3) All fuel pumps shall be located at least 25 feet from any street line
or property line.
(4) No vehicles shall be permitted to be parked on the premises of a
motor vehicle service station other than those used by the
employees in the indirect or direct operation of the establishment
and those being serviced by the station.
(5) Driveways shall cross the sidewalk at right angles and shall not be
more than 24 feet wide at any point. Driveways shall be at least 10
feet from any side lot line and 25 feet from the intersection of street
lines. No more than two driveways shall be permitted for each 100
feet of street frontage.
(6) The entire area of the site traversed by motor vehicles shall be
hard-surfaced with bituminous concrete or asphalt.
(7) The Planning Board shall determine that the site plan is
appropriate to the area. A five-foot planting strip, suitably
landscaped as recommended by the Borough Environmental
Commission, shall be provided between curb cuts and along all
other property lines.
(8) No motor vehicle service station shall be located within 1,500 feet
of any public entrance to a church, school, library, hospital, fire
station, park, playground, charitable institution or place of public
assemblage. Said distance shall be measured in a straight line
along the center lines of streets forming the shortest route from a
point in said center line opposite such public entrance to a point in
said center line opposite the nearest boundary of the service
station.
§ 310-67 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-67
288:558
(9) Any repair of motor vehicles shall be performed in a fully-enclosed
building. No parts or partially dismantled motor vehicle shall be
stored out-of-doors.
(10) Motor vehicle service stations shall comply with the sign
requirements contained in § 310-61A through § 310-61E.
[Amended 3-8-2016 by Ord. No. 16-06]
(11) One freestanding sign, which may be internally or externally
illuminated, shall be permitted for each street frontage, said sign
not to exceed eight feet in height and 40 square feet in area.
[Amended 3-8-2016 by Ord. No. 16-06]
(12) One wall sign shall be permitted per public street frontage. The
wall sign shall comply with the provisions of § 310-65A(1)(b). Each
permitted wall sign shall not exceed 24 square feet in area. Wall
signs shall not project more than 12 inches from the building
facade. [Amended 3-8-2016 by Ord. No. 16-06]
(13)Window signs shall be permitted in accordance with § 310-65E(1)
through (5). [Amended 3-8-2016 by Ord. No. 16-06]
B. Public utilities. Public utilities, as defined in N.J.S.A. 48:2-13, shall be
permitted in any zone district, provided that: [Amended 5-1-2012 by
Ord. No. 12-10]
(1) Should a utility service provider propose, for any reason, whether
or not required by law, permit, or order, that any design, redesign,
construction, repair, replacement, improvement, modification,
upgrade, rehabilitation, alteration, expansion, or addition to any
existing or new facility, installation, structure, building, or property
installation ("utility development") be located within any zone
district, the utility service provider shall provide evidence, in the
form and substance as herein required, or as requested by the land
use reviewing board, demonstrating that the proposed utility
development cannot be located in the Industrial Zone District of the
Borough of Hillsdale, or elsewhere.
(2) Should a utility service provider propose a utility development, said
service provider must obtain site plan approval from the municipal
land use board, pursuant to the requirements of Article XXIII of this
chapter and all requirements contained in this § 310-67B, prior to
commencing any site work on the utility development. Such utility
development includes, but is not limited to, changes to electrical
substations and their transmission and distribution of power
networks; changes to the storage facilities or operations, including
enclosed storage units or buildings, containment tanks or vessels,
reservoirs and spillways; and the release, transmission, or
distribution or transportation over land, by waterways, or through
subsurface means of electricity, water, petroleum products, natural
§ 310-67 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-67
288:559
or manufactured gases, waste transfer, or any other utility services
or utility products within the Borough of Hillsdale.
(3) The proposed utility development shall not alter or modify the use
or availability of the existing Borough, county or state roadway
systems located within the Borough of Hillsdale unless specifically
permitted in detail by the land use reviewing board.
(4) The proposed utility development shall not alter or modify any
properties and the improvements thereon owned or controlled by
the Borough of Hillsdale, Bergen County or State of New Jersey.
Such properties include, but are not limited to, roadways,
municipal buildings, municipal parking areas, Board of Education
buildings, recreational facilities, and open space.
(5) The utility service provider shall submit to the municipal land use
board, in the form and substance requested, an environmental
impact study (EIS) demonstrating the utility development and shall
be in full compliance with the stormwater management ordinances
of the Borough of Hillsdale. The proposed utility development shall
not cause, contribute to, or exacerbate the flooding of or detriment
to a public or private roadway, public or private watercourse, or
municipal or private property. Proof of meeting this requirement
shall be included in the EIS submitted to the land use board.
(6) The submitted EIS shall include information showing that the
proposed utility development shall not impair or divert the
movement of wildlife across open spaces either on or below the
ground surface, or in the air, in such a way that would be
detrimental to the Borough environment. In the alternative, the EIS
shall show, or the applicant shall provide through testimony, that
such relocation or natural movement of wildlife will not occur or
shall be mitigated within the utility property through proven
methods. The utility provider shall employ a third-party, New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, state-recognized,
environmental advocate or advocacy organization to approve such
mitigation methods or to confirm that no wildlife mitigation is
required.
(7) The proposed utility development shall not cause or contribute to
the release of stray electric current or voltage or static charge, or
cause or contribute to the mobilization of toxic or hazardous
substances or contamination of groundwater or surface waters, or
result in a noxious fumes or hazardous materials on a Borough
public or private roadway or on municipal or private property
located within the Borough.
(8) The proposed utility development shall not at any time negatively
impact or reduce the level of service of the Borough's
transportation system, including, but not limited to, roadways,
pedestrian passageways, and mass transit systems.
§ 310-67 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-67
288:560
(9) The proposed utility development shall not negatively impact,
cause additional travel time for, cause delays in, or compromise the
Borough's provision of emergency services to its residents, its
businesses, and to area municipalities.
(10) During the course of its public hearing before the land use board,
the proposed utility provider shall provide testimony that, should
its installation include a component for emergency procedures or
events, such component shall not compromise the general health,
welfare, and safety of the Borough of Hillsdale residents and
employees of commercial enterprises.
(11) To confirm that there is no negative impact to the Borough's
transportation system or provision of emergency services, the
utility service provider applicant shall submit referrals to the
municipal police, ambulance corps, Fire Department, Office of
Emergency Management, and local and regional Boards of
Education, for review of the application, to determine that there
will be no negative impact on emergency services. Affidavits
showing that the necessary referrals have been made at least 30
days prior to the public hearing on the matter are required.
(12) In an effort to protect the desirable visual environment of the
Borough, to prevent potential devaluation of lands within the
Borough, and consistent with the purposes of zoning contained
within the Municipal Land Use Law,221 the utility development shall
be visually buffered at all times of the year from all adjacent
properties, including, but not limited to, public and residential
property. Buffers shall provide a solid barrier from view of the
utility development from adjacent residential lands and municipal
open space or parks or from lands used for residential purposes.
The only exception to this requirement is where the utility
development and/or infrastructure is located on public lands or
within the public rights-of-way and visual screening is deemed
impracticable by the reviewing land use board. The maximum
height of a solid, man-made barrier shall be no greater than that
permitted in the zone district for fences. Visual mitigation may also
include, but is not limited to, colorized or architecturally treated
construction materials to visually blend with vegetated
surroundings, mass evergreen or pine plantings, or other means
deemed appropriate by the reviewing land use board. Buffers may
be planted on adjacent residential properties to achieve the same
barrier effect, with approval by the reviewing land use board and
the property owner on which the buffer will be planted. Tree
removal restitution shall be as prescribed in other sections of the
Land Use Ordinance.
(13) As part of the conditional use and site plan approval process for a
proposed new utility development or an existing utility
221. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 310-67 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-67
288:561
development, the application shall include an environmental
impact study (EIS) in the form and substance requested by the
municipal land use board. The EIS shall provide, at a minimum,
that the proposed utility development shall not produce heat, cold,
fumes, or energy into the air, upon the ground surface or into
groundwater without a balanced environment for the same, either
through natural plantings, mechanical conditioning, or choice of
colors and materials. Ambient temperatures over the lands to be
improved shall be maintained from the preconstruction
environment or shall be compensated within the utility
development or on lands within the Borough.
(14) The site plan shall include a lighting plan, which will be designed so
that all site, emergency, security, or architectural lighting of the
proposed utility development shall be shielded. The light source
element and light glare shall not be visible at any angle from
adjacent residential properties and shall not produce trespassing
glare to the public rights-of-way, thoroughfares, or pedestrian
walkways.
(15) The site plan shall include a temporary traffic control plan to
maintain a safe environment for both motorists and pedestrians.
The proposed utility development shall provide for temporary
traffic controls during construction, as approved by the Borough
and the County Engineer. Such traffic controls may include
temporary traffic signals or warning devices, traffic control
personnel, temporary bridges, temporary pedestrian walkways and
structures, and placement and availability of emergency service
vehicles to remove disabled motorists if such impairment affects
the local transportation network of streets and roadways.
Determination and need for the above by the Borough Engineer
shall be made upon presentation and review of traffic circulation/
mitigation studies submitted to the reviewing land use board.
(16) Subject to the review of the land use board, the proposed utility
development shall not produce any noise, sound, or vibrations,
either intermittent or continuous, above the limits of accepted
standards for noise decibel volume at the utility company property
line at any time, considering all times of the year. Such sound or
vibration emanation shall be effectively buffered by either proven
mechanical or natural means, as shown by environmental and/or
mechanical studies presented to the reviewing land use board as
part of the site plan application. This may include power
emergency generators, standby or stored vehicles or equipment,
pumps and mechanical devices, transformers, meters, valves, and
high-velocity movement of utility products either above or below
the ground surface.
(17) The utility provider's site plan shall include sustainable building
practices to promote the utilization of renewable energy resources
consistent with the purposes of the Municipal Land Use Law.
§ 310-67 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-67
288:562
(18) All bulk and design standards of the underlying zone district in
which the utility development is located shall be followed.
C. Apparel laundries and apparel dry-cleaning establishments. These uses
may be permitted in any C Commercial or I Industrial District only if:
(1) A site plan meeting the requirements of this chapter shall be filed
with the Planning Board, in triplicate, by the applicant.
(2) Items intended for laundering or dry cleaning shall not be received
in wholesale lots or bulk lots, but shall be received only from the
owners thereof at retail.
(3) An establishment shall not exceed a gross floor area of 1,600
square feet.
(4) An establishment shall not be permitted in any premises occupied
or used in part as a dwelling unit.
(5) An establishment shall not be permitted within 200 feet of any
existing noncommercial use.
(6) An establishment shall be permitted to operate only with an
employee attendant present at all times of operation.
(7) No establishment shall be permitted that shall be noxious or
injurious to adjacent properties by reason of noise, odor, glare or
vibration.
D. Nursing homes. Nursing homes may be permitted in the SP Semipublic
District only if:
(1) A site plan meeting the requirements of this chapter shall be filed
with the Planning Board, in triplicate, by the applicant.
(2) The nursing home shall be duly licensed under the New Jersey
Nursing Home and Hospital Licensing Act (N.J.S.A. 30:11-1 et seq.)
and shall conform in all respects to the standards prescribed by the
appropriate agencies of the State of New Jersey.
(3) The structure or use shall conform to all requirements for the SP
Zone District.
(4) Off-street parking facilities as required by § 310-59 shall be
provided on the premises in the rear and side yards, but not in the
front yard.
(5) One sign shall be permitted and may bear only the name of the
establishment and the street address. If such sign is to be
illuminated, the illumination shall be from within. Such sign shall
not exceed four square feet in area on either side and five feet in
height and shall be situated not less than five feet inside the
property lines.
§ 310-67 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-67
288:563
E. Funeral homes. Funeral homes may be permitted in the SP Semipublic
Zone if:
(1) A site plan meeting the requirements of this chapter shall be filed
with the Planning Board, in triplicate, by the applicant.
(2) It shall be determined by the Planning Board that the proposed use
and construction plans will not adversely affect the value of
adjacent properties, that the design of any structures or alterations
will be in keeping with the general character of the area and that
sufficient landscaping, including trees, shrubs and lawn, will be
provided to serve as a buffer between the proposed use and any
adjacent use other than another funeral home.
(3) Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions of § 310-59 of this chapter. However, there shall be no
parking in the front yard, and side-yard parking shall not be closer
than 25 feet to any lot line. [Amended 5-13-1997by Ord. No.
97-8]
(4) The minimum lot area shall be 40,000 square feet, and a minimum
yard depth of fifty feet shall be maintained on four sides of the
building.
F. Schools. Public, parochial or nonprofit private schools, but not trade,
vocational, commercial or business schools, may be permitted in any
residential district if:
(1) A site plan meeting the requirements of this chapter shall be filed
with the Planning Board, in triplicate, by the applicant.
(2) The curriculum of the proposed school shall be approved by the
New Jersey Department of Education.
(3) The minimum lot area for an elementary school shall be five acres
plus one additional acre for each 100 pupils. The minimum lot area
for an intermediate school, high school or institution of higher
learning shall be 10 acres, plus one additional acre for each 100
pupils. Not more than 35% of the site shall be covered by buildings.
(4) The minimum street frontage for an elementary school shall be 150
feet. The minimum street frontage for all other schools shall be 400
feet.
(5) A front and rear yard, each with a depth of not less than 100 feet,
and two side yards, each with a width of not less than 50 feet, shall
be provided. No parking shall be permitted within 25 feet of any
street or property line; no organized play facility or area shall be
permitted within 100 feet of any street or property line; and no
buildings shall be allowed within 50 feet of any street or property
line.
§ 310-67 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-67
288:564
(6) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of § 310-59 of this chapter.
(7) No driveway shall open onto a public street or road within 100 feet
of an intersection of such street or road with another public street
or road. In determining the suitability of proposed or existing
driveways upon the site, the Board shall consider such factors as
grade and sight distance, the number and pattern of driveways, the
number, location and design of ingress and egress points, the
volume of traffic which may be anticipated on the site and upon the
adjoining roads and the condition and width of pavement of
adjoining roads.
(8) Illumination for night athletic activities shall be shielded from view
from adjoining streets and residential uses.
G. A satellite antenna which complies with the following requirements:
(1) In all Residential Districts and in the commercial district, the
antenna surface area, in square feet, shall be no more than 12. The
equivalent diameter of the cable dish, in feet, shall be no more than
four, and the maximum antenna height, in feet, shall be no more
than eight.
(2) In the Commercial District, the antenna surface area, in square
feet, shall be no more than 50; the equivalent diameter of the cable
dish, in feet, shall be no more than eight, and the maximum
antenna height shall be no more than 12 feet. [Amended
5-13-1997by Ord. No. 97-8]
(3) The surface area of any reflective dish shall not exceed 12 square
feet in all districts except the Commercial District where the size
shall not exceed 50 square feet. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-8]
(4) The dish shall be erected on a secure ground-mounted foundation.
(5) The overall height from the mean ground level to the highest point
of the antenna or any attachments thereto when extended to their
full height should not exceed the height, measured in feet, shown in
the Schedule222 for maximum antenna height in any one zoning
district.
(6) The antenna shall be located in the rear yard and not violate any
yard and set back requirement of the main building.
(7) The antenna shall be located and screened to minimize motor noise
and visual impact from the street and adjacent properties. The
ability to install the antenna in an unobtrusive location and to
minimize noise and visual impact on adjacent property and from
222. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Uses and Requirements is on file in the Borough offices
and is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 310-67 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-67
288:565
the street shall be a major factor in determining whether or not the
conditional use is approved.
(8) The antenna shall be designed for use by residents of the main
building only.
(9) Installation of satellite antenna on a flat roof is permitted only in
the Commercial and Industrial Districts and on all public and
private schools and municipal buildings, provided that such roof
installations shall be no higher than four feet above the roofline and
the dishes are concealed from public view.
(10) Site plan approval by the Planning Board will be required for the
installation of a satellite antenna in all zone districts. Each
application shall include an antenna plan showing the specific
design, location, size and construction of the proposed antenna
which shall comply in all respects with the standards enumerated
herein.
(11) Application for site plan approval for a conditional use permit to
install a satellite antenna shall be on forms provided by the
Planning Board. The applicant shall pay the fee for conditional use
permits as set forth in § 310-29.223 The Planning Board shall then
conduct a public hearing to determine if the conditional use
requirements as set forth in § 310-66B and C have been satisfied.
(12) Where the antenna surface area is less than a nineteen-inch
diameter, the antenna is permitted in any district without
conditions. [Added 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8]
H. Places of worship. Places of worship shall be permitted in any district if
all of the following conditions are met:
(1) A site plan meeting the requirements of Part 5 shall be filed with
the Planning Board, in triplicate, by the applicant.
(2) No parking shall be located closer than 15 feet to the property line
of any adjacent residential lot. Such fifteen-foot buffer shall be
screened in accordance with § 310-113D of this chapter. When
parking areas abut zones other than residential, the requirements
of the adjacent zone shall be applied regarding buffers, in addition
to the requirements of § 310-113D.
(3) Driveways shall be located as far away as practicable from existing
or proposed street intersections.
(4) The following off-street parking spaces shall be required:
(a) One space per each three seats of 72 linear inches of pew
length in the place of assemblage; however, in no case shall
223. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 138, Fees.
§ 310-67 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-67
288:566
there be less than one parking space per 35 square feet of area
in the place of assemblage;
(b) One space per two residents; and
(c) One space per employee.
(5) Exterior signs shall meet the requirements of § 310-62C of this
chapter.
(6) Minimum lot size shall be two acres.
(7) Maximum building heights shall be as follows:
(a) Principal building: 30 feet.
(b) Other building: 25 feet. The height limitations shall not include
those additional structures referred to in § 310-54A.
(8) Minimum side yard and rear yard setbacks shall be equal to 0.90
times the actual building height.
(9) There shall be no maximum total gross floor area for buildings
other than the principal building, but in no case shall the total
building coverage exceed the maximum building coverage
requirements for the zone.
(10) Places of worship currently in existence on the effective date of this
chapter shall, if damaged or destroyed, be permitted to be rebuilt
to the same building coverage and building height as existed prior
to any damage or destruction.
I. Age-restricted housing development. [Added 2-6-2007 by Ord. No.
07-01]
(1) Single-family detached age-restricted housing shall be permitted in
the R-2 Zone if all of the following conditions are met:
(a) Required minimum contiguous tract area, completely located
within the Borough of Hillsdale: eight acres.
(b) Site plan approval shall be required.
(c) The plan shall address all issues of the tract's infrastructure,
including but not limited to delivery of proper water supply,
disposal of waste, trash, drainage and assurance of ingress and
egress.
(d) The applicant shall demonstrate through the site plan that
each dwelling in the age-restricted housing development has
an architectural theme with variations in design to provide
harmonious, theme-related, earth-tone colors in the style and
architectural character commonly referred to as Early
Colonial, New England Colonial, Georgian, Federal, Queen
§ 310-67 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-67
288:567
Anne or Jeffersonian. Landscape plantings, building
orientation on the lot, topography, natural features and
individual dwelling unit design shall all be considered for the
total tract development. Staggering unit setbacks, utilizing
different exterior materials, changing rooflines and roof
designs, altering building heights and types of windows,
shutters, doors and facade orientation, and other creative
design techniques are encouraged and will be considered by
the Planning Board during its review process.
(e) Roadway widths and improvements shall be in conformance
with the Residential Site Improvement Standards.
(f) A system of continuous walkways not less than four feet in
width shall be provided throughout the development, along the
roadway system and connecting to and including any common
open space areas. The location of the sidewalks shall be
confirmed during the site plan approval process.
(g) At least 25% of the total tract of the age-restricted housing
development shall be set aside as common open space. Where
feasible, common open space areas shall include passive open
space improvements such as walking paths or benches.
(h) One freestanding sign located at each entrance to the tract is
permitted. Such sign shall not exceed 15 square feet and shall
be located so the sign bottom is flush with the ground,
landscape plantings or retaining wall. The top of said sign shall
not exceed 3.5 feet from the ground surface. The sign shall be
surrounded by landscape plantings.
(i) All signs shall be designed with a consistent theme
incorporating letter style and construction material. The letter
and background colors should be coordinated so that they do
not violate any regulatory sign colors as required by state or
federal standards.
(j) All utilities shall be installed underground.
(k) The site plan shall include a landscape plan detailing the type,
size and location of plantings in the buffer area and throughout
the development. The landscape plan shall be reviewed during
the site plan process and by the Environmental Commission.
(l) The landscape plan shall also show street tree plantings. Street
trees shall be planted on both sides of the street a distance of
no more than 30 feet apart.
(m) Street lighting shall be provided on the site plan. Decorative
lighting shall be provided, subject to the approval by the
Planning Board during the site plan review.
§ 310-67 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-67
288:568
(n) The dwellings may consist of two stories and a basement.
However, the second story shall contain no more than 900
square feet.
(o) Each dwelling shall contain at least one bedroom and
bathroom located on the main floor (ground story).
(p) An attached two-car garage with a minimum floor area of 400
square feet shall be provided for each market-rate dwelling
unit. Each unit shall also include a private driveway that
provides two additional off-street parking spaces.
(q) The sum of floor area of the first and second stories of each
market-rate unit shall be between 2,500 square feet and 3,000
square feet. This figure includes the attached garage, but does
not include any basement area.
(r) Accessory detached structures, such as detached garages,
sheds and private swimming pools are prohibited. Fencing
surrounding the development is permitted, subject to a
demonstration to the Planning Board during site plan review
that such fencing does not interfere with the required
landscape buffer effect of providing green screening. Fencing
around individual dwelling units is prohibited.
(s) Patios and/or decks on individual dwelling units must be
included on the approved site plan. Any patio and/or deck not
shown on the approved site plan shall not be permitted.
(t) Buildings shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from all
exterior property lines of the tract.
(u) A planted landscape buffer area shall extend from all exterior
property lines of the tract a minimum depth of 20 feet. The
buffer area may be included in the required twenty-five-foot
building setback to exterior tract property lines referenced
above. Buffering shall be designed to provide a year-round
visual screen. The buffer area may include decorative fencing
only to a height generally permitted in the R-2 Zone. No
buildings, driveways or sidewalks are permitted in the buffer
area. Roadway access into and out of the age-restricted
housing development may occur through the buffer area. The
maximum total permitted roadway area within the buffer area
shall not exceed 1,000 square feet. The buffer area will be
approved as part of the site plan review, and will be subject to
review by the Environmental Commission.
(v) Patios, unroofed porches and unroofed decks less than four
feet above finished grade which are less than 20% of the gross
principle dwelling area footprint may extend 10 feet into the
required twenty-five-foot setback referenced above. However,
§ 310-67 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-67
288:569
such improvements shall not be placed in the required
landscape buffer area.
(w) Maximum permitted building height: 30 feet.
(x) Maximum total floor area ratio: 22%.
(y) Maximum total impervious coverage: 28%. The impervious
coverage calculations shall include all building footprints,
driveways, walkways and deck areas. Surfaces such as brick
pavers, laid stones, slate or timber with open joints shall all
constitute 50% of impervious surface coverage. Wherever
possible, brick pavers should be used for walkways, patios and
driveways to reduce the impervious coverage.
(z) Maximum total building coverage: 20%.
(aa) Minimum side-to-side building separation: 30 feet.
(bb) Minimum back-to-back building separation: 50 feet.
(cc) Minimum setback from garage front to paved roadway: 28 feet.
The attached garage structure and any second level located
above the garage shall be set back a minimum of 28 feet from
the paved roadway. The remainder of the dwelling may be set
back a minimum of 25 feet from the paved roadway. In the
instance of a corner lot, the dwelling must maintain the full
required setback to both paved roadways.
(2) Permitted accessory uses: recreational structures and facilities, as
limited common elements to be used solely by unit owners of the
age-restricted housing development and their guests. Such
facilities shall comply with all applicable bulk requirements of the
age-restricted housing development, including but not limited to
the prohibition of such improvements in the required buffer area.
(3) Growth share requirement.
(a) All age-restricted housing developments that result in the
construction of new market-rate dwelling units in the Borough
of Hillsdale shall provide one affordable housing unit for every
eight market rate units constructed. Affordable housing units
being constructed on site shall be in conformance with COAH's
third round rules at N.J.A.C. 5:94-1 et seq. and the Uniform
Housing Affordability Controls at N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.,
including but not limited to requirements regarding phasing
schedule, controls on affordability, low/moderate income split,
heating source, maximum rent and/or sales prices,
affordability average, bedroom distribution, and affirmative
marketing.
(b) The affordable units may be developed in a duplex
arrangement. If the growth share results in the need to
§ 310-67 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-67
288:570
construct more than two affordable units, the duplexes shall
be located throughout the development so they are not
immediately adjacent. Design techniques, such as placement
of entry doors, garages and windows should be utilized so
that the duplex containing the two attached affordable units
appears to resemble one of the market rate single-family
dwelling units. The duplex(es) shall maintain the bulk
regulations established for the market-rate units with the
following exceptions:
[1] Each affordable unit shall include a minimum of an
attached one-car garage with a minimum floor area of 200
square feet.
[2] Minimum building front setback to paved roadway: 25
feet.
(c) The developer may elect to provide a payment in lieu of
construction of affordable housing units. The cost per marketrate
unit shall be $34,117 or an amount not less than the
payment-in-lieu figure prepared by the New Jersey Council on
Affordable Housing (COAH) for COAH Housing Region 1,
whichever shall be higher, unless otherwise restricted by law.
(d) The developer may utilize a combination of construction of
affordable units and payment in lieu of construction of
affordable units to meet the growth share requirement. The
total combination of construction of affordable housing and
payment in lieu of construction of affordable housing shall
equal the growth share generated by the development,
including any fractional obligation.
§ 310-67 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-67
288:571

ARTICLE XIX
Nonconforming Uses and Structures
§ 310-68. Continuance.
Any lawful structure and lawful use of land or structures existing at the
effective date of this chapter may be continued, notwithstanding that such
use or structure does not conform to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 310-69. Reduction in area.
No lot that is nonconforming as to area shall be further reduced in area.
§ 310-70. Enlargement. [Amended 11-26-1985 by Ord. 85-22]
No nonconforming building or other structure shall be enlarged, extended
or increased in size where such enlargement, extension or increase would
tend to expand the degree of nonconformity.
§ 310-71. Expansion.
No nonconforming use shall be expanded.
§ 310-72. Abandonment.
It shall be prima facie evidence of intention to abandon a nonconforming
use or structure if:
§ 310-73. Restoration.
Any nonconforming building or other structure may be rebuilt, restored or
repaired in the event of partial destruction thereof. Nothing in this chapter
shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any wall,
floor or roof which has been declared unsafe by the Hillsdale Construction
Code Agency.
§ 310-74. Reversion.
No nonconforming use shall, if once changed into a conforming use, be
changed back into a nonconforming use.
§ 310-75. Alterations.
A nonconforming building or other structure may be altered but not
enlarged or extended.
A. It is converted into a conforming use or structure; or
B. The nonconforming use ceases or the nonconforming structure ceases
being used for its nonconforming purpose for 18 consecutive months.
§ 310-68 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-76
288:573
§ 310-76. Construction approved prior to provisions.
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in plans, construction
or designated use of a building or other structure for which a building
permit has been lawfully issued prior to the effective date hereof and
the construction of which shall have been diligently prosecuted within
three months next following the date of such permit and the ground-story
framework of which, including the second tier of beams, shall have been
completed in accordance with such plans within one year from the effective
date of this chapter.
§ 310-76 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-76
288:574
ARTICLE XX
Amendments; Protests
§ 310-77. Procedure.
The regulations, limitations and restrictions of this article may from time
to time be amended, changed, modified or repealed and the boundaries
of the districts hereby established changed by ordinance adopted by the
Borough Council after public hearing thereon, but no amendment or change
shall become effective unless the ordinance proposing such amendment or
change shall first have been submitted to the Planning Board for approval,
disapproval or recommendations. The Planning Board shall have a period of
35 days for consideration and report. In the case of an unfavorable report
by the Planning Board, such amendment shall not become effective except
by favorable vote of a majority of the full authorized membership of the
Borough Council.
§ 310-78. Protests.
A protest against any proposed amendment or revision of a zoning
ordinance may be filed with the Borough Clerk, signed by the owners of
20% or more either of the area of the lots or land included in such proposed
change or of the lots or land extending 200 feet in all directions therefrom,
inclusive of street space, whether within or without the Borough. Such
amendment or revision shall not become effective following the filing of
such protest except by the favorable vote of 2/3 of all the members of the
Borough Council.
§ 310-77 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-78
288:575

Part 5
Subdivision And Site Plan Review
ARTICLE XXI
General Provisions
§ 310-79. Purpose.
The purpose of this Part 5 is to provide rules, regulations and standards
to guide land subdivision and the development of land in the Borough
in order to promote its public health, safety, convenience and general
welfare. It shall be administered to ensure orderly growth and development,
conservation, protection and proper use of land and adequate provision for
circulation, utilities and services.
§ 310-80. Administration. [Amended 5-13-1997by Ord. No. 97-8]
As authorized by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37, the provisions of this article shall be
administered by the Planning Board.
§ 310-81. Construal of provisions.
This Part 5 shall not be construed to supersede Part 4 of this chapter or any
part thereof. All other ordinances which are inconsistent with the provisions
of this Part 5, however, shall be deemed superseded to the extent of such
inconsistency.
§ 310-82. Rules, regulations and standards as minimal; variances
permissible. [Amended 5-13-1997by Ord. No. 97-8]
The rules, regulations and standards contained in this article shall be
considered the minimum requirements for the protection of the public
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Borough. Any action taken
by the Planning Board under the terms of this article shall give primary
consideration to the above-mentioned matters and to the welfare of the
entire community. However, if the applicant for subdivision or site plan
approval can clearly demonstrate that, because of peculiar conditions
pertaining to his or her land, the literal enforcement of one or more of these
regulations is impracticable or will exact undue hardship, the Planning
Board may permit such variance as may be reasonable and within the
general purpose and intent of the rules, regulations and standards
established by this article.
§ 310-83. Subdivision approval.
No person shall subdivide or sell or agree (other than conditionally as
required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-55) to sell any land which forms part of a
subdivision as defined in this chapter until final approval of such subdivision
has been granted pursuant to this chapter.
§ 310-79 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-84
288:577
§ 310-84. Site plan approval.
Except as to detached one- and two-dwelling unit buildings:
§ 310-85. Plot plan approval. [Amended 7-10-1990 by Ord. 90-10]
A. No zoning permit shall be issued for a new building unless a site plan
shall have first been approved by the Planning Board in accordance
with the terms of this chapter. [Amended 5-13-1997by Ord. No.
97-8]
B. No zoning permit shall be issued for an addition to an existing building
unless a site plan shall have first been approved by the Planning Board
in accordance with the terms of this chapter. [Amended 5-13-1997by
Ord. No. 97-8]
C. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any new building, for any
addition to an existing building or for any change in use, ownership or
occupancy of a building if, under Part 4 of this chapter, a greater
number of parking spaces would be required for such new use or
occupancy, unless the building and its appurtenances conform in all
respects to an approved site plan or an approved amendment to an
approved site plan.
A. Before a construction permit is issued for any proposed dwelling, the
Construction Code Official shall forward to the Borough Engineer for
approval a plot plan provided by the applicant drawn to a scale of not
less than one inch equals 20 feet, prepared by a licensed professional
engineer or land surveyor, showing the following:
(1) Actual location of the proposed dwelling, with ground floor and
garage floor elevations and building heights.
(2) Proposed front, rear and side yard setbacks.
(3) Means of foundation drainage and any subsurface drainage
structures, drainage inlets or seepage fields.
(4) All existing trees over six inches in diameter and trees to be
removed.
(5) All existing and proposed utility and sanitary sewer connections.
(6) All easements, with purpose and/or owner.
(7) Dimensions and locations of proposed curb opening for driveways.
(8) All existing and proposed contours for the subject lot and existing
contours for adjacent lots, to adequately demonstrate proposed
surface water flows.
(9) All existing and/or proposed on- and off-site improvements in close
proximity to the subject lot.
§ 310-84 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-85
288:578
(10) Percolation test locations and rates. Percolation test must be
witnessed by Borough Engineer.
(11)New Jersey flood hazard areas, floodway and freshwater wetlands
limits.
B. Within 45 days of receipt of the plot plan, the Borough Engineer shall
issue a report to the Construction Code Official, with recommendations.
The Borough Engineer shall consider the following factors in evaluating
plot plans: [Amended 5-13-1997by Ord. No. 97-8]
(1) Surface and subsurface drainage.
(2) Preservation of trees and landscaping.
(3) Suitability of proposed utility connections.
(4) Soil erosion control.
(5) Any other factor relating to the health, safety and welfare of the
public.
(6) Suitability of existing streets, storm drainage and emergency
access to the subject or surrounding sites affected by proposed
construction.
C. Upon completion of the construction of a building or structure
foundation, an as-built foundation location plan prepared by a licensed
land surveyor shall be submitted to the Construction Code Official and
Borough Engineer for review and approval. The location plan shall
indicate foundation setbacks from property and building lines and
indicate finished floor elevations. [Amended 5-13-1997by Ord. No.
97-8]
D. Upon completion of construction approved on the plot plan, prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy, an as-built plan of the site shall
be submitted to the Borough Engineer which provides the following
information and details (except for the provision of an as-built
foundation location survey): [Amended 5-13-1997by Ord. No. 97-8]
(1) All topographic information provided on the approved plot plan.
(2) Final utility connections with reference ties to building corners.
(3) Final surface contours at two-foot intervals.
(4) Location of all underground structures with reference ties to
building corners.
(5) Finished floor elevations.
(6) Spot elevations at all building corners, drainage structures,
sewers, driveways, property limits, walls and/or other structures.
§ 310-85 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-85
288:579
(7) Topographical information within the public right-of-way
surrounding the site.
(8) Property survey boundary data.
(9) All other information deemed necessary by the Borough Engineer
or Construction Code Official to determine consistency with the
approved development application or building permit.
E. The initial deposit for engineering review and inspection costs in
connection with plot plan approval shall be as provided in Chapter 138,
Fees, as required by the Chief Financial Officer as necessary.
[Amended 5-13-1997by Ord. No. 97-8]
F. The ordinance governing plot plan approval shall not apply to additions
or alterations to existing structures.
§ 310-85 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-85
288:580
ARTICLE XXII
Minor Subdivision and Minor Site Plan Procedures and Plat Details
§ 310-86. Minor subdivision procedure and plat details. [Amended
10-8-1985 by Ord. No. 85-16]
For a minor subdivision the procedure shall be as follows:
A. An application shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Planning
Board, in writing, in duplicate, on forms supplied by the Planning
Board, furnishing pertinent data such as names and addresses of the
owner, agent, engineer and identification of the property involved.
B. The application shall be accompanied by 15 copies of a plan of the
proposed subdivision accurately drawn to a scale of not less than one
inch equals 20 feet with a date and revision block, a North arrow for
both the plan and the key map, all certified by a licensed land surveyor
or professional engineer. The plan shall be of a size acceptable to the
County Clerk for filing and shall indicate the data required by the
subsections hereinafter in this section set forth.
(1) The location of the lots to be created in relation to the entire tract.
(2) All existing structures and wooded areas within the subdivision and
within 200 feet thereof.
(3) The name of the owner and of all adjoining property owners as
disclosed by the most recent municipal tax records.
(4) The tax map sheet, block and lot numbers.
(5) All streets and streams within 500 feet of the subdivision.
(6) The area in square feet of all lots to be created.
(7) A key map showing the entire subdivision and its relation to
surrounding areas.
(8) Easements, streets, buildings, watercourses, railroads, bridges,
culverts, drain pipes, rights-of-way and drainage easements.
(9) Any variance or variances required.
(10) Acreage of the entire parcel to be subdivided.
(11) Topographical contours, if regrading of the property is
contemplated.
(12) The scale of the map.
(13) The true and magnetic North compass points.
C. The Planning Board may require that the application be filed at least 10
days prior to the agenda meeting immediately preceding the regular
meeting at which action is to be taken on such application.
§ 310-86 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-86
288:581
§ 310-87. Minor site plan procedures and details. [Added 2-13-1980
by Ord. No. 80-1; amended 10-8-1985 by Ord. No. 85-16]
D. Upon receipt of a completed application, the Board shall, within the
time periods prescribed by this chapter, approve or conditionally
approve the subdivision without the necessity of full notice and hearing,
classify the subdivision as a major subdivision or disapprove the
subdivision. The Board may, in addition to any other conditions which
the Board may deem necessary in order to carry out the purposes of this
chapter, require, as a condition for minor subdivision approval, that the
applicant install such improvements required by this Part 5 as the
Board, in accordance with the law, shall deem to be necessitated by the
proposed subdivision or development. Such improvements shall be in
accordance with the standards set forth in this Part 5 and performance
guaranties as may be required in this Part 5.
E. In addition to the requirements of Subsections A and D of this section,
the application for classification of a minor subdivision plat shall
contain the following:
(1) A bulk zone schedule indicating the required and proposed
information should be provided to enable the Planning Board to
determine if all the zoning criteria has been complied with.
(2) In the case where a new building lot is being created, a site plan
indicating proposed dwellings, driveways, elevations, sanitary
hookups, surface water and roof leader disposal and other
pertinent data to ensure the proper grading and development of
the proposed lots in relation to the surrounding properties. The
information is to be certified and sealed by a licensed professional
engineer.
(3) Certification by a licensed land surveyor as to the accuracy of the
property lines of the tract.
(4) Photographs of the property in question and the surrounding
properties.
A. The Planning Board may waive notice and public hearing for an
application for development, if the Planning Board or site plan
subcommittee of the Board appointed by the Chairperson finds that the
application for development conforms to the definition of minor site
plan. Minor site plan approval shall be deemed to be final approval of
the site plan by the Board, provided that the Board or said
subcommittee may condition such approval on the terms ensuring the
provisions of improvements pursuant to Part 4, Zoning, §§ 310-46 and
§ 310-47 and Part 5, § 310-79.
B. The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions, whether
conditional or otherwise, upon which minor site plan approval was
§ 310-86 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-87
288:582
granted shall not be changed for a period of two years after the date of
minor site plan approval.
C. If an application for development is found to be incomplete, the
developer shall be notified, in writing, of the deficiencies therein by the
Board or the Board's designee for the determination of completeness
within 45 days of the submission of such application, or it shall be
deemed to be properly submitted.
D. An application shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Planning
Board, in writing, in duplicate, on forms supplied by the Planning
Board, furnishing pertinent data such as names and addresses of the
owner, agent, engineer, identification of the property involved and
approval blocks for Planning Board signatures and other designated
municipal, county or state agencies.
E. The application shall be accompanied by 15 copies of the plan drawn to
a scale of one inch equals 20 feet with a date, a North arrow for the plan
and the key map, all certified and sealed by a licensed land surveyor or
professional engineer. The plan shall indicate the data required
hereinafter.
(1) It shall be in schematic phase form acceptable to general
engineering standards.
(2) Key map depicting a minimum of three adjacent streets in all
quadrants of the development.
(3) North arrow, scale, block and lot number, the name and address of
the record owner and the name and address of the person
preparing the plan.
(4) The zoning district in which the parcel is located.
(5) Survey data showing boundaries, including setback lines, building
lines, lines of existing streets, lots, easements and rights-of-way.
(6) Location of existing building and all other structures, including
walls, fences, culverts and bridges. Structures to be removed shall
be indicated by dashed lines.
(7) The proposed use or uses of land and building, together with floor
space of all number of employees.
(8) The means of vehicular access for ingress to and egress from the
site showing the location of driveway and curb cuts.
(9) Location of off-street parking areas.
(10) Location of proposed outdoor lighting.
(11) Proposed or existing landscaping and proposed signs.
(12) Location and elevation plan of existing and proposed signs.
§ 310-87 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-87
288:583
(13) Existing and proposed stormwater drainage system. All minor site
plans shall be accompanied by a plan sketch showing all existing
drainage within 500 feet of any boundary and all areas such as
paved areas, grassed areas, wooded areas and any other surface
area contributing to the calculations and showing methods used in
the drainage calculations.
(14) Data setting forth the lot number, block number and location of
adjacent buildings on adjacent properties.
(15) Such other information or data as may be required by the Board to
make a determination in accordance with the standards of this
chapter. It is understood that the above requirements may be
waived in whole or in part by the Board in its discretion.
F. In addition to the requirements of Subsections A through E of this
section, the application for minor site plan approval shall contain the
following:
(1) A bulk zone schedule indicating the required and proposed
information should be provided to enable the Planning Board to
determine if all the zoning criteria has been complied with.
(2) A topographical survey including all physical features above and
below ground, including elevations, major trees, curbs, pavement,
drainage, etc.
(3) Photographs of the property in question and the surrounding
properties.
(4) Provisions for barrier-free designs.
§ 310-87 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-87
288:584
ARTICLE XXIII
Major Subdivision and Site Plan Procedures and Plat Details
§ 310-88. Major subdivision and site plan procedure; preliminary
approval.
For preliminary approval of a major subdivision or site plan, the procedure
shall be as follows:
A. An application shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Planning
Board, in writing, in duplicate, on forms supplied by the Planning
Board, furnishing pertinent data such as the names and addresses of
the owner, agent, engineer and identification of the property involved.
B. The application shall be accompanied by 10 copies of a preliminary plat
of the proposed subdivision or of the site plan, accurate and to scale as
to boundaries and existing features, but approximate as to proposed
features. The accuracy of the boundaries and existing features shall be
certified by a licensed professional engineer or land surveyor. All design
shall be done by a licensed professional engineer. The details of the plat
shall be in conformity with § 310-89.
C. Simultaneously with filing the application, copies of the preliminary
plat shall be forwarded by the applicant to the following persons:
(1) The Land Use Officer.
(2) The Borough Engineer.
(3) The Board of Health.
(4) The Chief Law Enforcement Officer. [Amended 5-13-1997by Ord.
No. 97-8]
(5) The Department of Public Works.
(6) The Fire Prevention Bureau.224
(7) The Recreation Commission.
(8) The Board of Education.
(9) The Environmental Commission.
(10) The Planning Board Engineer.
D. The applicant shall produce proof by affidavit of the date such copies
were sent. The said persons and Boards may make recommendations, in
writing, to the Board within 30 days after service of the preliminary plat
on them. The Board shall take the said recommendations into account,
but shall have the authority to proceed in the absence of such
224. Editor's Note: Original Section 5.102(c)(7), Shade Tree Commission, which immediately
followed this subsection, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II.
§ 310-88 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-88
288:585
§ 310-89. Site plan and major subdivision plat details; preliminary
approval. [Amended 10-8-1985 by Ord. No. 85-16]
recommendation or to disregard or modify such recommendations.
Copies of all recommendations shall be sent to the applicant by the
recommending professionals and Boards.
E. Upon receipt of a completed application, the Planning Board shall
schedule a public hearing, but in no event shall such hearing be
scheduled earlier than 30 days after the service of the documents on
the persons and bodies required by Subsection C of this section. The
applicant shall thereupon give notice of such hearing in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter and of law.
A. The preliminary plat of a site plan, subdivision or conditional use shall
contain the following:
(1) Date: all revisions shall be noted and dated.
(2) Key map showing the location of the tract with reference to
surrounding properties and existing street intersections.
(3) Title of the development, North arrow, scale, block and lot number,
the name and address of the record owner, the name and address,
license number and seal of the person preparing the plat. If the
owner of the premises is a corporation, the name and address of
the president and secretary shall be submitted with the application.
(4) A scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet. All distances shall
be in feet and decimals of a foot and all bearings shall be given to
the nearest 10 seconds.
(5) The names and addresses, as shown on the current tax records, of
all owners of the property within 200 feet of the subdivision,
together with the block and lot numbers of said property.
(6) The zoning district in which the parcel is located, together with
zone boundaries included within the boundaries of the parcel or
within 200 feet therefrom.
(7) Survey data showing boundaries of the property, building or
setback lines and lines of existing and proposed streets, lots,
reservations, easements and areas dedicated to public use,
including grants, restrictions and rights-of-way.
(8) Reference to any existing or proposed covenants, deed restrictions
or exceptions covering all or any part of the parcel. A copy of such
covenants, deed restrictions or exceptions shall be submitted with
the application.
(9) The distances, measured along the right-of-way lines of existing
streets abutting the property, to the nearest intersections with
other public streets.
§ 310-88 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-89
288:586
(10) Location of existing buildings and all other structures, including
walls, fences, culverts and bridges, with spot elevations of such
buildings and structures. Structures to be removed shall be
indicated by dashed lines; structures to remain shall be indicated
by solid lines.
(11) Location of all existing and proposed storm drainage structures
and utility lines, whether publicly or privately owned, with pipe
sizes, grades and direction of flow, locations of inlets, manholes or
other appurtenances and appropriate invert and other elevations. If
any existing utility lines are underground, the estimated location of
said utility lines shall be shown.
(12) Existing and proposed contours, referred to U.S. Coast and
Geodetic data, with a contour interval of one foot for slopes of less
than 10% and an interval of two feet for slopes of more than 10%.
Existing contours are to be indicated by dashed lines and proposed
contours are to be indicated by solid lines.
(13) Location of existing rock outcrops, high points, watercourses,
depressions, ponds, marshes, wooded areas and other significant
existing features, including previous flood elevations of
watercourses, ponds and marsh areas as determined by survey.
(14) All proposed streets, with profiles, indicating grading; and crosssections
showing width of roadway, location and width of sidewalk
and location and size of utility lines conforming to the standards
and specifications of the Borough.
(15) The location of all existing and proposed water lines, valves and
hydrants and all sewer lines or alternative means of water supply
or sewage disposal and treatment.
(16) Existing and proposed stormwater drainage system. All site plans
and major subdivisions shall be accompanied by a plan sketch
showing all existing drainage within 500 feet of any boundary and
all areas such as paved areas, grassed areas, wooded areas and any
other surface area contributing to the calculations and showing
methods used in the drainage calculations.
(17) Acreage, to the nearest tenth of an acre, of the tract to be
subdivided and the area, in square feet, of all lots.
(18) Such other information or data as may be required by the Planning
Board or the County Planning Board for determination that the
details of the subdivision are in accordance with the standards of
this chapter and all other ordinances of the Borough of Hillsdale
and all other applicable laws, ordinances or resolutions.
B. In addition to the requirements of Subsection A of this section, the
preliminary plat of a site plan shall contain the following:
§ 310-89 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-89
288:587
§ 310-90. Effect of preliminary approval.
Preliminary approval of a major subdivision or of a site plan shall, except
as provided in Subsection D of this section, confer upon the applicant the
following rights for a three-year period from the date of the preliminary
approval:
(1) The proposed use or uses of land and buildings, together with the
floor space of all buildings and the estimated number of employees.
If the precise use of the building is unknown at the time of
application, an amended plan showing the proposed use shall be
required prior to issuance to a certificate of occupancy.
(2) The means of vehicular access for ingress to and egress from the
site, showing in particular the size and location of driveways and
curb cuts; walkways; the proposed traffic channels, if any;
additional width, if any: and any other means of controlling
vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
(3) The location and design of any off-street parking areas or leading
areas showing size and location of bays, aisles and barriers.
(4) The location, direction of illumination, power and hours of
operation of existing and proposed outdoor lighting.
(5) The location and elevation plan of existing and proposed signs.
(6) The proposed screening, landscaping planting plan.
(7) Elevation drawings of proposed addition or structure.
(8) Location of existing and proposed retention basins.
C. In addition to the requirements of Subsections A and B of this section,
the preliminary plan of a site plan or an application for conditional use
approval shall contain the following:
(1) A bulk zone schedule indicating the required and proposed
information should be provided to enable the Planning Board to
determine if all the zoning criteria have been complied with.
(2) Location of the proposed solid waste storage area together with the
screening for same.
(3) Photographs of the property in question and the surrounding
properties.
(4) Standard detail designs for curb, sidewalk, pavement and other
appurtenances shown on the plat.
(5) Provisions for barrier-free designs.
A. That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary approval
was granted shall not be changed, including but not limited to the
§ 310-89 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-90
288:588
§ 310-91. Site plan and major subdivision procedure; final approval.
For final approval of a major subdivision or site plan, the procedure shall be
as follows:
following: use requirements; layout and design standards for streets,
curbs and sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions and off-tract
improvements; and, in the case of a site plan, any requirements for
preservation of existing natural resources, for safe and efficient
vehicular and pedestrian circulation, parking and loading, for
screening, landscaping and location of structures and for exterior
lighting, except that nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the
Borough from modifying by ordinance such general terms and
conditions of preliminary approval as relate to public health and safety;
B. That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary subdivision plat or site plan, as the case may
be; and
C. That the applicant may apply for and the Planning Board may grant
extensions on such preliminary approval for additional periods of at
least one year, but not to exceed a total extension of two years, provided
that if the design standards have been revised by ordinance, such
revised standards may govern.
D. In the case of a subdivision of or site plan for an area of 50 acres or
more, the Planning Board may grant the rights referred to in
Subsections A, B and C of this section for such period of time in excess
of three years as shall be determined by the Planning Board to be
reasonable, taking into consideration: the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary approval;
economic conditions; and the comprehensiveness of the development.
The applicant may apply for thereafter, and the Planning Board may
thereafter grant, an extension to preliminary approval for such
additional period of time as shall be determined by the Planning Board
to be reasonable, taking into consideration: the number of dwelling
units and nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary
approval; and the potential number of dwelling units and nonresidential
floor area of the section or sections awaiting final approval; economic
conditions; and the comprehensiveness of the development; provided
that if the design standards have been revised, such revised standards
may govern.
A. The plat and an application for final approval, in duplicate and in a form
approved by the Board, shall be submitted to the Secretary of the
Planning Board, together with the fee required by this chapter.
B. The original cloth tracing and 10 white prints (blue or black on white) of
the plat shall accompany the application.
§ 310-90 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-91
288:589
C. The plat shall not differ substantially from the preliminary plat as
approved.
D. The final plat shall be drawn in ink on tracing cloth at a scale of not less
than one inch equals 50 feet and in compliance with all the provisions of
the Map Filing Law225 and with the plat details contained in § 310-89 of
this chapter.
E. Prior to final approval, the Board shall determine:
(1) The nature of the improvements to be required as a condition of
final approval.
(2) The estimated value of the improvements or to be installed in
accordance with this chapter.
(3) The nature and amount of performance guaranties, if any, to be
required as a condition to final approval.
(4) The amounts to be deposited to reimburse the Planning Board and
Borough for costs incurred or to be incurred for legal, engineering
and other consultant reports, for recording fees and for any other
costs anticipated by the Board.
(5) Any other conditions upon which final approval will be granted.
F. Prior to final approval, the applicant shall submit to the Board:
(1) A developer's agreement, prepared by the Board Attorney, setting
forth the obligations of the applicant in connection with the final
approval.
(2) A performance guaranty, in a form satisfactory to the Board and
Borough, complying with this chapter and guaranteeing
performance of the developer's agreement.
(3) Maintenance guaranties, if any, for work completed prior to final
approval.
(4) Deeds for any easements, rights-of-way, public lands or any other
interest in land in a form satisfactory to the Board Attorney and the
Borough Attorney.
(5) Funds to be deposited to reimburse the Board for costs incurred or
to be incurred for legal, engineering and other consultant reports,
for recording fees and for any other costs anticipated by the Board.
(6) Evidence of compliance with any other conditions imposed by the
Board.
G. Within 45 days after submission of a complete final plat or within such
further time as may be agreed to by the applicant, but in no event less
225. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 310-91 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-91
288:590
§ 310-92. Site plan and major subdivision plat details; final
approval.
The final plat of a site plan or subdivision shall contain the following:
than the thirty-day reporting period within which the County Planning
Board may act, the Planning Board shall approve, conditionally approve
or disapprove the final plat and report said action, whether it be
approval, conditional approval or disapproval, to the governing body. In
case of approval, the final plan shall be so certified. The applicant shall
be notified of the Board's action and the reasons therefor.
H. Upon final approval by the Planning Board and after all required
signatures are placed on the original tracing, the Planning Board
Secretary shall request the Planning Board Engineer to have prepared,
at the cost and expense of the applicant, two cloth prints and one Mylar
reproducible and sufficient copies of such final plat to enable the
Secretary to file a copy thereof with each of the following:
(1) Secretary of the Board.
(2) Engineer of the Board.
(3) Land Use Officer.
(4) Construction Code Agency.
(5) Tax Assessor.
(6) Borough Clerk.
(7) Board of Health.
(8) Superintendent of Public Works.226
(9) Environmental Commission.
(10) Board of Education.
(11) Such other officer or agency as the Planning Board shall deem
necessary or desirable.
A. Date, name and location of the subdivision, the name of the owner,
graphic scale and reference meridian.
B. Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, street names,
easements and other rights-of-way, land to be reserved or dedicated to
public use, all lot lines and other site lines; with accurate dimensions,
bearings or deflection angles and radii, arcs and central angles of all
curves; area of each lot.
226. Editor's Note: Original Section 5.105(h)(9), Shade Tree Commission, which immediately
followed this subsection, was deleted 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8.
§ 310-91 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-92
288:591
§ 310-93. Site plan and major subdivision as-built plans.
After installation of the improvements required by this chapter, the
subdivider or applicant for site plan approval shall cause to be prepared,
signed and sealed by a licensed professional engineer or land surveyor:
C. The names, exact locations and widths of all existent recorded streets
intersecting or paralleling the plot boundaries within a distance of 200
feet.
D. The purpose of any easement or land reserved or dedicated to public
use shall be designated and the proposed use of sites, other than
residential, shall be noted.
E. Lot, block and street numbers as approved by the Borough Engineer,
including lot and block numbers of abutting property.
F. Minimum building setback line on all lots and other sites.
G. Location and description of all monuments.
H. Names of owners of adjoining unsubdivided land.
I. Certification by a surveyor as to the accuracy of the details of the plat.
J. Certification that the applicant is agent or owner of the land or that the
owner has given consent under a written agreement.
K. When approval of a plat is required by any other officer or body of a
municipality, county or state, such approval shall be certified on the plat
or evidence shall be submitted that an application has been made for
such approval.
L. Proposed final grades of all streets shall be shown to a scale of one inch
equals five feet vertical and one inch equals 50 feet horizontal, on
sheets 22 inches by 36 inches, and drawings shall include both plans
and profiles and shall show elevations of all monuments referred to
U.S.C. & G.S. level benchmarks, and such elevations shall be shown in
feet and hundredths of feet.
M. Plans and profiles of storm and sanitary sewers and water mains.
N. Certificate from the Tax Collector that all taxes and assessments are
paid to date.
O. Written proof that the land set aside or shown for easement, public use
or streets are free and clear of all liens and encumbrances.
A. Plans showing:
(1) The contours (at two-foot intervals for lands having slopes
averaging 10% or greater and at one-foot intervals for lands of
lesser average slopes) of the land as finally graded; and
§ 310-92 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-93
288:592
(2) The location, as built, of all improvements required by this chapter,
including, without intending to limit the generality hereof, the
location of water mains, gas mains and underground supply lines
for light, power and telephone service and all of their
appurtenances, including building sewer laterals as defined in
Chapter 240, Sewers, of the Code of the Borough of Hillsdale, stubs
and taps for building connections.
B. Profiles, as built, of streets, storm sewers and sanitary sewers and their
respective appurtenances.
C. Cross sections, as built, of streets. The plans, profiles and crosssections
required by this section are hereinafter referred to as "as-built
plans." One complete set of the as-built plans shall be filed with the
Borough Engineer and one complete set with the Land Use Officer.
§ 310-93 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-93
288:593

ARTICLE XXIV
Improvements
§ 310-94. Improvements.
A. The subdivider or site plan applicant shall provide for the ultimate
installation of the following on-site and off-site improvements:
(1) New public street and roadway: when such items of construction
are not covered by the "Standards," the NJDOT Standards of
Highway and Bridge Construction shall apply. [Amended
5-13-1997by Ord. No. 97-8]
(2) Approved street signs.
(3) Curbs and gutters.
(4) Sidewalks, when required by the Planning Board. [Amended
5-13-1997by Ord. No. 97-8]
(5) No topsoil shall be removed from the site or used as spoil except in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 248, Soil Movement, of
the Code of the Borough of Hillsdale. All replaced or redistributed
topsoil shall be stabilized by seeding, planting or such other
method as may be specified in the soil moving permit to ensure that
it will remain in place and free from erosion.
(6) Monuments. Monuments shall be of the size and shape required by
N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.11 and shall be placed in accordance with said
statute.
(7) Utilities (including sewage disposal systems, storm drains and
culverts, water and gas mains and electrical supply lines for light,
power and telephone service), hydrants and connections thereof
with approved existing and proposed systems.
(8) Streetlighting. [Amended 5-13-1997by Ord. No. 97-8]
(9) Shade trees. Shade trees shall be located on the street line so as
not to interfere with utilities or sidewalks and shall be one of the
following types: Shade Maple, Sycamore or an equivalent approved
by the Planning Board.
B. The subdivider or site plan applicant shall, at its own cost, provide for
the ultimate installation of all off-tract water, sewers, drainage and
street improvements and easements therefor required by the Planning
Board in connection with the subdivision or site plan if such off-tract
improvements:
(1) Are wholly made necessary by the subdivision or site plan or the
improvement therein; and
§ 310-94 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-94
288:595
§ 310-95. Improvements; inspection.
All of the improvements installed by a subdivider or site plan applicant shall
be subject to inspection and approval by the Borough Engineer, who shall
be notified by the subdivider or site plan applicant at least 24 hours prior to
the start of construction. No underground installation shall be covered until
so inspected and approved.
(2) Do not confer material benefits on any land other than the land
within the subdivision or site plan.
C. The subdivider or site plan applicant shall provide for payment of its
proportionate share, allocated in accordance with this Part 5, of the
cost of the ultimate installation of all off-tract water, sewer, drainage
and street improvements and easements therefor required by the
Planning Board in connection with the subdivision or site plan if such
off-tract improvements:
(1) Are wholly or partially made necessary by the subdivision or site
plan or the improvements thereon; and
(2) Confer benefit on lands other than those within the subdivision or
site plan.
D. In addition to the improvements set forth in Subsections A, B and C of
this section, the site plan applicant shall, upon the conditions
delineated by the Planning Board, provide for the ultimate installation,
prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, of the following:
(1) Buffer landscaping and foundation plantings.
(2) On-site paved parking areas and all appurtenant curbs, islands,
lighting and driveways.
(3) Fencing and screening.
(4) On-site lighting.
(5) On-site pedestrian ways.
E. All such improvements shall meet the design standards of this chapter.
§ 310-94 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-95
288:596
ARTICLE XXV
Subdivision Design Standards
§ 310-96. Compliance required.
The subdivider shall observe the requirements and principles of land
subdivision in the design of each subdivision or portion thereof, as set forth
in this chapter.
§ 310-97. General standards.
The subdivision plat shall conform to design standards that will encourage
good development patterns within the Borough. Where an official map
or master plan, or both, has or have been adopted, the subdivision shall
conform to the proposals and conditions shown thereon. The streets,
drainageways, school sites, flood-control basins, public parks and
playgrounds and other public areas shown on an adopted master plan or
official map shall be considered in review of subdivision plats. Where no
master plan or official map exists, streets, drainageways and public areas
shall be shown on the final plat in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-44 and
shall be such as to lend themselves to the harmonious development of the
Borough and to enhance the public welfare in accordance with the design
standards set forth in this chapter.
§ 310-98. Streets.
A. The arrangement of streets not shown on the master plan or official
map shall be such as to provide for the appropriate extension of existing
streets.
B. Minor streets shall be so designated as to discourage through traffic.
C. Subdivisions abutting arterial streets shall provide a marginal service
road or reserve frontage with a buffer strip for planting or some other
means of separation of through and local traffic as the Planning Board
may determine to be appropriate.
D. The following design elements shall be in accordance with the
Residential Site Improvement Standards, N.J.A.C., Title 5, Chapter 21:
[Amended 5-13-1997by Ord. No. 97-8]
(1) Right-of-way width.
(2) Street profile grades.
(3) Geometry of street intersections and horizontal alignment.
(4) Construction and materials of streets.
(5) Drainage.
(6) Parking and circulation.
§ 310-96 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-98
288:597
§ 310-99. Blocks.
§ 310-100. Lots.
(7) The right-of-way width for internal roads and alleys in multifamily,
commercial and industrial developments shall be determined on an
individual basis and shall in all cases be of sufficient width and
design to safely accommodate the maximum anticipated traffic,
parking and loading needs and maximum access for fire-fighting
equipment.
E. No subdivision that shows reserve strips controlling access to streets
shall be approved unless the control and disposal of land comprising
such strips shall be transferred exclusively to the Borough Council
under conditions approved by the Planning Board.
F. Subdivisions adjoining or including existing streets that do not conform
to street widths shown on the master plan or official map or to the
street width requirements of this chapter may be required to dedicate
additional width along one or both sides of streets of substandard
width. If the subdivision is along one side only, dedication of 1/2 of the
required extra width may be required.227
G. Dead-end streets (culs-de-sac) shall not be longer than 600 feet and
shall provide a turnaround at the end with a radius of not less than 50
feet and tangent, whenever possible, to the side of the street. If a deadend
street is of a temporary nature, a similar turnaround shall be
provided and provisions made for future extension of the street and
reversion of the excess right-of-way to the adjoining properties.
H. No street shall have a name which will duplicate or likely be confused
with the names of existing streets. The continuation of an existing
street shall have the same name.
A. Block length and width or acreage within bounding roads shall be such
as to accommodate the size of lot required in the area by Part 4, Zoning,
and to provide for the convenient access, circulation control and safety
of street traffic.
B. In blocks over 1,000 feet long, pedestrian walkways may be required in
locations deemed necessary by the Planning Board.
C. For commercial, group housing or industrial use, block size shall be
sufficient to meet all area and yard requirements for such use.
A. Lot dimensions and area shall not be less than the requirements of Part
4 of this chapter unless authorized by duly granted variance.
227. Editor's Note: Original Subsections 5.303(g) through (l), which established specific street
construction standards and which immediately followed this subsection, were deleted
5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8.
§ 310-98 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-100
288:598
§ 310-101. Public use and service areas.
§ 310-102. Utilities design standards, inspections and approvals.
[Added 4-11-2006 by Ord. No. 06-06]
B. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
streets and radial to curved streets.
C. Each lot shall front upon an approved street at least 50 feet in width,
except lots fronting on streets described in § 310-98D(4) and (5).
D. Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing streets,
lots shall begin at such extra width line, and all setbacks shall be
measured from such line.
E. Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot for its intended
use due to factors such as rock formations, flood conditions or similar
circumstances, the Planning Board may, after adequate investigation,
withhold approval of such lots.
A. In a large-scale development, easements along rear property lines or
elsewhere for utility installation may be required. Such easements shall
be at least 15 feet wide and shall be located in consultation with the
companies or Borough departments concerned.
B. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway
channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or
drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such
watercourse and such further width or construction, or both, as will be
adequate for the purpose.
C. Natural features such as trees, brooks, hilltops and views shall be
preserved whenever possible in designing any subdivision containing
such features.
A. All storm drains and culverts and all sewage disposal systems and
installations, both individual and public, shall meet the standards
prescribed by, and be approved by, the Borough, county and state
health and engineering authorities having jurisdiction thereof.
B. All utilities and installations connected with systems maintained and
controlled by privately-owned public utilities shall meet the standards
for underground installation prescribed by, and be approved by, the said
public utilities.
C. All requirements contained in § 310-107 shall be followed and included
as part of the subdivision design standards.
§ 310-100 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-102
288:599

ARTICLE XXVI
Site Plan Design Standards
§ 310-103. Site plan conformance. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No.
97-8]
The applicant shall observe the requirements, principles and standards set
forth in this article with respect to site plan design. Residential development
shall follow the Residential Site Improvement Standards. All other
development shall be in accordance with this article.
§ 310-104. Access.
There shall be adequate provision for ingress to and egress from all parking
spaces. Access drives or driveways shall be not less than 12 feet in width
for ingress or egress alone and 24 feet in width for both ingress and egress.
No driveway or access drive shall be closer than 50 feet to the street lines
of any two intersecting streets.
§ 310-105. Buffer strips.
The site plan shall indicate buffer strips and planting strips as required
by this chapter. In the event that the Planning Board shall determine that
additional buffer strips or planting strips are required to protect public
areas or neighboring properties from adverse effects of the proposed
building or addition, the Board may require such additional buffer or
planting strips, the Shade Tree Commission and Environmental Commission
may recommend landscaping and foundation planting which will ensure the
attractiveness of premises subject to this chapter and the protection of soil
thereon. The Planning Board shall take such recommendations into account
in reviewing the application.
§ 310-106. Circulation.
A. Provision shall be made for the safe and adequate circulation of
pedestrians and vehicles within the property. The width of all aisles or
driveways providing direct access to individual parking stalls shall be in
accordance with the following requirements: [Amended 5-13-1997 by
Ord. No. 97-8]
Parking Angle
(degrees)
Aisle or Driveway Width
(feet)
0º (parallel parking) 12
30º 12
45º 13
60º 18
90º 24
§ 310-103 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-106
288:601
§ 310-107. Stormwater management. [Amended 4-11-2006 by Ord.
No. 06-06]
B. Only one-way traffic shall be permitted in aisles or driveways providing
direct access to parking spaces placed at an angle other than 90º.
A. Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in
this section shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they
have in common usage and to give this section its most reasonable
application. The definitions below are the same as or based on the
corresponding definitions in the Stormwater Management Rules at
N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES OR NODES — Those areas within
boundaries accepted by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection (the Department) pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8E-5B.
CAFRA PLANNING MAP — The geographic depiction of the boundaries
for Coastal Planning Areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA Cores and CAFRA
Nodes pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.3.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses
serving the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and
access to public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County
Board of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinance(s). The county review
agency may either be:
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly
licensed in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may
include, but not necessarily be limited to, development of project
requirements, creation and development of project design and
preparation of drawings and specifications.
DESIGNATED CENTER — A State Development and Redevelopment
Plan Center as designated by the State Planning Commission, such as
urban, regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more
parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any
(1) A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A.
58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal
stormwater management plans and implementing ordinances.
(2)
§ 310-106 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-107
288:602
mining excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of
any building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land,
by any person, for which permission is required under the Municipal
Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. In the case of development
of agricultural lands, development means: any activity that requires a
state permit; any activity reviewed by the County Agricultural Board
(CAB) and the State Agricultural Development Committee (SADC), and
municipal review of any activity not exempted by the Right to Farm Act,
N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving water
body or to a particular point along a receiving water body.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood designated by
the Urban Coordinating Council "in consultation and conjunction with"
the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — An area or feature which is
of significant environmental value, including but not limited to: stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland
forest; steep slopes; and wellhead protection and groundwater
recharge areas. Habitats of endangered or threatened species are
identified using the Department's Landscape Project as approved by the
Department's Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments
by water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer
of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water. This
definition is for the purpose of this stormwater management ordinance
only.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that provides for
ultimately disturbing one or more acres of land. Disturbance for the
purpose of this rule is the placement of impervious surface or exposure
and/or movement of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of
vegetation.
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, borough, town, township, or village.
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities that are not organized in a
compact form.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
§ 310-107 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-107
288:603
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, Borough of Hillsdale, or political subdivision of this state
subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use
Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
filter backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge,
munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes,
radioactive substance [except those regulated under the Atomic Energy
Act of 1954, as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.)], thermal waste,
wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial,
municipal, agricultural, and construction waste or runoff, or other
residue discharged directly or indirectly to the land, groundwaters
or surface waters of the state, or to a domestic treatment works.
"Pollutant" includes both hazardous and nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates
into the ground and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension,
is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air,
water or gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or
has occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN
METROPOLITAN PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the
State Plan Policy Map and adopted by the State Planning Commission
that is intended to be the focus for much of the state's future
redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies,
and the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain
and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, or is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or
drainage facilities, or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or
embankment and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A
stormwater management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a
detention basin or infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool
(a retention basin), or be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most
constructed stormwater wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater
§ 310-107 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-107
288:604
recharge of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater
discharges into stormwater conveyances.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or
in storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area, which may
be influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is
primarily caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT
NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood given priority access to state
resources through the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — A zone designated by the New Jersey
Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban
Enterprise Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT ARE — A Previously developed portions of
areas:
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs,
streams, wetlands, and bodies of surface or groundwater, whether
natural or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or
subject to its jurisdiction.
WETLANDS OR WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated
by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient
to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a
prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the
Metropolitan Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or
Nodes;
(1)
(2) Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
(3) Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
(4)
B. Scope and purpose.
(1) Policy statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and
pollutant reduction through nonstructural or low-impact
techniques shall be explored before relying on structural best
management practices (BMPs). Structural BMPs shall be
integrated with nonstructural stormwater management strategies
and proper maintenance plans. Nonstructural strategies include
both environmentally sensitive site design and source controls that
prevent pollutants from being placed on the site or from being
exposed to stormwater. Source control plans shall be developed
based upon physical site conditions and the origin, nature, and the
§ 310-107 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-107
288:605
anticipated quantity or amount of potential pollutants. Multiple
stormwater management BMPs may be necessary to achieve the
established performance standards for water quality, quantity, and
groundwater recharge.
(2) Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for "major
development," as defined in Subsection A.
(3) Applicability.
(a) This section shall be applicable to all site plans and
subdivisions for the following major developments that require
preliminary or final site plan or subdivision review:
[1] Nonresidential major developments; and
[2] Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards
at N.J.A.C. 5:21.
(b) This section shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the Borough of Hillsdale.
(4) Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans
pursuant to this section are to be considered an integral part of
development approvals under the subdivision and site plan review
process and do not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to
secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any
other applicable code, rule, act, or ordinance. In their
interpretation and application, the provisions of this section shall
be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the
public health, safety, and general welfare. This section is not
intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other
ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law
except that, where any provision of this section imposes
restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance,
rule or regulation, or other provision of law, the more restrictive
provisions or higher standards shall control.
C. General standards. Design and performance standards for stormwater
management measures.
(1) Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
standards in Subsection D. To the maximum extent practicable,
these standards shall be met by incorporating nonstructural
stormwater management strategies into the design. If these
strategies alone are not sufficient to meet these standards,
§ 310-107 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-107
288:606
structural stormwater management measures necessary to meet
these standards shall be incorporated into the design.
(2) The standards in this section apply only to new major development
and are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on
water quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and
maintain groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to new
major development to the extent that alternative design and
performance standards are applicable under a regional stormwater
management plan or water quality management plan adopted in
accordance with Department rules.
(3) Alternative standards shall provide at least as much protection
from stormwater-related loss of groundwater recharge, stormwater
quantity and water quality impacts of major development projects
as would be provided under the standards in N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.
D. Stormwater management requirements for major development.
(1) The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development in accordance with Subsection J.
(2) Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered
species as documented in the Department's Landscape Project or
Natural Heritage Database established under N.J.S.A.
13:1B-15.147 through 15.150, particularly Helonias bullata
(swamp pink) and/or Clemmys muhlnebergi (bog turtle).
(3) The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and
stormwater runoff quality requirements of Subsections D(6) and
D(7):
(a) The construction of an underground utility line, provided that
the disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(b) The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that
the existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(c) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a
sidewalk or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided
that the access is made of permeable material.
(4) A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of Subsections D(6) and D(7) may be obtained for the
enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access,
provided that the following conditions are met:
§ 310-107 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-107
288:607
(a) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(b) The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis
that through the use of nonstructural and structural
stormwater management strategies and measures, the option
selected complies with the requirements of Subsections D(6)
and D(7) to the maximum extent practicable;
(c) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the
requirements of Subsections D(6) and D(7), existing structures
currently in use, such as homes and buildings, would need to
be condemned; and
(d) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under Subsection D(4)(c) above
within the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream,
that would provide additional opportunities to mitigate the
requirements of Subsections D(6) and D(7) that were not
achievable on site.
(5) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(a) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in
Subsections D(6) and D(7) shall be met by incorporating
nonstructural stormwater management strategies set forth at
Subsection D(5) into the design. The applicant shall identify
the nonstructural measures incorporated into the design of the
project. If the applicant contends that it is not feasible for
engineering, environmental, or safety reasons to incorporate
any nonstructural stormwater management measures
identified in Subsection D(5)(b) below into the design of a
particular project, the applicant shall identify the strategy
considered and provide a basis for the contention.
(b) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies
incorporated into site design shall:
[1] Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
[2] Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect
the flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
[3] Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
[4] Minimize the decrease in the time of concentration from
preconstruction to postconstruction. "Time of
concentration" is defined as the time it takes for runoff to
§ 310-107 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-107
288:608
travel from the hydraulically most distant point of the
watershed to the point of interest within a watershed;
[5] Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading;
[6] Minimize soil compaction;
[7] Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes
the use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
[8] Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
[9] Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the
use or exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to
prevent or minimize the release of those pollutants into
stormwater runoff. Such source controls include, but are
not limited to:
[a] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation
of trash and debris in drainage systems, including
features that satisfy Subsection D(5)(c) below;
[b] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of
trash and debris from drainage systems;
[c] Site design features that help to prevent and/or
contain spills or other harmful accumulations of
pollutants at industrial or commercial developments;
and
[d] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the
requirements established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A 4:24-39 et seq., and
implementing rules.
(c) Site design features identified under Subsection D(5)(b)[1][b]
above shall comply with the following standard to control
passage of solid and floatable materials through storm drain
inlets. For purposes of this paragraph, "solid and floatable
materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating,
suspended, or settleable solids. For exemptions to this
standard see Subsection D(5)(c)[3] below.
[1] Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a
storm drain or surface water body under that grate:
[a] The New Jersey Department of Transportation
(NJDOT) bicycle safe grate, which is described in
§ 310-107 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-107
288:609
Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle Compatible
Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
[b] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven square
inches, or is no greater than 0.5 inches across the
smallest dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include
grates in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curbopening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on
storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates,
and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples
of ground surfaces include surfaces of roads
(including bridges), driveways, parking areas,
bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and stormwater basin floors.
[2] Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the
clear space in that curb opening (or each individual clear
space, if the curb opening has two or more clear spaces)
shall have an area of no more than seven square inches, or
be no greater than two inches across the smallest
dimension.
[3] This standard does not apply:
[a] Where the review agency determines that this
standard would cause inadequate hydraulic
performance that could not practicably be overcome
by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
[b] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in Subsection D(7)(a) are conveyed through
any device (e.g., end-of-pipe netting facility,
manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent
delivery of all solid and floatable materials that could
not pass through one of the following:
[i] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2
inches wide (this option does not apply for outfall
netting facilities); or
[ii] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
[c] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that
has parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the
bars, to the elevation of the water quality design storm
as specified in Subsection D(7)(a); or
§ 310-107 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-107
288:610
[d] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c),
that action to meet this standard is an undertaking
that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register-listed historic
property.
(d) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater
management measure to meet the performance standards in
Subsections D(6) and D(7) shall be dedicated to a government
agency, subjected to a conservation restriction filed with the
appropriate county clerk's office, or subject to an approved
equivalent restriction that ensures that measure or an
equivalent stormwater management measure approved by the
reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
(e) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management
strategies is available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be
obtained from the Department.
(6) Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity
standards.
(a) This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration
and groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff
quantity impacts of major development.
[1] The minimum design and performance standards for
erosion control are those established under the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.,
and implementing rules.
[2] The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
[a] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge calculations at Subsection E, either:
[i] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater
management measures maintain 100% of the
average annual preconstruction groundwater
recharge volume for the site; or
[ii] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff
volume from preconstruction to postconstruction
for the two-year storm is infiltrated.
§ 310-107 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-107
288:611
[b] This groundwater recharge requirement does not
apply to projects within the urban redevelopment
area, or to projects subject to Subsection D(6)(a)[3]
below.
[c] The following types of stormwater shall not be
recharged:
[i] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading.
High pollutant loading areas are areas in
industrial and commercial developments where
solvents and/or petroleum products are loaded/
unloaded, stored or applied; areas where
pesticides are loaded/unloaded or stored; areas
where hazardous materials are expected to be
present in greater than "reportable quantities" as
defined by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR 302.4; areas
where recharge would be inconsistent with
Department-approved remedial action work plan
or landfill closure plan and areas with high risks
for spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations
and vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[ii] Industrial stormwater exposed to source material.
"Source material" means any material(s) or
machinery, located at an industrial facility that is
directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities,
which could be a source of pollutants in any
industrial stormwater discharge to groundwater.
Source materials include, but are not limited to,
raw materials; intermediate products; final
products; waste materials; by-products; industrial
machinery and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and
detergents that are related to process,
manufacturing, or other industrial activities that
are exposed to stormwater.
[d] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact
on the groundwater table and design the site so as to
avoid adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse
hydraulic impacts include, but are not limited to,
exacerbating a naturally or seasonally high water
table so as to cause surficial ponding, flooding of
basements, or interference with the proper operation
of subsurface sewage disposal systems and other
subsurface structures in the vicinity or downgradient
of the groundwater recharge area.
§ 310-107 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-107
288:612
[3] In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors
for stormwater runoff calculations at Subsection E,
complete one of the following:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that for stormwater leaving the site,
postconstruction runoff hydrographs for the two-, tenand
one-hundred-year storm events do not exceed, at
any point in time, the preconstruction runoff
hydrographs for the same storm events;
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that there is no increase, as compared to the
preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten- and onehundred-
year storm events and that the increased
volume or change in timing of stormwater runoff will
not increase flood damage at or downstream of the
site. This analysis shall include the analysis of impacts
of existing land uses and projected land uses assuming
full development under existing zoning and land use
ordinances in the drainage area;
[c] Design stormwater management measures so that the
postconstruction peak runoff rates for the two-, tenand
one-hundred-year storm events are 50%, 75% and
80%, respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff
rates. The percentages apply only to the
postconstruction stormwater runoff that is
attributable to the portion of the site on which the
proposed development or project is to be constructed.
The percentages shall not be applied to
postconstruction stormwater runoff into tidal flood
hazard areas if the increased volume of stormwater
runoff will not increase flood damages below the point
of discharge; or
[d] In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with Subsection D(6)(a)[3][a],
[b] and [c] above shall only be applied if the increased
volume of stormwater runoff could increase flood
damages below the point of discharge.
(b) Any application for a new agricultural development that meets
the definition of major development at Subsection A shall be
submitted to the appropriate soil conservation district for
review and approval in accordance with the requirements of
this section and any applicable soil conservation district
guidelines for stormwater runoff quantity and erosion control.
For the purposes of this section, "agricultural development"
§ 310-107 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-107
288:613
means land uses normally associated with the production of
food, fiber and livestock for sale. Such uses do not include the
development of land for the processing or sale of food and the
manufacturing of agriculturally related products.
(7) Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(a) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to
reduce the postconstruction load of total suspended solids
(TSS) in stormwater runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from
the developed site, expressed as an annual average.
Stormwater management measures shall only be required for
water quality control if an additional 1/4 acre of impervious
surface is being proposed on a development site. The
requirement to reduce TSS does not apply to any stormwater
runoff in a discharge regulated under a numeric effluent
limitation for TSS imposed under the New Jersey Pollution
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A,
or in a discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit
from this requirement. The water quality design storm is 1.25
inches of rainfall in two hours. Water quality calculations shall
take into account the distribution of rain from the water quality
design storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation of the
volume of runoff may take into account the implementation of
nonstructural and structural stormwater management
measures.
Table 1
Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000
5 0.0083
10 0.0166
15 0.0250
20 0.0500
25 0.0750
30 0.1000
35 0.1330
40 0.1660
45 0.2000
50 0.2583
55 0.3583
§ 310-107 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-107
288:614
Table 1
Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative Rainfall
(inches)
60 0.6250
65 0.8917
70 0.9917
75 1.0500
80 1.0840
85 1.1170
90 1.1500
95 1.1750
100 1.2000
105 1.2250
110 1.2334
115 1.2417
120 1.2500
(b) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below
presents the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs
designed in accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be
obtained from the address identified in Subsection G, or found
on the Department's Web site at www.njstormwater.org. The
BMP Manual and other sources of technical guidance are listed
in Subsection G. TSS reduction shall be calculated based on
the removal rates for the BMPs in Table 2 below. Alternative
removal rates and methods of calculating removal rates may be
used if the design engineer provides documentation
demonstrating the capability of these alternative rates and
methods to the review agency. A copy of any approved
alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate shall
be provided to the Department at the following address:
Division of Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, P.O. Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey,
08625-0418.
(c) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the
required 80% TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall
utilize the following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
§ 310-107 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-107
288:615
R = A+B-(AXB)/100
Where
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of
both BMPs
A = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first
BMP
B = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second
BMP
Table 2
TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice
TSS Percent Removal
Rate
Bioretention systems 90
Constructed stormwater wetland 90
Extended detention basin 40-60
Infiltration structure 80
Manufactured treatment device See Subsection F(3)
Sand filter 80
Vegetative filter strip 60-80
Wet pond 50-90
(d) If there is more than one on site drainage area, the eightypercent
TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage area,
unless the runoff from the subareas converge on site, in which
case the removal rate can be demonstrated through a
calculation using a weighted average.
(e) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the postconstruction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design
storm. In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum
extent feasible, the design of the site shall include
nonstructural strategies and structural measures that optimize
nutrient removal while still achieving the performance
standards in Subsections D(6) and D(7).
(f) Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which
may be obtained from the address identified in Subsection G.
(g) In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to
§ 310-107 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-107
288:616
prevent any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified
as FW1.
(h) Special water resource protection areas shall be established
along all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and
perennial or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream
of the Category One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle
Maps or in the county soil surveys, within the associated
HUC14 drainage area. These areas shall be established for the
protection of water quality, aesthetic value, exceptional
ecological significance, exceptional recreational significance,
exceptional water supply significance, and exceptional
fisheries significance of those established Category One
waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
[1] The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[a] A three-hundred-foot special water resource
protection area shall be provided on each side of the
waterway, measured perpendicular to the waterway
from the top of the bank outwards or from the center
line of the waterway where the bank is not defined,
consisting of existing vegetation or vegetation allowed
to follow natural succession.
[b] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under Subsection
D(7)(h)[1][a] above shall only be allowed where
previous development or disturbance has occurred
(for example, active agricultural use, parking area or
maintained lawn area). The encroachment shall only
be allowed where applicant demonstrates that the
functional value and overall condition of the special
water resource protection area will be maintained to
the maximum extent practicable. In no case shall the
remaining special water resource protection area be
reduced to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the top-of-bank of the waterway or
center line of the waterway where the bank is
undefined. All encroachments proposed under this
subparagraph shall be subject to review and approval
by the Department
[2] All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow
through the special water resource protection area and
shall comply with the standard for off-site stability in the
Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
§ 310-107 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-107
288:617
Jersey, established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
[3] If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through
the special water resource protection area cannot comply
with the standard for off-site stability in the Standards for
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey,
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., then the stabilization
measures in accordance with the requirements of the
above standards may be placed within the special water
resource protection area, provided that:
[a] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150
feet of the Category One waterway;
[b] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by
this section shall achieve a ninety-five-percent TSS
postconstruction removal rate;
[c] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact
on the receiving waterway;
[d] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource
protection area will be maintained to the maximum
extent practicable;
[e] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with
the appropriate Department staff and soil
conservation district staff to identify necessary
stabilization measures; and
[f] All encroachments proposed under this section shall
be subject to review and approval by the Department.
[4] A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as
an element of a regional stormwater management plan, or
by a municipality through an adopted municipal
stormwater management plan. If a stream corridor
protection plan for a waterway subject to Subsection
D(7)(h) has been approved by the Department of
Environmental Protection, then the provisions of the plan
shall be the applicable special water resource protection
area requirements for that waterway. A stream corridor
protection plan for a waterway subject to Subsection
D(7)(h) shall maintain or enhance the current functional
value and overall condition of the special water resource
protection area as defined in Subsection D(7)(h)[1][a]
above. In no case shall a stream corridor protection plan
§ 310-107 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-107
288:618
allow the reduction of the special water resource
protection area to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the waterway subject to this subsection.
[5] Subsection G(8) does not apply to the construction of one
individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final
subdivision approval on or before February 2, 2004,
provided that the construction begins on or before
February 2, 2009.
E. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge.
(1) Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the
following.
(a) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
[1] The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service
(NRCS) methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation
and Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the
NRCS National Engineering Handbook Section 4 —
Hydrology and Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology
for Small Watersheds; or
[2] The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified
Rational Method for hydrograph computations.
(b) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and
groundwater recharge, there is a presumption that the
preconstruction condition of a site or portion thereof is a
wooded land use with good hydrologic condition. The term
"runoff coefficient" applies to both the NRCS methodology at
Subsection E(1)(a)[1] and the Rational and Modified Rational
Methods at Subsection E(1)(a)[2]. A runoff coefficient or a
groundwater recharge land cover for an existing condition may
be used on all or a portion of the site if the design engineer
verifies that the hydrologic condition has existed on the site or
portion of the site for at least five years without interruption
prior to the time of application. If more than one land cover
have existed on the site during the five years immediately prior
to the time of application, the land cover with the lowest runoff
potential shall be used for the computations. In addition, there
is the presumption that the site is in good hydrologic condition
(if the land use type is pasture, lawn, or park), with good cover
(if the land use type is woods), or with good hydrologic
condition and conservation treatment (if the land use type is
cultivation).
(c) In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
§ 310-107 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-107
288:619
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows,
or culverts that may reduce preconstruction stormwater runoff
rates and volumes.
(d) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the
design engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff
rates and/or volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces
separately to accurately compute the rates and volume of
stormwater runoff from the site. To calculate runoff from
unconnected impervious cover, urban impervious area
modifications as described in the NRCS Technical Release 55
— Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds and other methods
may be employed.
(e) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater
management measure is below the flood hazard design flood
elevation as defined at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall
take into account the effects of tailwater in the design of
structural stormwater management measures.
(2) Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following:
(a) The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32, A Method
for Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference, as amended and
supplemented. Information regarding the methodology is
available from the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual; at http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at
New Jersey Geological Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427,
Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
F. Standards for structural stormwater management measures.
(1) Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
(a) Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed to take into account the existing site conditions,
including, for example, environmentally critical areas,
wetlands; flood-prone areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high
water table; soil type, permeability and texture; drainage area
and drainage patterns; and the presence of solution-prone
carbonate rocks (limestone).
(b) Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed to minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and
repairs, and ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet structure, as appropriate,
and shall have parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the
bars to the elevation of the water quality design storm. For
elevations higher than the water quality design storm, the
§ 310-107 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-107
288:620
parallel bars at the outlet structure shall be spaced no greater
than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the orifice or 1/3 the
width of the weir, with a minimum spacing between bars of
one inch and a maximum spacing between bars of six inches.
In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with the
requirements of Subsection H(4).
(c) Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed, constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and
corrosion-resistant. Measures that are consistent with the
relevant portions of the Residential Site Improvement
Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3, 7.4, and 7.5 shall be deemed to
meet this requirement.
(d) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management
basin, the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in
diameter.
(e) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins
at Subsection H.
(2) Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the
New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized, provided the
design engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its
design will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater
recharge and water quality design and performance standards
established by Subsection D of this section.
(3) Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the
requirements of Subsection D of this section, provided the pollutant
removal rates are verified by the New Jersey Corporation for
Advanced Technology and certified by the Department.
G. Sources for technical guidance.
(1) Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at Subsections G(1)(a) and G(1)(b)
below, which are available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street,
P.O. Box 420, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625; telephone (609)
777-1038.
(a) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are
contained in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual, as amended. Information is provided on
stormwater management measures such as: bioretention
systems, constructed stormwater wetlands, dry wells,
extended detention basins, infiltration structures,
manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand filters,
vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
§ 310-107 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-107
288:621
(b) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
(2) Additional technical guidance for stormwater management
measures can be obtained from the following:
(a) The Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee
and incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards
may be obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation
Committee or any of the soil conservation districts listed in
N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The location, address, and telephone
number of each soil conservation district may be obtained from
the State Soil Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton,
New Jersey 08625; (609) 292-5540;
(b) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, (732) 932-9306;
and
(c) The Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
The location, address, and telephone number of each soil
conservation district may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey,
08625; (609) 292-5540.
H. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
(1) This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety
through the proper design and operation of stormwater
management basins. This section applies to any new stormwater
management basin. The provisions of this section are not intended
to preempt more stringent municipal or county safety requirements
for new or existing stormwater management basins. Municipal and
county stormwater management plans and ordinances may,
pursuant to their authority, require existing stormwater
management basins to be retrofitted to meet one or more of the
safety standards in Subsections H(2)(a), H(2)(b) and H(2)(c) for
trash racks, overflow grates, and escape provisions at outlet
structures.
(2) Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape
provisions.
(a) A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
[1] The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater
than six-inch spacing between the bars.
§ 310-107 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-107
288:622
[2] The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely
affect the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or
structure.
[3] The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is
not to exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of
stage and discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the
basis of the net area of opening through the rack.
[4] The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion-resistant, and shall be
designed to withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300
pounds per square foot.
(b) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
[1] The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure
but removable for emergencies and maintenance.
[2] The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two
inches across the smallest dimension.
[3] The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion-resistant, and shall be
designed to withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300
pounds per square foot.
(c) For purposes of this paragraph, escape provisions means the
permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other
features that provide easily accessible means of egress from
stormwater management basins. Stormwater management
basins shall include escape provisions as follows:
[1] If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the
structure. With the prior approval of the reviewing agency
identified in Subsection H(3), a freestanding outlet
structure may be exempted from this requirement.
[2] Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool
of water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four to six feet
in width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2
feet below the permanent water surface, and the second
step shall be located 1 1/2 feet above the permanent water
surface. See Subsection H(4) for an illustration of safety
ledges in a stormwater management basin.
§ 310-107 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-107
288:623
[3] In new stormwater management basins, the maximum
interior slope for an earthen dam, embankment or berm
shall not be steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
(3) Variance or exemption from safety standards. A variance or
exemption from the safety standards for stormwater management
basins may be granted only upon a written finding by the
appropriate reviewing agency (municipality, county or Department)
that the variance or exemption will not constitute a threat to public
safety.
(4) Illustration of safety ledges in a new stormwater management
basin.
I. Requirements for a site development stormwater plan.
(1) Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(a) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a
development subject to this section, the applicant shall submit
all of the required components of the checklist for the site
development stormwater plan at Subsection I(3) below as part
of the submission of the applicant's application for subdivision
or site plan approval.
(b) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this section.
§ 310-107 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-107
288:624
(c) The applicant shall submit 12 copies of the materials listed in
the checklist for site development stormwater plans in
accordance with Subsection I(3) of this section.
(2) Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision
or site plan review process by the municipal board or official from
which municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or
official shall consult the engineer retained by the Planning and/or
Zoning Board (as appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist
requirements have been satisfied and to determine if the project
meets the standards set forth in this section.
(3) Checklist requirements. The following information shall be
required:
(a) Topographic base map. The reviewing engineer shall require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary.
A topographic base map of the site shall be submitted which
extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits of the
proposed development, at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet or
greater, showing two-foot contour intervals. The map shall
indicate the following where appropriate: existing surface
water drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils,
perennial or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream
of the Category One waters, wetlands and floodplains along
with their appropriate buffer strips, marshlands and other
wetlands, pervious or vegetative surfaces, existing man-made
structures, roads, bearing and distances of property lines, and
significant natural and man-made features not otherwise
shown.
(b) Environmental site analysis. A written and graphic description
of the natural and man-made features of the site and its
environs. This description shall include a discussion of soil
conditions, slopes, wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the
site. Particular attention shall be given to unique, unusual, or
environmentally sensitive features and to those that provide
particular opportunities or constraints for development.
(c) Project description and site plan(s). A map (or maps) at the
scale of the topographical base map indicating the location of
existing and proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities,
structural facilities for stormwater management and sediment
control, and other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also
clearly show areas where alterations occur in the natural
terrain and cover, including lawns and other landscaping, and
seasonal high ground water elevations. A written description of
the site plan and justification of proposed changes in natural
conditions may also be provided.
§ 310-107 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-107
288:625
(d) Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall
provide a demonstration of how the goals and standards of
Subsections C through F are being met. The focus of this plan
shall be to describe how the site is being developed to meet the
objective of controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater
quality and stormwater quantity problems at the source by
land management and source controls whenever possible.
(e) Stormwater management facilities map. The following
information, illustrated on a map of the same scale as the
topographic base map, shall be included:
[1] Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon,
and details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
[2] Details of all stormwater management facility designs,
during and after construction, including discharge
provisions, discharge capacity for each outlet at different
levels of detention and emergency spillway provisions with
maximum discharge capacity of each spillway.
(f) Calculations.
[1] Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design
calculations for the predevelopment and postdevelopment
conditions for the design storms specified in Subsection D
of this section.
[2] When the proposed stormwater management control
measures (e.g., infiltration basins) depend on the
hydrologic properties of soils, then a soils report shall be
submitted. The soils report shall be based on site boring
logs or soil pit profiles. The number and location of
required soil borings or soil pits shall be determined based
on what is needed to determine the suitability and
distribution of soils present at the location of the control
measure.
(g) Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of Subsection J.
(h) Waiver from submission requirements. The municipal official
or board reviewing an application under this section may, in
consultation with the Municipal Engineer, waive submission of
any of the requirements in Subsections I(3)(a) through I(3)(f) of
this section when it can be demonstrated that the information
requested is impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship
§ 310-107 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-107
288:626
on the applicant to obtain and its absence will not materially
affect the review process.
J. Maintenance and repair.
(1) Applicability. Projects subject to review as in Subsection B(3) of this
section shall comply with the requirements of Subsections J(2) and
J(3) of this section.
(2) General maintenance.
(a) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the
design of a major development.
(b) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris or trash removal; and the
name, address, and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance
(including replacement). Maintenance guidelines for
stormwater management measures are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. If the
maintenance plan identifies a person other than the developer
(for example, a public agency or homeowners' association) as
having the responsibility for maintenance, the plan shall
include documentation of such person's agreement to assume
this responsibility or of the developer's obligation to dedicate a
stormwater management facility to such person under an
applicable ordinance or regulation.
(c) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or
transferred to the owner or tenant of an individual property in
a residential development or project, unless such owner or
tenant owns or leases the entire residential development or
project.
(d) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection J(2)(b) above is not a public agency, the
maintenance plan and any future revisions based on
Subsection J(2)(g) below shall be recorded upon the deed of
record for each property on which the maintenance described
in the maintenance plan must be undertaken.
(e) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow
and ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of
vegetation; and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
§ 310-107 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-107
288:627
(f) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection J(2)(b) above shall maintain a detailed log of all
preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural
stormwater management measures incorporated into the
design of the development, including a record of all inspections
and copies of all maintenance-related work orders.
(g) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection J(2)(b) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan
and the deed as needed.
(h) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection J(2)(b) above shall retain and make available, upon
request by any public entity with administrative, health,
environmental, or safety authority over the site, the
maintenance plan and the documentation required by
Subsections J(2)(f) and J(2)(g) above.
(i) The requirements of Subsections J(2)(c) and J(2)(d) do not
apply to stormwater management facilities that are dedicated
to and accepted by the municipality or another governmental
agency.
(j) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes
a danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance
and repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the
Municipal Engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its
discretion, may extend the time allowed for effecting
maintenance and repair for good cause. If the responsible
person fails or refuses to perform such maintenance and
repair, the municipality or county may immediately proceed to
do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the responsible person.
(3) Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.
S.A. 40:55D-53.
K. Violations and penalties. Any person who erects, constructs, alters,
repairs, converts, maintains, or uses any building, structure or land in
violation of this section shall be subject to the following penalties:
$1,000 per incidence of violation.
L. Effective date. This section shall take effect immediately upon the
approval by the county review agency, or 60 days from the receipt of the
ordinance by the county review agency if the county review agency
shall fail to act.
§ 310-107 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-108
288:628
§ 310-108. Fencing and screening.
Provision shall be made for such fencing or screening of the subject
property from public view as the Planning Board may deem necessary for
the conservation of the character of the neighborhood and the conservation
of property values therein, as well as such protective fencing or screening
as the Planning Board may deem necessary for the health, safety and
welfare of the public.
§ 310-109. Garbage and refuse.
Provision shall be made for the indoor or enclosed storage of garbage and
other waste materials.
§ 310-110. Illumination.
The lighting of the building, the property and all signs on the property shall
be such as not to produce any glare at the exterior lot lines of the premises.
The traffic circulation patterns shall be such as to eliminate, at the exterior
lot lines, glare from the lights of motor and other vehicles on the property.
§ 310-111. Loading spaces.
When there shall be proposed the construction or alteration of a building
requiring loading facilities, there shall be provided on the same lot a
sufficient number of loading spaces to permit the loading operations to
occur without impeding normal circulation of vehicular traffic on the lot.
Each loading space shall be at least 12 feet wide, 35 feet long and 14 feet
high and shall, as nearly as may be practicable, be located in such a position
as to cause the least hindrance to internal circulation of traffic and the least
noise and aesthetic disturbance to the public and neighboring property
owners. No loading space shall be located in a position in which any vehicle
using the space will block the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles on the
street.
§ 310-112. Noise.
Provision shall be made for the protection of neighboring properties and
the public at large against all loud and offensive noises emanating from the
subject property.
§ 310-113. Parking.
A. The Planning Board shall require the most appropriate location on the
site for the proposed parking, taking into account the size and
topography of the property, considerations of safety and aesthetics, the
need for adequate buffers and the elimination of glare, dust and noise
caused by traffic. There shall be provided for each building subject to
this chapter the number of off-street parking spaces required under
Part 4 of this chapter.
§ 310-108 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-113
288:629
B. Each off-street parking space shall have an area of at least 180 square
feet, exclusive of access drives or aisles, shall be at least nine feet wide
and 18 feet long and shall be surfaced so as to be usable for parking. If
off-site off-street parking is contemplated, the Board, in addition, shall
determine what provisions, if any, are required for the safe and
adequate circulation of pedestrians between the parking area and the
property. [Amended 5-13-1997by Ord. No. 97-8]
C. All parking areas and appurtenant maneuvering areas, passageways
and driveways serving semipublic, office research, commercial and
industrial uses shall be illuminated adequately during the hours
between sunset and sunrise when the use is in operation. Adequate
shielding shall be provided by all such users to protect adjacent
residential districts from the glare of such illumination and from glare
of motor vehicle headlights produced by such vehicles entering and
leaving the area.
D. Off-street parking areas shall be effectively screened on any side which
adjoins or faces premises situated in any residential district or
institutional premises by screening equivalent to a solid, uniformly
painted fence or wall not less than four nor more than six feet in height,
maintained in good condition: provided, however, that where the
adjacent owners agree in writing, a screening hedge or natural
landscaping may be substituted for the required fence or wall. No part
of any parking area shall be closer than 10 feet to any school, hospital
or other institutional building unless properly screened in accordance
with Planning Board requirements.
E. Parking areas may be located in any yard space except where otherwise
prohibited, but shall not be closer than 10 feet to any street line.
[Amended 6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 18-12]
F. Off-street parking areas located in Commercial Districts which provide
parking for 20 or more vehicles shall be provided with shade trees of a
type approved by the Borough Shade Tree and Environmental
Commissions. The shade trees shall be located in a planned manner
within the parking lot area as recommended by said Commissions and
approved by the Planning Board. There shall be not less than one shade
tree for every 10 parking spaces.
G. The Planning Board may, upon satisfactory proof that the occupancy of
the buildings for which a community parking program is provided does
not require final grading and surfacing of the entire area, grant
permission for deferment of that portion of the final grading and
surfacing not required by the then-current occupancy and use. No
person shall permit or cause to be occupied any building by more
persons than shall be permitted by Planning Board approval of the
community parking plan. In the event that the Planning Board shall
determine, after notice to the owner of buildings participating in the
community parking plan and a hearing, that the partially paved and
§ 310-113 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-113
288:630
§ 310-114. Retaining walls.
Retaining walls shall be designed to be safe and adequate for the purpose
intended.
§ 310-115. Sewage disposal.
Provision shall be made in accordance with applicable regulations of all
boards and bodies having jurisdiction over the collection and disposal of
sewage. No site plan approval may be granted until the Board of Health has
certified that an acceptable sanitary system has been designed.
§ 310-116. Sidewalks.
Sidewalks shall be provided where needed to protect the safety of
pedestrians.
§ 310-117. Storage.
Outside storage, when permitted, shall only be permitted in specific areas
approved by the Board. Such areas shall, as nearly as may be practicable, be
shielded from public view and protected by adequate fencing or screening.
§ 310-118. Utilities.
Facilities shall be provided for placing all utilities underground, including
telephone and electric power lines.
graded parking area is inadequate, the owner shall forthwith complete
the final grading and surfacing of the entire required parking area.228
228. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 5.412, which immediately followed this section, was deleted
7-10-1990 by Ord. No. 90-10.
§ 310-113 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-118
288:631

ARTICLE XXVII
Performance and Maintenance Guarantees
[Amended in entirety 6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 18-16; Prior history
includes Ord. No. 80-1]
§ 310-119. Developer's agreement.
With respect to all applications for subdivision and site plan approval, the
Borough of Hillsdale Planning Board shall condition any such approval
upon the execution of a developer's agreement between the Borough of
Hillsdale Planning Board (the "Board") and the applicant specifying, in part,
off-site, on-tract or off-tract improvements, public improvements, bonding
requirements, escrow requirements, other conditions imposed by the
Borough and such other terms and conditions as the Borough deems
appropriate. The Board may waive the requirement of a developer's
agreement in appropriate circumstances. Unless so waived, no certificate
of occupancy or building permit shall be issued respecting any application
for development requiring subdivision or site plan approval unless the
applicant has entered into a developer's agreement of a form specified
herein.
§ 310-120. Furnishing of performance guarantees; improvements.
A. Before filing of final subdivision plats or recording of minor subdivision
deeds or as a condition of final site plan approval or as a condition to
the issuance of a zoning permit pursuant to subsection d of Section 52
of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (C.40:55D-65), or as a condition of approval of a
permit update under the State Uniform Construction Code for the
purpose of updating the name and address of the owner of property on
a construction permit, the Borough shall require and shall accept in
accordance with the standards set forth hereinbelow and regulations
adopted pursuant to Section 1 of P.L. 1999, c. 68 (C. 40:55D-53a) for the
purpose of assuring the installation and maintenance of certain on-tract
improvements, the furnishing of a performance guarantee, and
provision for a maintenance guarantee as set forth in this section.
(1) The developer shall furnish a performance guarantee in favor of the
Borough in an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of installation
of only those improvements required by an approval or developer's
agreement, ordinance, or regulation to be dedicated to a public
entity, and that have not yet been installed, which cost shall be
determined by the Borough Engineer, according to the method of
calculation set forth in Section 15 of P.L. 1991, c. 256 (C.
40:55D-53.4), for the following improvements as shown on the
approved plans or plat:
(a) Streets.
(b) Pavement.
(c) Gutters.
§ 310-119 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-120
288:633
§ 310-120.1. Safety and Stabilization.
(d) Curbs.
(e) Sidewalks.
(f) Street lighting.
(g) Street trees.
(h) Surveyor's monuments, as shown on the final map and
required by "the map filing law," P.L. 1960, c. 141 (C. 46:23-9.9
et seq.; repealed by Section 2 of P.L. 2011, C. 217) or N.J.S.A.
46:26B-1 through N.J.S.A. 46:26B-8.
(i) Water mains.
(j) Sanitary sewers.
(k) Community septic systems.
(l) Drainage structures.
(m) Public improvements of open space; and
(n) Any grading necessitated by the preceding improvements.
(2) The developer shall also furnish a performance guarantee to
include, within an approved phase or section of a development,
privately-owned perimeter buffer landscaping, as required by the
Borough Code or imposed as a condition of approval. At a
developer's option, a separate performance guarantee may be
posted for the privately-held perimeter buffer landscaping.
(3) The Borough Engineer shall prepare an itemized cost estimate of
the improvements covered by the performance guarantee, which
itemized cost estimate shall be appended to each performance
guarantee posted by the obligor.
A. The developer shall also furnish to the Borough a "safety and
stabilization guarantee" in favor of the Borough. At the developer's
option, a "safety and stabilization guarantee" may be furnished either
as a separate guarantee or as a line item of the performance guarantee.
A "safety and stabilization guarantee" shall be available to the Borough
solely for the purpose of returning property that has been disturbed to a
safe and stable condition or otherwise implementing measures to
protect the public from access to an unsafe or unstable condition, only
in the circumstance that:
(1) Site disturbance has commenced and, thereafter, all work on the
development has ceased for a period of at least 60 consecutive days
following such commencement for reasons other than force
majeure.
§ 310-120 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-120.1
288:634
§ 310-120.2. Temporary certificate of occupancy; guarantee.
(2) Work has not recommenced within 30 days following the provision
of written notice by the Borough to the developer of the Borough's
intent to claim payment under the guarantee.
(3) The Borough shall not provide notice of its intent to claim payment
under a "safety and stabilization guarantee" until a period of at
least 60 days has elapsed during which all work on the
development has ceased for reasons other than force majeure. The
Borough shall provide written notice to the developer by certified
mail or other form of delivery providing evidence of receipt.
(4) The amount of a "safety and stabilization guarantee" for a
development with bonded improvements in an amount not
exceeding $100,000 shall be $5,000.
(5) The amount of a "safety and stabilization bond guarantee" for a
development with bonded improvements exceeding $100,000 shall
be calculated as a percentage of the bonded improvement costs of
the development or phase of development as follows:
(a) $5,000 for the first $100,000 of bonded improvement costs,
plus two and a half percent of bonded improvement costs in
excess of $100,000 up to $1,000,000, plus
(b) One percent of bonded improvement costs in excess of
$1,000,000.
(6) The Borough shall release a separate "safety and stabilization
guarantee" to a developer upon the developer's furnishing of a
performance guarantee which includes a line item for safety and
stabilization in the amount required under this paragraph.
(7) The Borough shall release a "safety and stabilization guarantee"
upon the Borough Engineer's or other municipal official's
(designated by ordinance) determination that the development of
the project site has reached a point that the improvements installed
are adequate to avoid any potential threat to public safety.
A. In the event that the developer shall seek a temporary certificate of
occupancy for a development, unit, lot, building, or phase of
development, as a condition of the issuance thereof, the developer shall
furnish a separate guarantee, referred to herein as a "temporary
certificate of occupancy guarantee," in favor of the Borough in an
amount equal to 120% of the cost of installation of only those
improvements or items which remain to be completed or installed
under the terms of the temporary certificate of occupancy and which
are required to be installed or completed as a condition precedent to
the issuance of the permanent certificate of occupancy for the
development, unit, lot, building or phase of development and which are
not covered by an existing performance guarantee. Upon posting of a
§ 310-120.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-120.2
288:635
§ 310-120.3. Acceptance of performance guarantee from successor
developer.
§ 310-121. Maintenance guarantee.
"temporary certificate of occupancy guarantee," all sums remaining
under a performance guarantee previously furnished by the developer
which relate to the development, unit, lot, building, or phase of
development for which the temporary certificate of occupancy is
sought, shall be released. The scope and amount of the "temporary
certificate of occupancy guarantee" shall be determined by the Borough
Engineer or such other municipal official designated by ordinance.
The "temporary certificate of occupancy guarantee" shall be released
by the Borough Engineer or other municipal official designated by
ordinance upon the issuance of a permanent certificate of occupancy
with regard to the development, unit, lot, building, or phase as to which
the temporary certificate of occupancy relates.
A. The Borough may accept a performance guarantee in favor of the
municipality from a successor developer as a replacement for a
performance guarantee that was previously furnished, pursuant to
section 41 of P.L. 1975, c.291 (C.40:55D-53), for the purpose of assuring
the installation of improvements. The Borough shall not accept a
replacement performance guarantee without securing:
(1) written confirmation from the new obligor that the intent of the
new obligor is to furnish a replacement performance guarantee,
relieving the predecessor obligor and surety, if any, of any
obligation to install improvements, and
(2) written verification from the Borough engineer that the
replacement performance guarantee is of an amount sufficient to
cover the cost of the installation of improvements, but not to
exceed 120% of the cost of the installation, which verification shall
be determined consistent with section 41 of P.L. 1975, c.291
(C.40:55D-53).
B. An approving authority shall notify the Governing Body whenever it
accepts a replacement performance guarantee. Notice shall contain a
copy of the written confirmation of the new obligor's intent to furnish a
replacement performance guarantee and the municipal engineer's
written verification of the sufficiency of the amount of that replacement
performance guarantee.
C. Within 30 days after receiving notice from the approving authority of its
acceptance of a replacement performance guarantee, the Governing
Body, by resolution, shall release the predecessor obligor from liability
pursuant to its performance guarantee.
A. Prior to the release of a performance guarantee required pursuant to
this section, the developer shall post with the Borough a maintenance
§ 310-120.2 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-121
288:636
§ 310-121.1. Other agencies; utilities.
In the event that other governmental agencies or public utilities
automatically will own the utilities to be installed or the improvements
are covered by a performance or maintenance guarantee to another
governmental agency, no performance or maintenance guarantee, as the
case may be, shall be required by the Borough for such utilities or
improvements.
§ 310-121.2. Regulations concerning performance guarantees.
guarantee in an amount not to exceed 15% of the cost of the installation
of the improvements which are being released.
(1) The developer shall post with the Borough, upon the inspection and
issuance of final approval of the following private site
improvements by the Borough Engineer, a maintenance guarantee
in an amount not to exceed 15% of the cost of the installation of the
following private site improvements, which cost shall be
determined according to the method of calculation set forth in
section 15 of P.L.1991, c.256 (C.40:55D-53.4):
(a) Stormwater management basins;
(b) In-flow and water quality structures within the basins; and
(c) The out-flow pipes and structures of the stormwater
management system, if any.
(2) The term of the maintenance guarantee shall be for a period not to
exceed two years and shall automatically expire at the end of the
established term.
A. The time allowed for installation of the bonded improvements for which
the performance guarantee has been provided may be extended by the
Governing Body by resolution. As a condition or as part of any such
extension, the amount of any performance guarantee shall be increased
or reduced, as the case may be, to an amount not to exceed 120% of the
cost of the installation, which cost shall be determined by the Borough
Engineer according to the method of calculation set forth in section 15
of P.L. 1991, c. 256 (C. 40:55D-53.4) as of the time of the passage of the
resolution.
B. If the required bonded improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with the performance guarantee, the obligor and surety, if
any, shall be liable thereon to the Borough for the reasonable cost of the
improvements not completed or corrected, and the Borough may either
prior to or after the receipt of the proceeds thereof complete such
improvements. Such completion or correction of improvements shall be
subject to the public bidding requirements of the "Local Public
Contracts Law," P.L. 1971, c. 198 (C. 40A:11-1 et seq.).
§ 310-121 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-121.2
288:637
C. Upon substantial completion of all required street improvements
(except for the top course) and appurtenant utility improvements, and
the connection of same to the public system, the obligor may request of
the Governing Body in writing, by certified mail addressed in care of the
Borough Clerk, that the Borough Engineer prepare, in accordance with
the itemized cost estimate prepared by the Borough Engineer and
appended to the performance guarantee pursuant to this section, a list
of all uncompleted or unsatisfactory completed bonded improvements.
If such a request is made, the obligor shall send a copy of the request to
the Borough Engineer. The request shall indicate which bonded
improvements have been completed and which bonded improvements
remain uncompleted in the judgment of the obligor. Thereupon the
Borough Engineer shall inspect all bonded improvements covered by
obligor's request and shall file a detailed list and report, in writing, with
the Governing Body, and shall simultaneously send a copy thereof to the
obligor not later than 45 days after receipt of the obligor's request.
(1) The list prepared by the Borough Engineer shall state, in detail,
with respect to each bonded improvement determined to be
incomplete or unsatisfactory, the nature and extent of the
incompleteness of each incomplete improvement or the nature and
extent of, and remedy for, the unsatisfactory state of each
completed bonded improvement determined to be unsatisfactory.
The report prepared by the Borough Engineer shall identify each
bonded improvement determined to be complete and satisfactory
together with a recommendation as to the amount of reduction to
be made in the performance guarantee relating to the completed
and satisfactory bonded improvement, in accordance with the
itemized cost estimate prepared by the Borough Engineer and
appended to the performance guarantee pursuant to this section.
(2) The Governing Body, by resolution, shall either approve the bonded
improvements determined to be complete and satisfactory by the
Borough Engineer, or reject any or all of these bonded
improvements upon the establishment in the resolution of cause for
rejection, and shall approve and authorize the amount of reduction
to be made in the performance guarantee relating to the
improvements accepted, in accordance with the itemized cost
estimate prepared by the Borough Engineer and appended to the
performance guarantee pursuant to this section. This resolution
shall be adopted not later than 45 days after receipt of the list and
report prepared by the Borough Engineer. Upon adoption of the
resolution by the Governing Body, the obligor shall be released
from all liability pursuant to its performance guarantee with
respect to those approved bonded improvements, except for that
portion adequately sufficient to secure completion or correction of
the improvements not yet approved; provided that 30% of the
amount of the total performance guarantee and "safety and
stabilization guarantee" posted may be retained to ensure
completion and acceptability of all improvements. The "safety and
§ 310-121.2 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-121.2
288:638
stabilization guarantee" shall be reduced by the same percentage
as the performance guarantee is being reduced at the time of each
performance guarantee reduction.
(3) For the purpose of releasing the obligor from liability pursuant to
its performance guarantee, the amount of the performance
guarantee attributable to each approved bond improvement shall
be reduced by the total amount for each such improvement, in
accordance with the itemized cost estimate prepared by the
Borough Engineer and appended to the performance guarantee
pursuant to subsection a of this section, including any contingency
factor applied to the cost of installation. If the sum of the approved
bonded improvements would exceed 70 percent of the total amount
of the performance guarantee, then the Borough may retain 30
percent of the amount of the total performance guarantee and
"safety and stabilization guarantee" to ensure completion and
acceptability of all bonded improvements, as provided above,
except that any amount of the performance guarantee attributable
to bonded improvements for which a "temporary certificate of
occupancy guarantee" has been posted shall be released from the
performance guarantee even if such release would reduce the
amount held by the Borough below 30 percent.
(4) If the Borough Engineer fails to send or provide the list and report
as requested by the obligor pursuant to this section within 45 days
from receipt of the request, the obligor may apply to the court in a
summary manner for an order compelling the Borough Engineer to
provide the list and report within a stated time and the cost of
applying to the court, including reasonable attorney's fees, may be
awarded to the prevailing party.
(5) If the Governing Body fails to approve or reject the bonded
improvements determined by the Borough Engineer to be complete
and satisfactory or reduce the performance guarantee for the
complete and satisfactory improvements within 45 days from the
receipt of the Borough Engineer's list and report, the obligor may
apply to the court in a summary manner for an order compelling,
within a stated time, approval of the complete and satisfactory
improvements and approval of a reduction in the performance
guarantee for the approvable complete and satisfactory
improvements in accordance with the itemized cost estimate
prepared by the Borough Engineer and appended to the
performance guarantee pursuant to this section; and the cost of
applying to the court, including reasonable attorney's fees, may be
awarded to the prevailing party.
(6) In the event that the obligor has made a cash deposit with the
Borough or approving authority as part of the performance
guarantee, then any partial reduction granted in the performance
guarantee pursuant to this subsection shall be applied to the cash
deposit in the same proportion as the original cash deposit bears to
§ 310-121.2 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-121.2
288:639
§ 310-122. Regulations Concerning Inspection Fees.
the full amount of the performance guarantee, provided that if the
developer has furnished a "safety and stabilization guarantee," the
Borough may retain cash equal to the amount of the remaining
"safety and stabilization guarantee."
D. If any portion of the required bonded improvements is rejected, the
approving authority may require the obligor to complete or correct
such improvements and, upon completion or correction, the same
procedure of notification, as set forth in this section shall be followed.
E. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the right of the obligor to
contest by legal proceedings any determination of the Governing Body
or the Borough Engineer.
A. The obligor shall reimburse the Borough for reasonable inspection fees
paid to the Borough Engineer for the foregoing inspection of
improvements; which fees shall not exceed the sum of the amounts set
forth hereinbelow. The Borough shall require the developer to post the
inspection fees in escrow in an amount:
(1) Not to exceed, except for extraordinary circumstances, the greater
$500 or 5% of the cost of bonded improvements that are subject to
a performance guarantee under this section; and
(2) Not to exceed 5% of the cost of private site improvements that are
not subject to a performance guarantee under this Section, which
cost shall be determined pursuant to Section 15 of P.L. 1991, c. 256
(C. 40:55D-53.4).
B. For those developments for which the inspection fees total less than
$10,000, fees may, at the option of the developer, be paid in two
installments. The initial amount deposited in escrow by a developer
shall be 50% of the inspection fees. When the balance on deposit drops
to 10% of the inspection fees because the amount deposited by the
developer has been reduced by the amount paid to the Borough
Engineer for inspections, the developer shall deposit the remaining
50% of the inspection fees.
C. For those developments for which the inspection fees are total $10,000
or greater, fees may, at the option of the developer, be paid in four
installments. The initial amount deposited in escrow by a developer
shall be 25% of the inspection fees. When the balance on deposit drops
to 10% of the inspection fees because the amount deposited by the
developer has been reduced by the amount paid to the Borough
Engineer for inspection, the developer shall make additional deposits of
25% of the inspection fees.
D. If the Borough determines that the amount in escrow for the payment of
inspection fees, as calculated hereinabove, is insufficient to cover the
cost of additional required inspections, the developer shall deposit
§ 310-121.2 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-122
288:640
§ 310-122.1. Approved by stages or sections.
In the event that final approval is by stages or sections of development
pursuant to subsection a of section 29 of P.L.1975, c.291 (C.40:55D-38), the
provisions of this section shall be applied by stage or section.
§ 310-122.2. Dedication of improvements to borough.
To the extent that any of the improvements have been dedicated to the
Borough on the subdivision plat or site plan, the Governing Body shall be
deemed, upon the release of any performance guarantee required pursuant
to this section, to accept dedication for public use of streets or roads
and any other improvements made thereon according to site plans and
subdivision plats approved by the approving authority, provided that such
improvements have been inspected and have received final approval by the
Borough Engineer.
additional funds in escrow. In such instance, the Borough shall deliver
to the developer a written inspection escrow deposit request, signed
by the Borough Engineer, which informs the developer of the need for
additional inspections, details the items or undertakings that require
inspection, estimates the time required for those inspections, and
estimates the cost of performing those inspections.
§ 310-122 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-122.2
288:641

ARTICLE XXVIII
(Reserved)
[History: Prior material concerning off-tract improvements and
procedure to determine allocation of costs was repealed by Ord. No.
18-16. See Article XXVII.]
§ 310-123. Standards for allocating costs.
A. In determining the allocation of costs for off-tract improvements as
between the subdivider or site plan applicant, other property owners
and the Borough, the Planning Board shall be guided by the following
factors:
(1) The total estimated cost of off-tract improvements;
(2) The increase in market values of the properties affected and any
other benefits conferred;
(3) The needs created by the application;
(4) Population and land use projections for the land within the general
area of the subdivision or site plan and other areas to be served by
the off-tract improvements;
(5) The estimated time for construction of the off-tract improvements;
and
(6) The condition and periods of usefulness of the improvements which
may be based upon the criteria of N.J.S.A. 40A:2-22.
B. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the Planning Board
may take into account the following specific factors:
(1) With respect to street, curb, gutter, sidewalk, shade trees,
streetlights, street signs and traffic light improvements, the Board
may consider:
(a) Traffic counts.
(b) Existing and projected traffic patterns.
(c) Quality of roads and sidewalks in the area.
(d) Such other factors as it may deem relevant to the need created
by the subdivision or site plan.
(2) With respect to drainage facilities, the Board may consider:
(a) The relationship between the area of the subdivision or site
plan and the area of the total drainage basin of which the
subdivision or site plan is a part.
§ 310-123 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-123
288:643
§ 310-124. Deposits.
Any money received by the Borough Chief Financial Officer for off-tract
improvements to be constructed or installed by the Borough pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter shall be deposited in a suitable depository
therefor and shall be used only for the improvements for which they are
deposited or improvements satisfying the same purpose. If construction of
improvements for which the Borough is responsible has not commenced
within five years from the date of deposit, the amount deposited, together
with any income thereon, shall be returned to the subdivider or site plan
applicant or his or her successor in interest.
§ 310-125. Actual costs.
Upon completion of any improvement constructed by the municipality as a
general or local improvement, the total cost of such improvement shall be
determined by the Borough Chief Financial Officer. The difference between
the actual cost, as so determined, and the estimated cost, shall be
computed. The subdivider or site plan applicant, or his or her successor in
interest, shall make remittance to the Borough, if the actual cost exceeds
the estimated cost, or shall receive a refund from the funds deposited with
the Borough if the estimated cost exceeds the actual cost, in an amount
which bears the same relationship to the difference between the actual
and estimated costs as the amount deposited by the subdivider or site plan
applicant for his or her proportionate share of the estimated cost bears to
the total estimated cost. Any sum payable by the subdivider or site plan
applicant or his or her successor in interest may be levied and collected
by the Borough in the same manner as is provided by law for the levy and
collection of real estate taxes.
(b) The proposed use of land within the subdivision or site plan
and the amount of land area to be covered by impervious
surfaces on the land within the subdivision or site plan.
(c) The use, condition or status of the remaining land area in the
drainage basin.
(3) With respect to water, gas and electric supply and distribution
facilities, the Board may consider the use requirements of the use
proposed for the subdivision or site plan and the use requirements
of all other properties to be benefited by the improvements.
(4) With respect to sewerage facilities, the Board may consider:
(a) The anticipated volume of effluent from the use proposed for
the subdivision or site plan and the anticipated volume of
effluent from all other properties to be benefited by the
improvements.
(b) The types of effluent anticipated and particular problems
requiring special equipment or added costs.
§ 310-123 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-126
288:644
§ 310-126. Successor in interest.
In the absence of an express provision in a deed or deeds of conveyance,
it shall be presumed that the fee owners of all lots in the subdivision
or site plan at the date any deposit or portion thereof is returned or
additional charge is made pursuant to §§ 310-124 and 310-125 are the
lawful successors in interest to the subdivider or site plan applicant and that
each such fee owner shall be charged with or entitled to receive a pro-rata
share, based on lot area, of any funds to be returned or additional charge
to be made pursuant to this chapter. Upon payment of any such sums to
the said fee owners, the Borough shall be released of liability to any other
person.
§ 310-126 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-126
288:645

Part 6
Violations And Penalties
ARTICLE XXIX
Enforcement
§ 310-127. Enforcement officer.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Land Use Officer or his or her duly
designated agent, as provided by law. Where federal security is involved,
the Land Use Officer shall furnish written proof that the required and
proper clearance has been authorized by the appropriate federal agency.
§ 310-127 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-127
288:647

ARTICLE XXX
Penalties
§ 310-128. Selling before approval.
If, before the granting of final approval of a subdivision of any land for
which, under this chapter, subdivision approval is required, any person,
either as owner or as agent, shall transfer or sell or agree to transfer or
sell any land forming part of such subdivision, without having made such
transfer, sale or agreement expressly conditional upon final subdivision
approval, such person shall be subject to a penalty not to exceed $1,000.
Each lot disposition so made shall be deemed a separate violation.
§ 310-129. Other violations.
Any person (whether as owner, tenant or other occupant, agent, architect,
builder, contractor or any other workman or in any other capacity) who shall
commit, take part or assist in any violation (other than a violation set forth
in § 310-128) or who shall knowingly maintain any building or premises in
which any violation of this chapter shall exist may, upon conviction thereof,
for each and every violation, be fined not exceeding $500 or be imprisoned
in the Bergen County Jail for a period not exceeding 90 days, or both, in the
discretion of the Court. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 310-130. Jurisdiction of Municipal Court.
The Municipal Court is expressly vested with jurisdiction over the
determination of violations hereunder and the imposition of the penalties
therefor.
§ 310-128 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-130
288:649

ARTICLE XXXI
Civil Remedies
§ 310-131. Selling before approval.
In addition to the other remedies set forth in this chapter, the Borough
Council or the Land Use Officer may, in the event of a sale, transfer or
agreement which violates § 310-128 of this chapter, institute and maintain
a civil action:
§ 310-132. Other violations.
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, altered, repaired,
converted or maintained or any building, structure or land is used in
violation of the Municipal Land Use Law229 or of this chapter or any other
regulation made pursuant to the authority conferred by the Municipal
Land Use Law, the Borough Council, the Land Use Officer or his or her
duly designated representative or an interested party, in addition to other
remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent
such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair,
conversion, maintenance or use, to restrain, correct or abate such violation,
to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land or to prevent
any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises.
§ 310-133. Removal of trees. [Amended 7-10-1990 by Ord. No.
90-10; 4-14-1998 by Ord. No. 98-4; 4-4-2007 by Ord. No. 07-16;
5-1-2012 by Ord. No. 12-09]
A. For injunctive relief; and
B. To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such a
contract of sale if a certificate as to approval of subdivision of land shall
not have been issued for such conveyance. In any such action, the
transferee, purchaser or grantee shall be entitled to a lien upon the
portion of the land from which the subdivision was made that remains
in the possession of the developer or his or her assigns or successors, to
secure the return of any deposit made or purchase price paid, and also,
a reasonable search fee, survey expense and title closing expense, if
any. Any such action must be brought within two years after the date of
the recording of the instrument of transfer, sale or conveyance of said
land, or within six years if unrecorded.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meaning as set forth below:
REPLANTED TREE — Any deciduous or evergreen woody plant of the
diameter caliper required in this section, planted for the purpose of
replacing trees cut, removed or destroyed.
229. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 310-131 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-133
288:651
TREE — Any live, woody plant having a diameter or width greater than
six inches and/or a circumference greater than 25 inches, measured
at the natural ground level. If a plant has multiple stems, then the
aggregate of the stem diameters and/or the aggregate of the
circumferences shall be used in determining whether the plant is a tree.
B. Prohibited activities. No individual, corporation or association shall do,
or cause to be done by others, either purposely, carelessly or
negligently, upon privately owned property within the Borough of
Hillsdale, any of the following acts:
(1) Cutting, destroying or injuring any tree, except as provided for in
this section.
(2) Placing or maintaining upon the ground any substance which will
impede the tree's free access to air and water to the tree's living
components.
(3) Applying any substance to any part of a tree, including the roots,
with the intention to injure or destroy the tree.
(4) Failing to maintain trees, bushes, shrubs, buffer strips, and other
landscaping and conditions imposed as part of site plan or
subdivision approval without application and approval by a board
of appropriate jurisdiction.
C. Permitted activities. Notwithstanding the restrictions contained in the
above subsection, the following activities shall be permitted:
(1) The removal of not more than three trees per calendar year on any
approved or existing building lot, as shown on the current Tax
Assessment Map of the Borough.
(2) The removal of trees in accordance with a site plan or subdivision
plan approved by the Planning Board or a plot plan submitted for a
soil movement permit approved by the Building Department, in
conjunction with development or soil movement applications, so
long as the approval includes a requirement that the applicant
replace two trees for each tree removed for property that is not
located in a floodplain.
(a) Floodplains are identified by largest areas shown as either the
one-hundred-year flood hazard area on the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection flood delineation
maps or as the special flood hazard area per the one-hundredyear
flood on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) prepared
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(b) For those properties located within either one-hundred-year
floodplain, the ratio for tree replacement shall be four replaced
trees for each tree removed from property that is within a onehundred-
year floodplain.
§ 310-133 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-133
288:652
(c) The following reforestation methodology shall be used, subject
to the recommendations of the Environmental Commission. All
reforestation shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Hillsdale Environmental Commission and the Borough
Engineer.
[1] The first location for replanting shall be on the same
property from which the tree was removed.
[2] The second location for replanting shall be on a different
one-hundred-year floodplain property within the Borough
of Hillsdale.
[3] The third location for replanting shall be on public
property within the Borough of Hillsdale.
(3) The cutting, trimming or maintenance of trees in a manner which is
not harmful to the health of the tree.
(4) The removal of trees which are diseased, dead, or partially or
completely fallen by acts of nature or which endanger public safety.
(5) The removal of trees necessary to construct any structure for which
a permit has been issued by the Construction Code Official, so long
as the approval includes a requirement that the applicant replace
at least 25% of the trees removed.
(6) Activities involving tree trimming or removal located within a
public right-of-way or easement, or publicly owned or controlled
property, so long as the Borough of Hillsdale is in responsible
charge of the activities.
D. Exceptions. The following exceptions shall apply:
(1) The Planning Board may waive the replacement-planting
requirements either in number, species or replacement size.
(2) Upon application to the Planning Board, the granting of exceptions
from the requirements of this section, as may be reasonable and
within the purposes and intent of this section, if the literal
enforcement of one or more provisions is impracticable or will
exact due hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the
land in question. The form of application will be the same as in the
provisions of the Site Plan Review Ordinance.230
(3) Where the Environmental Commission and Borough Engineer
deem it acceptable and make such recommendation to the land use
board or Construction Department, the number of trees for
restitution may be reduced in quantity if replacement caliper sizes
are increased based on the methodology found in the current New
230. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55SD-1 et seq.
§ 310-133 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-133
288:653
Jersey No Net Loss Reforestation Act "Caliper Tree Substitution
Size" list for the various types of trees.
E. Criteria for consideration of tree removal and replanting.
(1) The Planning Board may consult with the Hillsdale Environmental
Commission, the Department of Public Works, the Borough
Engineer, or any professional as provided in the Municipal Land
Use Law.231
(2) Standards for replanted trees.
(a) Replanted trees shall be at least 2 1/2 inches in diameter
caliper, measured at breast or chest height, and must be
nursery stock, balled in burlap and staked upon planting per
Borough standards provided by the Borough Engineer or the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, Division
of Parks and Forestry, New Jersey Forestry Services, as
detailed in the most recent Program Guidelines. Trees for
reforestation shall be indigenous to the site from which trees
have been removed, consistent with the species found and/or
being considered for removal. The Planning Board may also
consult with the Environmental Commission in the selection of
replacement trees.
(b) Replanted trees for restitution shall not include trees required
for visual buffers, foundation plantings, or ornamental trees.
Tree size substitutions and species shall be in conformance
with the New Jersey No Net Reforestation Act (N.J.S.A.
13:1L-14.1 et seq.) Program Guidelines, current edition, and
the recommendations made by the Hillsdale Environmental
Commission.
(3) The location of replanted trees shall be determined by the following
schedule of preference when at all possible:
(a) In the location where the trees are removed.
(b) Within the building lot containing the removed trees.
(c) Within the development site approved by the Planning Board
or within the public right-of-way fronting or bounding the site.
(d) Elsewhere in the Borough within public property, but as near
as possible to the building lot where the trees are removed.
F. Landscaped buffers, landscape plantings, and replacement trees that
are part of an approved site plan, subdivision, soil movement permit, or
plot plan shall remain in effect and be maintained in perpetuity.
Conditions of approvals relying upon such buffers and/or landscape
plantings shall be binding upon all subsequent property owners of the
231. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 310-133 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-133
288:654
lands upon which the approvals were granted. Any alteration of such
improvements must be approved by the appropriate land use board or
municipal official referenced under this section.
G. Enforcement. The Borough Code Compliance Officer or his/her
designee is designated as the enforcing agent for this section. Upon
review of as-built plans or site inspection of any development
application or soil movement activity, the Borough Engineer shall
inform the Code Compliance Officer of any trees removed in excess of
those called for removal in the Planning Board's approval.
H. Penalty.
(1) Any individual, corporation or association violating any provision of
this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine
not exceeding $1,000 per offense. The cutting, destruction or
removal of each tree shall constitute a separate offense.
(2) If trees are cut, destroyed, or removed for any reason, in
conjunction with any land use, development or soil movement
activity in excess of the specified number of trees which were
approved for removal by the Planning Board, restitution shall be
made by the applicant in accordance with the following schedule:
Diameter of Tree Removed
(inches)
Number of 2.5-Inch-Caliper
Trees to be Provided
8 to 15 6
16 to 24 10
25 to 36 15
37 and over 20
§ 310-133 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-133
288:655

Part 7
Construal Of Provisions
ARTICLE XXXII
General Provisions
§ 310-134. Minimum requirements.
All standards and restrictions set forth in this chapter shall be interpreted
and applied as minimum requirements. Nothing herein contained shall be
construed to prohibit or prevent the use of higher or more restrictive
standards or requirements that may appear in any other lawfully applicable
statutes, ordinances, regulations, rules, deed restrictions or covenants.
§ 310-135. Applicability of construction standards.
Whenever the clear context of this chapter does not require a contrary
interpretation, this chapter shall be read in pari materia with Chapter 124,
Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 310-136. Pending applications.
Notwithstanding the repealer of prior ordinances, all applications for
development properly and timely made pursuant to said ordinances prior to
the effective date of this chapter may be continued, but shall be processed
in accordance with the substantive and procedural requirements of this
chapter.
§ 310-134 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-136
288:657

Part 8
Affordable Housing
ARTICLE XXXIII
Affordable Housing Regulations
[Amended in entirety 6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 18-11; Added 3-4-2008
by Ord. No. 08-05; amended 5-5-2009 by Ord. No. 09-10; amended
in entirety 6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 18-11]
§ 310-137. Preamble.
The Code of the Borough of Hillsdale is hereby replaced to include
provisions addressing Hillsdale's constitutional obligation to provide for
its fair share of low- and moderate-income housing, as directed by the
Superior Court and consistent with N.J.A.C. 5:93-1, et seq., as amended and
supplemented, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, et seq., as amended and supplemented,
and the New Jersey Fair Housing Act of 1985. This Article is intended
to provide assurances that low and moderate income units ("affordable
units") are created with controls on affordability over time and that low
and moderate income households shall occupy those units. This Article shall
apply except where inconsistent with applicable law.
The Hillsdale Borough Planning Board has adopted a Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law at N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1, et seq. The Housing Element and Fair Share Plan have been
endorsed by the Governing Body. This Article implements and incorporates
the adopted and endorsed Housing Element and Fair Share Plan and
addresses the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:93-1, et seq., as amended and
supplemented, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, et seq. as amended and supplemented,
and the New Jersey Fair Housing Act of 1985.
§ 310-138. Purpose.
The purpose of this Article is to provide for and regulate affordable housing
in the Borough.
§ 310-139. Monitoring Requirements.
A. On the first anniversary of the Court's approval of the Settlement
Agreement, executed October 10, 2017, and every anniversary
thereafter through July 1, 2025, the Borough shall provide annual
reporting of its Affordable Housing Trust Fund activity to the New
Jersey Department of Community Affairs, Council on Affordable
Housing, or Local Government Services, or other entity designated by
the State of New Jersey, with a copy provided to Fair Share Housing
Center and posted on the municipal website, using forms developed for
this purpose by the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs,
Council on Affordable Housing or Local Government Services. Such
forms shall be provided to the Borough prior to the Fairness Hearing.
The reporting shall include an accounting of all Affordable Housing
§ 310-137 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-139
288:659
§ 310-140. Definitions.
The following terms when used in this Article shall have the meanings given
in this section:
ACT — The Fair Housing Act of 1985, P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301
et seq.).
ADAPTABLE — Constructed in compliance with the technical design
standards of the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
Trust Fund activity, including the source and amount of funds collected
and the amount and purpose for which any funds have bene expended.
B. On the first anniversary of the Court's approval of the Settlement
Agreement, executed October 10, 2017, and every anniversary
thereafter through July 1, 2025, the Borough shall provide annual
reporting of the status of all affordable housing activity within the
municipality through posting on the municipal website, with copies
provided to Fair Share Housing Center, using forms previously
developed for this purpose by the Council on Affordable Housing or any
other forms endorsed by the Court-appointed Special Master and Fair
Share Housing Center. Such forms shall be provided to the Borough
prior to the Fairness Hearing.
C. For the midpoint realistic opportunity review, due on July 1, 2020, as
required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-313, the Borough shall post on its
municipal website, with copies provided to Fair Share Housing Center,
a status report as to its implementation of its Plan and an analysis of
whether any unbuilt sites or unfulfilled mechanisms continue to present
a realistic opportunity and whether any mechanisms to meet unmet
need should be revised or supplemented. Such posting shall invite any
interested party to submit comments to the municipality, with copies
provided to Fair Share Housing Center, regarding whether any sites no
longer present a realistic opportunity and should be replaced and
whether any mechanisms to meet unmet need should be revised or
supplemented.
D. For the review of very-low income housing requirements required by
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.1, within 30 days of the third anniversary of the
Court's approval of the Settlement Agreement, executed October 10,
2017, and every third year thereafter, the Borough will post on its
municipal website, with copies provided to Fair Share Housing Center,
a status report as to its satisfaction of its very-low income
requirements, including the family very-low income requirements
referenced in the Settlement Agreement. Such posting shall invite any
interested party to submit comments to the municipality, with copies
provided to Fair Share Housing Center, on the issue of whether the
municipality has complied with its very-low income housing obligation
under the terms of the Settlement Agreement.
§ 310-139 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-140
288:660
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity designated by the Borough to
administer affordable units in accordance with this Article, N.J.A.C. 5:93,
and UHAC (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26).
AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING — A regional marketing strategy designed
to attract buyers and/or renters of affordable units pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.15.
AFFORDABILITY AVERAGE — The average percentage of median income
at which new restricted units in an affordable housing development are
affordable to low- and moderate-income households.
AFFORDABLE — A sales price or rent level that is within the means of a
low- or moderate-income household as defined within N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4, and,
in the case of an ownership unit, that the sales price for the unit conforms
to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6, as may be amended and
supplemented, and, in the case of a rental unit, that the rent for the
unit conforms to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.12, as may be
amended and supplemented.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included in
or approved pursuant to the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan or
otherwise intended to address the Borough's fair share obligation, and
includes, but is not limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal
construction project or a 100% affordable housing development.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRAM(S) — Any mechanism in a municipal
Fair Share Plan prepared or implemented to address a municipality's fair
share obligation.
AFFORDABLE UNIT — A housing unit proposed or created pursuant to
the Act and approved for crediting by the Court and/or funded through an
affordable housing trust fund.
AGENCY — The New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency
established by P.L. 1983, c. 530 (N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1, et seq.).
AGE-RESTRICTED UNIT — A housing unit designed to meet the needs
of, and exclusively for, the residents of an age- restricted segment of the
population such that: 1) all the residents of the development wherein the
unit is situated are 62 years of age or older; or 2) at least 80% of the
units are occupied by one person who is 55 years of age or older; or 3) the
development has been designated by the Secretary of the U.S. Department
of Housing and Urban Development as "housing for older persons" as
defined in Section 807(b)(2) of the Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. § 3607.
ALTERNATIVE LIVING ARRANGEMENTS — A structure in which
households live in distinct bedrooms, yet share kitchen and plumbing
facilities, central heat and common areas. Alternative living arrangements
include, but are not limited to: transitional facilities for the homeless;
Class A, B, C, D and E boarding homes as regulated by the State of New
Jersey Department of Community Affairs; residential health care facilities
as regulated by the New Jersey Department of Health; group homes for
the developmentally disabled and mentally ill as licensed and/or regulated
§ 310-140 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-140
288:661
by the New Jersey Department of Human Services; and congregate living
arrangements.
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — A facility that is licensed by the New
Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services to provide apartment-style
housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted living services
are available when needed for four or more adult persons unrelated to the
proprietor and that offers units containing, at a minimum, one unfurnished
room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette and a lockable door on the unit
entrance.
CERTIFIED HOUSEHOLD — A household that has been certified by an
Administrative Agent as a low income household or moderate income
household.
COAH — The Council on Affordable Housing, as established by the New
Jersey Fair Housing Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301, et seq.), or any successor
agency charged with the administration of the Act.
COURT — The Superior Court of New Jersey, Law Division, Bergen County.
DCA — The State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
DEFICIENT HOUSING UNIT — A housing unit with health and safety code
violations that requires the repair or replacement of a major system. A
major system includes weatherization, roofing, plumbing (including wells),
heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic systems), lead paint
abatement and/or load bearing structural systems.
DEVELOPER — Any person, partnership, association, company or
corporation that is the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or any
land included in a proposed development including the holder of an option
to contract to purchase, or other person having an enforceable proprietary
interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation, or enlargement of any use or change in the use of any building
or other structure, or of any mining, excavation or landfill, and any use or
change in the use of any building or other structure, or land or extension
of use of land, for which permission may be required pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1, et seq.
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT — A development containing both
affordable units and market rate units. This term includes, but is not limited
to: new construction, the conversion of a non-residential structure to
residential use and the creation of new affordable units through the gut
rehabilitation or reconstruction of a vacant residential structure.
LOW INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 50% or less of the regional median household
income by household size.
LOW INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a low income
household.
§ 310-140 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-140
288:662
MAJOR SYSTEM — The primary structural, mechanical, plumbing,
electrical, fire protection, or occupant service components of a building
which include but are not limited to, weatherization, roofing, plumbing
(including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic
systems), lead paint abatement and load bearing structural systems.
MARKET-RATE UNITS — Housing not restricted to low and moderate
income households that may sell or rent at any price.
MEDIAN INCOME — The median income by household size for the
applicable housing region, as adopted annually by COAH or a successor
entity approved by the Court.
MODERATE INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross
annual household income in excess of 50% but less than 80% of the regional
median household income by household size.
MODERATE INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a
moderate income household.
MULTI-FAMILY UNIT — A structure containing five or more dwelling units.
NON-EXEMPT SALE — Any sale or transfer of ownership other than the
transfer of ownership between husband and wife; the transfer of ownership
between former spouses ordered as a result of a judicial decree of divorce
or judicial separation, but not including sales to third parties; the transfer of
ownership between family members as a result of inheritance; the transfer
of ownership through an executor's deed to a class A beneficiary and the
transfer of ownership by court order.
RANDOM SELECTION PROCESS — A process by which currently incomeeligible
households are selected for placement in affordable housing units
such that no preference is given to one applicant over another except for
purposes of matching household income and size with an appropriately
priced and sized affordable unit (e.g., by lottery).
REGIONAL ASSET LIMIT — The maximum housing value in each housing
region affordable to a four-person household with an income at 80% of
the regional median as defined by duly adopted Regional Income Limits
published annually by COAH or a successor entity.
REHABILITATION — The repair, renovation, alteration or reconstruction of
any building or structure, pursuant to the Rehabilitation Subcode, N.J.A.C.
5:23-6.
RENT — The gross monthly cost of a rental unit to the tenant, including the
rent paid to the landlord, as well as an allowance for tenant-paid utilities
computed in accordance with allowances published by DCA for its Section
8 program. In assisted living residences, rent does not include charges for
food and services.
RESTRICTED UNIT — A dwelling unit, whether a rental unit or an
ownership unit, that is subject to the affordability controls of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1, as amended and supplemented, but does not include a marketrate
unit financed under UHORP or MONI.
§ 310-140 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-140
288:663
UHAC — The Uniform Housing Affordability Controls set forth in N.J.A.C.
5:80-26, et seq.
VERY-LOW INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 30% or less of the regional median household
income by household size.
VERY-LOW INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a verylow
income household.
WEATHERIZATION — Building insulation (for attic, exterior walls and crawl
space), siding to improve energy efficiency, replacement storm windows,
replacement storm doors, replacement windows and replacement doors,
and is considered a major system for purposes of a rehabilitation program.
§ 310-141. Applicability.
§ 310-142. Rehabilitation Program.
A. The provisions of this Article shall apply to all affordable housing
developments and affordable housing units that currently exist and that
are proposed to be created within the Borough of Hillsdale pursuant to
the Borough's most recently adopted Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan.
B. Moreover, this Article shall apply to all developments that contain low
and moderate income housing units, including any currently
unanticipated future developments that will provide low and moderate
income housing units.
C. Any property in the Borough of Hillsdale that is currently zoned for nonresidential
uses and subsequently receives a zoning change or use
variance or approval of a redevelopment or rehabilitation plan to permit
multi-family residential development, or that is currently zoned for
residential uses and receives a zoning change or density variance or
approval of a redevelopment or rehabilitation plan to permit multifamily
residential development, which multi-family residential
development will yield 5 or more new dwelling units, shall provide a
minimum affordable housing set-aside of 15% percent if the affordable
units will be for rent and a minimum 20% percent if the affordable units
will be for sale. This provision does not affect residential development
on sites that are zoned for inclusionary residential development as part
of the Borough's Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, which are
subject to the affordable housing set-aside requirements set forth in the
applicable zoning. This requirement does not give any developer the
right to any such rezoning, variance or other relief, or establish any
obligation on the part of the Borough of Hillsdale to grant such
rezoning, variance or other relief. A property shall not be permitted to
be subdivided so as to avoid compliance with this requirement. All
affordable units created pursuant to this paragraph shall be governed
by the provisions of this Article.
§ 310-140 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-142
288:664
§ 310-143. Alternative living arrangements.
A. Hillsdale's rehabilitation program shall be designed to renovate
deficient housing units occupied by low- and moderate-income
households such that, after rehabilitation, these units will comply with
the New Jersey State Housing Code pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:28.
B. Both owner occupied and renter occupied units shall be eligible for
rehabilitation funds.
C. All rehabilitated units shall remain affordable to low- and moderateincome
households for a period of 10 years (the control period). For
owner occupied units the control period will be enforced with a lien and
for renter occupied units the control period will be enforced with a deed
restriction.
D. The Borough of Hillsdale shall dedicate a minimum of $10,000 for each
unit to be rehabilitated through this program. The Borough will main
sufficient funds in its affordable housing trust fund account to finance
the rehabilitation program.
E. The Borough of Hillsdale shall designate, subject to the approval of the
Court, one or more Administrative Agents to administer the
rehabilitation program in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:91 and N.J.A.C.
5:93. The Administrative Agent(s) shall provide a rehabilitation manual
for the owner occupancy rehabilitation program and a rehabilitation
manual for the rental occupancy rehabilitation program to be adopted
by resolution of the Governing Body and subject to approval of the
Court. Both rehabilitation manuals shall be available for public
inspection in the Office of the Municipal Clerk and in the office(s) of the
Administrative Agent(s).
F. Units in a rehabilitation program shall be exempt from the Uniform
Housing Affordability Controls (UHAC), but shall be administered in
accordance with the following:
(1) If a unit is vacant, upon initial rental subsequent to rehabilitation,
or if a renter-occupied unit is re-rented prior to the end of controls
on affordability, the deed restriction shall require the unit to be
rented to a low- or moderate-income household at an affordable
rent and affirmatively marketed pursuant to UHAC.
(2) If a unit is renter-occupied, upon completion of the rehabilitation,
the maximum rate of rent shall be the lesser of the current rent or
the maximum permitted rent pursuant to UHAC.
(3) Rents in rehabilitated units may increase annually based on the
standards in UHAC.
(4) Applicant and/or tenant households shall be certified as incomeeligible
in accordance with UHAC, except that households in owner
occupied units shall be exempt from the regional asset limit.
§ 310-142 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-143
288:665
§ 310-144. Inclusionary zoning.
A. The administration of an alternative living arrangement shall be in
compliance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.8 and UHAC, with the following
exceptions:
(1) Affirmative marketing (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15), provided, however,
that the units or bedrooms may be affirmatively marketed by the
provider in accordance with an alternative plan approved by COAH
or the Court.
(2) Affordability average and bedroom distribution (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3).
B. With the exception of units established with capital funding through a
20-year operating contract with the Department of Human Services,
Division of Developmental Disabilities, alternative living arrangements
shall have at least 30 year controls on affordability in accordance with
UHAC, unless an alternative commitment is approved by COAH or the
Court.
(1) The service provider for the alternative living arrangement shall
act as the Administrative Agent for the purposes of administering
the affirmative marketing and affordability requirements for the
alternative living arrangement.
A. To implement the fair share plan in a manner consistent with the terms
of the October 10, 2017 Settlement Agreement, ensure the efficient use
of land through compact forms of development and to create realistic
opportunities for the construction of affordable housing, inclusionary
zoning shall be permitted on the following properties consistent with
the provisions of the Borough of Hillsdale's Housing Plan Element and
Fair Share Plan, and the terms of the settlement agreement:
(1) The Bank of America site, known as Block 1102, Lots 2, 3 and 4,
shall be rezoned to permit mixed-use development with commercial
uses on the first floor and residential units above with a maximum
of 20 units to the acre.
(2) The Verizon site, known as Block 1201, Lot 11, shall be rezoned to
permit mixed-use development with commercial uses on the first
floor and residential units above with a maximum of 20 units to the
acre.
(3) To the extent feasible, the previously approved Walsky (Block 1212,
Lots 15 and 16) and Paterno (Block 1205, Lot 8) shall be consistent
with the terms of the Settlement Agreement.
(4) The Industrial Zone site, which is located off of Patterson Street.
These parcels are known as Block 1207, Lots 8-11; Block 1208, Lots
1-5; Block 1209, Lots 2-6; Block 1210, Lots 6-11; Block 1211, Lots 1
and 2; Block 1212, Lot 13. The Borough will designate these sites
as an area in need of redevelopment and subsequently prepare a
§ 310-143 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-144
288:666
§ 310-145. Phasing schedule for inclusionary zoning.
§ 310-146. Fractional units and payments-in-lieu.
§ 310-147. New construction.
Redevelopment Plan. The Redevelopment Plan will permit a variety
of uses, including inclusionary housing at a maximum density of
28 units per acre within three years of the Court's approval of the
Settlement Agreement.
A. In inclusionary developments the following schedule shall be followed:
Maximum Percentage of
Market-Rate Units Completed
Minimum Percentage of Low
and Moderate Income Units
Completed
25 0
25+1 10
50 50
75 75
90 100
A. Inclusionary developments that result in an affordable housing
obligation that is fractional shall pay a payment-in-lieu for the fraction.
B. The payment-in-lieu for Hillsdale shall be $195,000 for 2018. The
payment-in-lieu shall increase by 3% each year. To calculate the
payment-in-lieu the developer shall multiply the fraction by the
payment. For example, a fraction of 0.6 triggered in 2018 would require
a payment of $117,000. The payment shall be made to the Borough's
Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
A. Low/Moderate Split and Bedroom Distribution of Affordable Housing
Units:
(1) The fair share obligation shall be divided equally between low and
moderate income units, except that where there is an odd number
of affordable housing units, the extra unit shall be a low income
unit. At least 13% of all restricted rental units shall be very-low
income units (affordable to a household earning 30% or less of
median income). The very-low income units shall be counted as
part of the required number of low income units within the
development.
(2) At least 25% of the obligation shall be met through rental units,
including at least half in rental units available to families.
§ 310-144 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-147
288:667
(3) A maximum of 25% of the Borough's obligation may be met with
age restricted units. At least half of all affordable units in the
Borough's Plan shall be non-restricted.
(4) In each affordable development, at least 50% of the restricted units
within each bedroom distribution shall be low income units.
(5) Affordable developments that are not age-restricted shall be
structured in conjunction with realistic market demands such that:
(a) The combined number of efficiency and one-bedroom units
shall be no greater than 20% of the total low and moderate
income units;
(b) At least 30% of all low and moderate income units shall be two
bedroom units;
(c) At least 20% of all low and moderate income units shall be
three bedroom units; and
(d) The remaining units may be allocated among two and three
bedroom units at the discretion of the developer.
(6) Affordable developments that are age-restricted shall be structured
such that the number of bedrooms shall equal the number of agerestricted
low and moderate income units within the inclusionary
development. This standard may be met by having all one-bedroom
units or by having a two-bedroom unit for each efficiency unit. The
Borough shall not be permitted to claim credit to satisfy its
obligations under the Settlement Agreement for age-restricted
units that exceed 25% of all units developed.
B. Accessibility Requirements.
(1) The first floor of all restricted townhouse dwelling units and all
restricted units in all other multi-story buildings shall be subject to
the technical design standards of the Barrier Free SubCode,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
(2) All restricted townhouse dwelling units and all restricted units in
other multi-story buildings in which a restricted dwelling unit is
attached to at least one other dwelling unit shall have the following
features:
(a) An adaptable toilet and bathing facility on the first floor; and
(b) An adaptable kitchen on the first floor; and
(c) An interior accessible route of travel on the first floor; and
(d) An adaptable room that can be used as a bedroom, with a door
or casing for the installation of a door, on the first floor; and
§ 310-147 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-147
288:668
(e) If not all of the foregoing requirements in paragraphs (2)(a)
through (2)(d) can be satisfied, then an interior accessible
route of travel must be provided between stories within an
individual unit, but if all of the terms of paragraphs (2)(a)
through (2)(d) above have been satisfied, then an interior
accessible route of travel shall not be required between stories
within an individual unit; and
(f) An accessible entranceway as set forth at P.L. 2005, c. 350
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311a, et seq.) and the Barrier Free SubCode,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, or evidence that Hillsdale has collected funds
from the developer sufficient to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in the development accessible:
[1] Where a unit has been constructed with an adaptable
entrance, upon the request of a person with disabilities
who is purchasing or will reside in the dwelling unit, an
accessible entrance shall be installed.
[2] To this end, the builder of restricted units shall deposit
funds within the Borough of Hillsdale's Affordable Housing
Trust Fund sufficient to install accessible entrances in 10%
of the affordable units that have been constructed with
adaptable entrances.
[3] The funds deposited under paragraph (f)[2] above shall be
used by the Borough of Hillsdale for the sole purpose of
making the adaptable entrance of an affordable unit
accessible when requested to do so by a person with a
disability who occupies or intends to occupy the unit and
requires an accessible entrance.
[4] The developer of the restricted units shall submit a design
plan and cost estimate to the Construction Official of the
Borough of Hillsdale for the conversion of adaptable to
accessible entrances.
[5] Once the Construction Official has determined that the
design plan to convert the unit entrances from adaptable
to accessible meet the requirements of the Barrier Free
SubCode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, and that the cost estimate of
such conversion is reasonable, payment shall be made to
the Borough's Affordable Housing Trust Fund in care of
the Borough Chief Financial Officer who shall ensure that
the funds are deposited into the Affordable Housing Trust
Fund and appropriately earmarked.
[6] Full compliance with the foregoing provisions shall not be
required where an entity can demonstrate that it is "site
impracticable" to meet the requirements. Determinations
of site impracticability shall be in compliance with the
Barrier Free SubCode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
§ 310-147 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-147
288:669
C. Design.
(1) In inclusionary developments, to the extent possible, low and
moderate income units shall be integrated with the market units.
(2) In inclusionary developments, low and moderate income units shall
have access to all of the same common elements and facilities as
the market units.
D. Maximum Rents and Sales Prices.
(1) In establishing rents and sales prices of affordable housing units,
the Administrative Agent shall follow the procedures set forth in
UHAC, utilizing the regional income limits established by COAH or
a successor entity.
(2) The maximum rent for restricted rental units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 60% of median income, and the average rent for
restricted rental units shall be affordable to households earning no
more than 52% of median income.
(3) The developers and/or municipal sponsors of restricted rental units
shall establish at least one rent for each bedroom type for both low
income and moderate income units, provided that at least 13% of
all low and moderate income rental units shall be affordable to
very-low income households, earning 30% or less of the regional
median household income, with such very-low income units
counted the low income housing requirement.
(4) The maximum sales price of restricted ownership units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 70% of median income, and each affordable
development must achieve an affordability average of 55% for
restricted ownership units; in achieving this affordability average,
moderate income ownership units must be available for at least
three different sales prices for each bedroom type, and low income
ownership units must be available for at least two different sales
prices for each bedroom type.
(5) In determining the initial sales prices and rent levels for
compliance with the affordability average requirements for
restricted units other than assisted living facilities and agerestricted
developments, the following standards shall be used:
(a) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
(b) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one and one-half
person household;
(c) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a three-person
household;
§ 310-147 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-147
288:670
(d) A three-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a four and one-half
person household; and
(e) A four-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a six-person
household.
(6) In determining the initial sales prices and rents for compliance with
the affordability average requirements for restricted units in
assisted living facilities and age-restricted developments, the
following standards shall be used:
(a) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
(b) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one and one-half
person household; and
(c) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a two-person
household or two one-person households.
(7) The initial purchase price for all restricted ownership units shall be
calculated so that the monthly carrying cost of the unit, including
principal and interest (based on a mortgage loan equal to 95% of
the purchase price and the Federal Reserve H.15 rate of interest),
taxes, homeowner and private mortgage insurance and
condominium or homeowner association fees do not exceed 28% of
the eligible monthly income of the appropriate size household as
determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and
supplemented; provided, however, that the price shall be subject to
the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may
be amended and supplemented.
(8) The initial rent for a restricted rental unit shall be calculated so as
not to exceed 30% of the eligible monthly income of the appropriate
size household, including an allowance for tenant paid utilities, as
determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and
supplemented; provided, however, that the rent shall be subject to
the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may
be amended and supplemented.
(9) The price of owner-occupied low and moderate income units may
increase annually based on the percentage increase in the regional
median income limit for each housing region. In no event shall the
maximum resale price established by the Administrative Agent be
lower than the last recorded purchase price.
(10) The rent of low and moderate income units may be increased
annually based on the permitted percentage increase in the
Housing Consumer Price Index for the United States. This increase
shall not exceed nine percent in any one year. Rents for units
constructed pursuant to low income housing tax credit regulations
shall be indexed pursuant to the regulations governing low income
housing tax credits.
§ 310-147 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-148
288:671
§ 310-148. Utilities.
§ 310-149. Occupancy standards.
§ 310-150. Control periods for restricted ownership units and
enforcement measures.
A. Affordable units shall utilize the same type of heating source as market
units within an inclusionary development.
B. Tenant-paid utilities included in the utility allowance shall be set forth
in the lease and shall be consistent with the utility allowance approved
by HUD for its Section 8 program.
A. In referring certified households to specific restricted units, the
Administrative Agent shall, to the extent feasible and without causing
an undue delay in the occupancy of a unit, strive to:
(1) Provide an occupant for each bedroom;
(2) Provide children of different sexes with separate bedrooms;
(3) Provide separate bedrooms for parents and children; and
(4) Prevent more than two persons from occupying a single bedroom.
A. Control periods for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:80- 26.5, as may be amended and supplemented, and
each restricted ownership unit shall remain subject to the requirements
of this Article for a period of at least 30 years, until Hillsdale takes
action to release the unit from such requirements; prior to such action,
a restricted ownership unit shall remain subject to the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented.
B. The affordability control period for a restricted ownership unit shall
commence on the date the initial certified household takes title to the
unit.
C. Prior to the issuance of the initial certificate of occupancy for a
restricted ownership unit and upon each successive sale during the
period of restricted ownership, the Administrative Agent shall
determine the restricted price for the unit and shall also determine the
non-restricted, fair market value of the unit based on either an
appraisal or the unit's equalized assessed value without the restrictions
in place.
D. At the time of the initial sale of the unit, the initial purchaser shall
execute and deliver to the Administrative Agent a recapture note
obligating the purchaser (as well as the purchaser's heirs, successors
and assigns) to repay, upon the first non-exempt sale after the unit's
release from the restrictions set forth in this Article, an amount equal to
the difference between the unit's non-restricted fair market value and
§ 310-148 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-150
288:672
§ 310-151. Price restrictions for restricted ownership units,
homeowner association fees and resale prices.
§ 310-152. Buyer Income Eligibility.
its restricted price, and the recapture note shall be secured by a
recapture lien evidenced by a duly recorded mortgage on the unit.
E. The affordability controls set forth in this Article shall remain in effect
despite the entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure with
respect to restricted ownership units.
F. A restricted ownership unit shall be required to obtain a Continuing
Certificate of Occupancy or a certified statement from the Construction
Official stating that the unit meets all Code standards upon the first
transfer of title following the removal of the restrictions provided under
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5(a), as may be amended and supplemented.
A. Price restrictions for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:80- 26.1, as may be amended and supplemented,
including:
(1) The initial purchase price for a restricted ownership unit shall be
approved by the Administrative Agent.
(2) The Administrative Agent shall approve all resale prices, in writing
and in advance of the resale, to assure compliance with the
foregoing standards.
(3) The master deeds of inclusionary developments shall provide no
distinction between the condominium or homeowner association
fees and special assessments paid by low and moderate income
purchasers and those paid by market purchasers.
(4) The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
Administrative Agent to increase the maximum sales price for the
unit on the basis of anticipated capital improvements. Eligible
capital improvements shall be those that render the unit suitable
for a larger household or the addition of a bathroom. See Section
310-154.
A. Buyer income eligibility for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented, such that low income ownership units shall be reserved
for households with a gross household income less than or equal to 50%
of median income and moderate income ownership units shall be
reserved for households with a gross household income less than 80%
of median income.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, the Administrative Agent may,
upon approval by the Borough Council, and subject to the Court's
approval, permit moderate income purchasers to buy low income units
§ 310-150 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-152
288:673
§ 310-153. Limitations on indebtedness secured by ownership unit;
subordination.
§ 310-154. Capital improvements to ownership units.
in housing markets if the Administrative Agent determines that there
is an insufficient number of eligible low income purchasers to permit
prompt occupancy of the units. All such low income units to be sold
to moderate income households shall retain the required pricing and
pricing restrictions for low income units.
C. A certified household that purchases a restricted ownership unit must
occupy it as the certified household's principal residence and shall not
lease the unit; provided, however, that the Administrative Agent may
permit the owner of a restricted ownership unit, upon application and a
showing of hardship, to lease the restricted unit to another certified
household for a period not to exceed one year.
D. The Administrative Agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted ownership unit when the household is a low income
household or a moderate income household, as applicable to the unit,
and the estimated monthly housing cost for the particular unit
(including principal, interest, taxes, homeowner and private mortgage
insurance and condominium or homeowner association fees, as
applicable) does not exceed 33% of the household's eligible monthly
income.
A. Prior to incurring any indebtedness to be secured by a restricted
ownership unit, the owner shall apply to the Administrative Agent for a
determination in writing that the proposed indebtedness complies with
the provisions of this section, and the Administrative Agent shall issue
such determination prior to the owner incurring such indebtedness.
B. With the exception of First Purchase Money Mortgages, neither an
owner nor a lender shall at any time cause or permit the total
indebtedness secured by a restricted ownership unit to exceed 95% of
the maximum allowable resale price of the unit, as such price is
determined by the Administrative Agent in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.6(b).
A. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
Administrative Agent to increase the maximum sales price for the unit
on the basis of capital improvements made since the purchase of the
unit. Eligible capital improvements shall be those that render the unit
suitable for a larger household or that adds an additional bathroom. In
no event shall the maximum sales price of an improved housing unit
exceed the limits of affordability for the larger household.
B. Upon the resale of a restricted ownership unit, all items of property that
are permanently affixed to the unit or were included when the unit was
initially restricted (for example, refrigerator, range, washer, dryer,
§ 310-152 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-154
288:674
§ 310-155. Control periods for restricted units.
§ 310-156. Rent restrictions for rental units; leases.
dishwasher, wall-to-wall carpeting) shall be included in the maximum
allowable resale price. Other items may be sold to the purchaser at a
reasonable price that has been approved by the Administrative Agent
at the time of the signing of the agreement to purchase. The purchase
of central air conditioning installed subsequent to the initial sale of the
unit and not included in the base price may be made a condition of
the unit resale provided the price, which shall be subject to 10-year,
straight- line depreciation, has been approved by the Administrative
Agent. Unless otherwise approved by the Administrative Agent, the
purchase of any property other than central air conditioning shall not
be made a condition of the unit resale. The owner and the purchaser
must personally certify at the time of closing that no unapproved
transfer of funds for the purpose of selling and receiving property has
taken place at the time of or as a condition of resale.
A. Control periods for restricted rental units shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80- 26.11, as may be amended and supplemented, and each
restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the requirements of this
Article for a period of at least 30 years, until Hillsdale takes action to
release the unit from such requirements. Prior to such action, a
restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented.
B. Deeds of all real property that include restricted rental units shall
contain deed restriction language. The deed restriction shall have
priority over all mortgages on the property, and the deed restriction
shall be filed by the developer or seller with the records office of the
County of Somerset. The deed shall also identify each affordable unit by
apartment number and/or address and whether that unit is designated
as a very-low, low or moderate income unit. Neither the unit nor its
affordability designation shall change throughout the term of the deed
restriction. A copy of the filed document shall be provided to the
Administrative Agent within 30 days of the receipt of a Certificate of
Occupancy.
C. A restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the affordability controls
of this Article despite the occurrence of any of the following events:
(1) Sublease or assignment of the lease of the unit;
(2) Sale of other voluntary transfer of the ownership of the unit; or
(3) The entry and enforcement of any judgement of foreclosure on the
property containing the unit.
A. A written lease shall be required for all restricted rental units and
tenants shall be responsible for security deposits and the full amount of
§ 310-154 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-156
288:675
§ 310-157. Tenant income eligibility.
the rent as stated on the lease. A copy of the current lease for each
restricted rental unit shall be provided to the Administrative Agent.
B. No additional fees or charges shall be added to the approved rent
(except, in the case of units in an assisted living residence, to cover the
customary charges for food and services) without the express written
approval of the Administrative Agent.
C. Application fees (including the charge for any credit check) shall not
exceed five percent of the monthly rent of the applicable restricted unit
and shall be payable to the Administrative Agent to be applied to the
costs of administering the controls applicable to the unit as set forth in
this Article.
D. No rent control ordinance or other pricing restriction shall be
applicable to either the market units or the affordable units in any
development in which at least 15% of the total number of dwelling units
are restricted rental units in compliance with this Article.
A. Tenant income eligibility shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.13, as may be amended and supplemented, and shall be
determined as follows:
(1) Very-low income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than or equal to 30% of median
income.
(2) Low income rental units shall be reserved for households with a
gross household income less than or equal to 50% of median
income.
(3) Moderate income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than 80% of median income.
B. The Administrative Agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted rental unit when the household is a very-low income
household, low income household or a moderate income household, as
applicable to the unit, and the rent proposed for the unit does not
exceed 35% (40% for age-restricted units) of the household's eligible
monthly income as determined pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16, as may
be amended and supplemented; provided, however, that this limit may
be exceeded if one or more of the following circumstances exists:
(1) The household currently pays more than 35% (40% for households
eligible for age-restricted units) of its gross household income for
rent, and the proposed rent will reduce its housing costs;
(2) The household has consistently paid more than 35% (40% for
households eligible for age-restricted units) of eligible monthly
income for rent in the past and has proven its ability to pay;
§ 310-156 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-157
288:676
§ 310-158. Municipal Housing Liaison.
(3) The household is currently in substandard or overcrowded living
conditions;
(4) The household documents the existence of assets with which the
household proposes to supplement the rent payments; or
(5) The household documents reliable anticipated third-party
assistance from an outside source such as a family member in a
form acceptable to the Administrative Agent and the owner of the
unit.
C. The applicant shall file documentation sufficient to establish the
existence of the circumstances in A(1) through B(5) above with the
Administrative Agent, who shall counsel the household on budgeting.
A. The Borough of Hillsdale shall appoint a specific municipal employee to
serve as a Municipal Housing Liaison responsible for administering the
affordable housing program, including affordability controls, the
Affirmative Marketing Plan, monitoring and reporting, and, where
applicable, supervising any contracted Administrative Agent. The
Municipal Housing Liaison shall be appointed by the Governing Body
and may be a full or part time municipal employee.
B. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight and
administration of the affordable housing program for Hillsdale,
including the following responsibilities which may not be contracted
out to the Administrative Agent:
(1) Serving as Hillsdale's primary point of contact for all inquiries from
the State, affordable housing providers, Administrative Agents and
interested households;
(2) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in Hillsdale's Fair Share
Plan;
(3) Compiling, verifying and submitting annual monitoring reports as
may be required by the Court;
(4) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
Administrative Agents, as needed; and
(5) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring and affirmative marketing at least
annually and more often as needed.
C. Subject to the approval of the Court, the Borough of Hillsdale shall
designate one or more Administrative Agent(s) to administer newly
constructed affordable units in accordance with UHAC. An Operating
Manual for each affordable housing program shall be provided by the
Administrative Agent(s) to be adopted by resolution of the Governing
Body and subject to approval of the Court. The Operating Manual(s)
§ 310-157 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-158
288:677
§ 310-159. Administrative Agent.
shall be available for public inspection in the office of the Borough
Clerk, in the office of the Municipal Housing Liaison, and in the office(s)
of the Administrative Agent(s). The Municipal Housing Liaison shall
supervise the contracting Administrative Agent(s).
D. Compensation. Compensation shall be fixed by the Governing Body at
the time of the appointment of the Municipal Housing Liaison.
A. The Administrative Agent shall be an independent entity serving under
contract to and reporting to the municipality. For new sale and rental
developments, all of the fees of the Administrative Agent shall be paid
by the owners of the affordable units for which the services of the
Administrative Agent are required. For resales, single family
homeowners and condominium homeowners shall be required to pay
three percent of the sales price for services provided by the
Administrative Agent related to the resale of their homes. That fee shall
be collected at closing and paid directly to the Administrative Agent.
The Administrative Agent shall perform the duties and responsibilities
of an Administrative Agent as set forth in UHAC, including those set
forth in Sections 5:80-26.14, 16 and 18 thereof, which include:
(1) Conducting an outreach process to affirmatively market affordable
housing units in accordance with the Affirmative Marketing Plan of
the Borough of Hillsdale and the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15;
and
(2) Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling services
to low and moderate income applicants on subjects such as
budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental lease
requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
B. Household Certification:
(1) Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on interviews
with interested households;
(2) Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation of
gross income and assets upon which to base a determination of
income eligibility for a low or moderate income unit;
(3) Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or non-eligibility;
(4) Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units execute a
certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of either the
ownership or rental certificates set forth in Appendices J and K of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
(5) Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant
households living in the housing region and eligible applicant
§ 310-158 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-159
288:678
households with members working in the housing region where the
units are located; and
(6) Employing a random selection process as provided in the
Affirmative Marketing Plan of the Borough of Hillsdale when
referring households for certification to affordable units.
C. Affordability Controls:
(1) Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed restrictions
and mortgages for recording at the time of conveyance of title of
each restricted unit;
(2) Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its
control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions,
recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
(3) Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and cancellation
of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly filed with the
Bergen County Register of Deeds or County Clerk's office after the
termination of the affordability controls for each restricted unit;
(4) Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
(5) Ensuring the issuance of Continuing Certificates of Occupancy or
certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
D. Sales and Rerentals:
(1) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating
information between owners and the Administrative Agent
regarding the availability of restricted units for resale or rerental;
and
(2) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating
information to low and moderate income households regarding the
availability of restricted units for resale or re-rental.
E. Processing Requests from Unit Owners:
(1) Reviewing and approving requests for determination from owners
of restricted units who wish to take out home equity loans or
refinance during the term of their ownership that the amount of
indebtedness to be incurred will not violate the terms of this
Article;
(2) Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices from
owners of restricted units who wish to make capital improvements
to the units that would affect the selling price, such authorizations
to be limited to those improvements resulting in additional
bedrooms or bathrooms and the depreciated cost of central air
conditioning systems;
§ 310-159 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-159
288:679
§ 310-160. Affirmative marketing requirements.
(3) Notifying the municipality of an owner's intent to sell a restricted
unit; and
(4) Making determinations on requests by owners of restricted units
for hardship waivers.
F. Enforcement:
(1) Securing annually from the municipality a list of all affordable
housing units for which tax bills are mailed to absentee owners,
and notifying all such owners that they must either move back to
their unit or sell it;
(2) Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units, at
the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project or
development, written acknowledgement of the requirement that no
restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way committed, to
any person, other than a household duly certified to the unit by the
Administrative Agent;
(3) The posting annually in all rental properties, including two-family
homes, of a notice as to the maximum permitted rent together with
the telephone number of the Administrative Agent where
complaints of excess rent or other charges can be made;
(4) Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling units,
reminding them of the notices and requirements outlined in
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
(5) Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to the
municipality's Affordable Housing Trust Fund; and
(6) Creating and publishing a written operating manual for each
affordable housing program administered by the Administrative
Agent, to be approved by the Borough Council and the Court,
setting forth procedures for administering the affordability
controls.
G. Additional Responsibilities:
(1) The Administrative Agent shall have the authority to take all
actions necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities
hereunder.
(2) The Administrative Agent shall prepare monitoring reports for
submission to the Municipal Housing Liaison in time to meet any
monitoring requirements and deadlines imposed by the Court.
(3) The Administrative Agent shall attend continuing education
sessions on affordability controls, compliance monitoring, and
affirmative marketing at least annually and more often as needed.
§ 310-159 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-160
288:680
A. The Borough of Hillsdale shall adopt by resolution an Affirmative
Marketing Plan, subject to the approval of the Court that is compliant
with N.J.A.C. 5:80-25.15, as may be amended and supplemented.
B. The Affirmative Marketing Plan is a regional marketing strategy
designed to attract buyers and/or renters of all majority and minority
groups, regardless of race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry,
marital or familial status, gender, affectional or sexual orientation,
disability, age or number of children to housing units which are being
marketed by a developer, sponsor or owner of affordable housing. The
Affirmative Marketing Plan is intended to target those potentially
eligible persons who are least likely to apply for affordable units in that
region. In addition, as a result of the Settlement Agreement with FSHC,
the Affirmative Marketing Plan shall require the notification of the New
Jersey State Conference of the NAACP, FSHC, the Bergen County
Chapter of the NAACP, the Latino Action Network and the Bergen
Urban League of affordable housing opportunities. It is a continuing
program that directs marketing activities toward Housing Region 1 and
is required to be followed throughout the period of restriction.
C. The Affirmative Marketing Plan shall provide a regional preference for
all households that live and/or work in Housing Region 1, comprised of
Bergen, Hudson, Passaic and Sussex Counties.
D. The municipality has the ultimate responsibility for adopting the
Affirmative Marketing Plan and for the proper administration of the
Affirmative Marketing Program, including initial sales and rentals and
resales and rerentals. The Administrative Agent designated by the
Borough of Hillsdale shall implement the Affirmative Marketing Plan to
assure the affirmative marketing of all affordable units.
E. In implementing the Affirmative Marketing Plan, the Administrative
Agent shall provide a list of counseling services to low and moderate
income applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit issues,
mortgage qualification, rental lease requirements, and landlord/tenant
law.
F. The Affirmative Marketing Plan shall describe the media to be used in
advertising and publicizing the availability of housing. In implementing
the Affirmative Marketing Plan, the Administrative Agent shall consider
the use of language translations where appropriate.
G. The affirmative marketing process for available affordable units shall
begin at least four months (120 days) prior to the expected date of
occupancy.
H. Applications for affordable housing shall be available in several
locations, including, at a minimum, the Danforth Memorial Library,
Johnson Free Public Library, Hudson County Library, Sussex County
Main Library, Sussex County Administration Building, Hudson County
Administration Building, Passaic County Administration Building,
Bergen County Administration Building, Hillsdale Library, the Hillsdale
§ 310-160 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-160
288:681
§ 310-161. Enforcement of affordable housing regulations.
Municipal Building and the developer's rental office. Pre-applications
may be emailed to prospective applicants upon request. Otherwise,
hard copies are available from the Municipal Housing Liaison.
I. The costs of advertising and affirmative marketing of the affordable
units shall be the responsibility of the developer, sponsor or owner.
A. Upon the occurrence of a breach of any of the regulations governing the
affordable unit by an Owner, Developer or Tenant, the municipality shall
have all remedies provided at law or equity, including but not limited to
foreclosure, tenant eviction, a requirement for household
recertification, acceleration of all sums due under a mortgage,
recuperation of any funds from a sale in violation of the regulations,
injunctive relief to prevent further violation of the regulations, entry on
the premises, and specific performance.
B. After providing written notice of a violation to an Owner, Developer or
Tenant of a low or moderate income unit and advising the Owner,
Developer or Tenant of the penalties for such violations, the
municipality may take the following action(s) against the Owner,
Developer or Tenant for any violation that remains uncured for a period
of 60 days after service of the written notice:
(1) The municipality may file a court action pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2A:58-11 alleging a violation or violations of the regulations
governing the affordable housing unit. If the Owner, Developer or
Tenant is adjudged by the Court to have violated any provision of
the regulations governing affordable housing units the Owner,
Developer or Tenant shall be subject to one or more of the following
penalties, at the discretion of the Court:
(a) A fine of not more than $500.00 per day or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed 90 days, or both, provided that each and
every day that the violation continues or exists shall be
considered a separate and specific violation of these provisions
and not a continuation of the initial offense. In the case of an
Owner who has rented a low or moderate income unit in
violation of the regulations governing affordable housing units,
payment into the Borough of Hillsdale Affordable Housing
Trust Fund of the gross amount of rent illegally collected;
(b) In the case of an Owner who has rented a low or moderate
income unit in violation of the regulations governing affordable
housing units, payment of an innocent tenant's reasonable
relocation costs, as determined by the Court.
(2) The municipality may file a court action in the Superior Court
seeking a judgment that would result in the termination of the
Owner's equity or other interest in the unit, in the nature of a
§ 310-160 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-161
288:682
mortgage foreclosure. Any such judgment shall be enforceable as if
the same were a judgment of default of the First Purchase Money
Mortgage and shall constitute a lien against the low or moderate
income unit:
(a) The judgment shall be enforceable, at the option of the
municipality, by means of an execution sale by the Sheriff, at
which time the low and moderate income unit of the violating
Owner shall be sold at a sale price which is not less than the
amount necessary to fully satisfy and pay off any First
Purchase Money Mortgage and prior liens and the costs of the
enforcement proceedings incurred by the municipality,
including attorney's fees. The violating Owner shall have his
right to possession terminated as well as his title conveyed
pursuant to the Sheriff's sale.
(b) The proceeds of the Sheriff's sale shall first be applied to
satisfy the First Purchase Money Mortgage lien and any prior
liens upon the low and moderate income unit. The excess, if
any, shall be applied to reimburse the municipality for any and
all costs and expenses incurred in connection with either the
court action resulting in the judgment of violation or the
Sheriff's sale. In the event that the proceeds from the Sheriff's
sale are insufficient to reimburse the municipality in full as
aforesaid, the violating Owner shall be personally responsible
for the full extent of such deficiency, in addition to any and all
costs incurred by the municipality in connection with collecting
such deficiency. In the event that a surplus remains after
satisfying all of the above, such surplus, if any, shall be placed
in escrow by the municipality for the Owner and shall be held
in such escrow for a maximum period of two years or until such
earlier time as the Owner shall make a claim with the
municipality for such. Failure of the Owner to claim such
balance within the two-year period shall automatically result in
a forfeiture of such balance to the municipality. Any interest
accrued or earned on such balance while being held in escrow
shall belong to and shall be paid to the municipality, whether
such balance shall be paid to the Owner or forfeited to the
municipality.
(c) Foreclosure by the municipality due to violation of the
regulations governing affordable housing units shall not
extinguish the restrictions of the regulations governing
affordable housing units as the same apply to the low and
moderate income unit. Title shall be conveyed to the purchaser
at the Sheriff's sale, subject to the restrictions and provisions
of the regulations governing the affordable housing unit. The
Owner determined to be in violation of the provisions of this
plan and from whom title and possession were taken by means
§ 310-161 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-161
288:683
§ 310-162. Appeals.
Appeals from all decisions of an Administrative Agent appointed pursuant
to this Article shall be filed in writing with the Court.
of the Sheriff's sale shall not be entitled to any right of
redemption.
(d) If there are no bidders at the Sheriff's sale, or if insufficient
amounts are bed to satisfy the First Purchase Money Mortgage
and any prior liens and crediting the violating owner with an
amount equal to the difference between the First Purchase
Money Mortgage and any prior liens and costs of the
enforcement proceedings, including legal fees and the
maximum resale price for which the low and moderate income
unit could have been sold under the terms of the regulations
governing affordable housing units. This excess shall be
treated in the same manner as the excess which would have
been realized from an actual sale as previously described.
§ 310-161 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-162
288:684
ARTICLE XXXIV
Development Fee Ordinance
[Added 6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 18-10]
§ 310-163. Purpose.
This Article establishes standards for the collection, maintenance, and
expenditure of development fees that are consistent with COAH's
regulations developed in response to P.L. 2008, c. 46, Sections 8 and 32-38
(C. 52:27D-329.2) and the Statewide Non-Residential Development Fee Act
(C. 40:55D-8.1 through 8.7). Fees collected pursuant to this Article shall be
used for the sole purpose of providing very-low, low and moderate income
housing in accordance with a Court-approved Spending Plan.
§ 310-164. Basic Requirements.
§ 310-165. Definitions.
The following terms when used in this Article shall have the meanings given
in this section:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included in
or approved pursuant to the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan or
otherwise intended to address the Borough's fair share obligation, and
includes, but is not limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal
construction project or a 100% affordable housing development.
COAH — The Council on Affordable Housing, as established by the New
Jersey Fair Housing Act, or any successor agency charged with the
administration of the Fair Housing Act.
COURT — The Superior Court of New Jersey, Law Division, Bergen County.
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Money paid by a developer for the improvement
of property as authorized by Holmdel Builder's Association v. Holmdel
Borough, 121 N.J. 550 (1990) and the Fair Housing Act of 1985, N.J.S.A.
52:27d-301, et seq., and regulated by applicable COAH Rules.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The assessed value of a property divided
by the current average ratio of assessed to true value for the municipality in
which the property is situated, as determined in accordance with Sections
1, 5, and 6 of P.L. 1973, c.123 (C.54:1-35a through C.54:1-35c).
A. This Article shall not be effective until approved by the Court.
B. The Borough of Hillsdale shall not spend development fees until the
Court has approved a plan for spending such fees (Spending Plan).
§ 310-163 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-165
288:685
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES — Strategies that minimize the impact
of development on the environment, and enhance the health, safety and
well-being of residents by producing durable, low-maintenance, resourceefficient
housing while making optimum use of existing infrastructure and
community services.
§ 310-166. Residential development fees.
A. Imposition of Fees.
(1) Within the Borough of Hillsdale, all residential developers, except
for developers of the types of developments specifically exempted
below and developers of developments that include affordable
housing, shall pay a fee of 1.5% of the equalized assessed value for
all new residential development provided no increased density is
permitted.
(2) When an increase in residential density is permitted pursuant to a
"d" variance granted under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d(5), developers
shall be required to pay a "bonus" development fee of 6% of the
equalized assessed value for each additional unit that may be
realized, except that this provision shall not be applicable to a
development that will include affordable housing. If the zoning on a
site has changed during the two-year period preceding the filing of
such a variance application, the base density for the purposes of
calculating the bonus development fee shall be the highest density
permitted by right during the two-year period preceding the filing
of the variance application.
B. Eligible Exactions, Ineligible Exactions and Exemptions for Residential
Developments
(1) Affordable housing developments and/or developments where the
developer has made a payment in lieu of on-site construction of
affordable units, if permitted by Ordinance or by Agreement with
the Borough of Hillsdale, shall be exempt from the payment of
development fees.
(2) Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan
approval prior to the adoption of this Article shall be exempt from
the payment of development fees, unless the developer seeks a
substantial change in the original approval. Where site plan
approval is not applicable, the issuance of a Zoning Permit and/or
Construction Permit shall be synonymous with preliminary or final
site plan approval for the purpose of determining the right to an
exemption. In all cases, the applicable fee percentage shall be
determined based upon the Development Fee Ordinance in effect
on the date that the Construction Permit is issued.
(3) Residential development fees shall not be imposed and collected
when an existing structure is expanded or undergoes a change,
§ 310-165 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-166
288:686
§ 310-167. Non-Residential development fees.
except for the following: when there is the removal and
replacement of 50% or more of the sum of the area of all floors
of the existing building, excluding a basement or cellar area. The
development fee shall be calculated on the increase in the
equalized assessed value of the improved structure.
(4) Developers of residential structures demolished and replaced inkind
as a result of a natural disaster shall be exempt from paying a
development fee.
A. Imposition of Fees.
(1) Within all zoning districts, non-residential developers, except for
developers of the types of developments specifically exempted
below, shall pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the equalized assessed value
of the land and improvements, for all new non-residential
construction on an unimproved lot or lots.
(2) Within all zoning districts, non-residential developers, except for
developers of the types of developments specifically exempted
below, shall also pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the increase in
equalized assessed value resulting from any additions to existing
structures to be used for non-residential purposes.
(3) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure is demolished and replaced. The development fee of 2.5%
shall be calculated on the difference between the equalized
assessed value of the pre-existing land and improvements and the
equalized assessed value of the newly improved structure, i.e. land
and improvements, and such calculation shall be made at the time a
final Certificate of Occupancy is issued. If the calculation required
under this section results in a negative number, the non-residential
development fee shall be zero.
B. Eligible Exactions, Ineligible Exactions and Exemptions for Nonresidential
Development.
(1) The non-residential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or market
rate development shall be subject to a 2.5% development fee,
unless otherwise exempted below.
(2) The 2.5% development fee shall not apply to an increase in
equalized assessed value resulting from alterations, change in use
within the existing footprint, reconstruction, renovations and
repairs.
(3) Non-residential developments shall be exempt from the payment of
non-residential development fees in accordance with the
exemptions required pursuant to the Statewide Non-Residential
Development Fee Act (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1 through 8.7), as
§ 310-166 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-167
288:687
§ 310-168. Collection Procedures.
specified in Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Non-Residential
Development Certification/ Exemption". Any exemption claimed by
a developer shall be substantiated by that developer.
(4) A developer of a non-residential development exempted from the
non-residential development fee pursuant to the Statewide Non-
Residential Development Fee Act shall be subject to the fee at such
time as the basis for the exemption no longer applies and shall
make the payment of the non-residential development fee, in that
event, within three years after that event or after the issuance of
the final Certificate of Occupancy for the non-residential
development, whichever is later.
(5) If a property which was exempted from the collection of a nonresidential
development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt from
property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit the fees
required pursuant to this section within 45 days of the termination
of the property tax exemption. Unpaid non-residential development
fees under these circumstances may be enforceable by the Borough
of Hillsdale as a lien against the real property of the owner.
A. Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable approval
for a development, the approving authority or entity shall notify or
direct its staff to notify the Construction Official responsible for the
issuance of a Construction Permit.
B. For non-residential developments only, the developer shall also be
provided with a copy of Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Non-
Residential Development Certification/ Exemption" to be completed as
per the instructions provided. The developer of a non-residential
development shall complete Form N-RDF as per the instructions
provided. The Construction Official shall verify the information
submitted by the non-residential developer as per the instructions
provided in the Form N-RDF. The Tax Assessor shall verify exemptions
and prepare estimated and final assessments as per the instructions
provided in Form N-RDF.
C. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a Construction
Permit shall notify the Borough Tax Assessor of the issuance of the first
Construction Permit for a development which is subject to a
development fee.
D. Within 90 days of receipt of such notification, the Borough Tax Assessor
shall prepare an estimate of the equalized assessed value of the
development based on the plans filed.
E. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a final
Certificate of Occupancy shall notify the Borough Tax Assessor of any
§ 310-167 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-168
288:688
§ 310-169. Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
and all requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on a property
which is subject to a development fee.
F. Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the Borough Tax Assessor shall confirm or modify the
previously estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements
associated with the development; calculate the development fee; and
thereafter notify the developer of the amount of the fee.
G. Should the Borough of Hillsdale fail to determine or notify the
developer of the amount of the development fee within 10 business days
of the request for final inspection, the developer may estimate the
amount due and pay that estimated amount consistent with the dispute
process set forth in Subsection b of Section 37 of P.L. 2008, c.46
(C.40:55D-8.6).
H. Except as provided in Section 167A.(3) hereinabove, 50% of the initially
calculated development fee shall be collected at the time of issuance of
the Construction Permit. The remaining portion shall be collected at the
time of issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy. The developer shall be
responsible for paying the difference between the fee calculated at the
time of issuance of the Construction Permit and that determined at the
time of issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy.
I. Appeal of Development Fees.
(1) A developer may challenge residential development fees imposed
by filing a challenge with the County Board of Taxation. Pending a
review and determination by the Board, collected fees shall be
placed in an interest bearing escrow account by the Borough of
Hillsdale. Appeals from a determination of the Board may be made
to the tax court in accordance with the provisions of the State Tax
Uniform Procedure Law, R.S. 54:48-1, et seq., within 90 days after
the date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts
escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
(2) A developer may challenge non-residential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the Director of the Division of
Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the Director,
which shall be made within 45 days of receipt of the challenge,
collected fees shall be placed in an interest bearing escrow account
by the Borough of Hillsdale. Appeals from a determination of the
Director may be made to the tax court in accordance with the
provisions of the State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, R.S.54:48-1, et
seq., within 90 days after the date of such determination. Interest
earned on amounts escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing
party.
§ 310-168 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-169
288:689
A. There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing Affordable
Housing Trust Fund to be maintained by the Chief Financial Officer of
the Borough of Hillsdale for the purpose of depositing development fees
collected from residential and non-residential developers and proceeds
from the sale of units with extinguished controls.
B. The following additional funds shall be deposited in the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source and
amount:
(1) Payments in lieu of on-site construction of a fraction of an
affordable unit, where permitted by ordinance or by agreement
with the Borough of Hillsdale;
(2) Funds contributed by developers to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached dwelling
unit development accessible;
(3) Rental income from municipally operated units;
(4) Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
(5) Recapture funds;
(6) Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
(7) Any other funds collected in connection with Hillsdale's affordable
housing program.
C. In the event of a failure by the Borough of Hillsdale to comply with trust
fund monitoring and reporting requirements or to submit accurate
monitoring reports; or a failure to comply with the conditions of the
judgment of compliance or a revocation of the judgment of compliance;
or a failure to implement the approved Spending Plan and to expend
funds within the applicable required time period as set forth in In re Tp.
of Monroe, 442 N.J. Super. 565 (Law Div. 2015) (aff'd 442 N.J. Super.
563); or the expenditure of funds on activities not approved by the
Court; or for other good cause demonstrating the unapproved use(s) of
funds, the Court may authorize the State of New Jersey, Department of
Community Affairs ("DCA"), Division of Local Government Services
("LGS"), to direct the manner in which the funds in the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund shall be expended, provided that all such funds
shall, to the extent practicable, be utilized for affordable housing
programs within the Borough of Hillsdale, or, if not practicable, then
within the County.
Any party may bring a motion before the Superior Court presenting
evidence of such condition(s), and the Court may, after considering
the evidence and providing the municipality a reasonable opportunity
to respond and/or to remedy the non-compliant condition(s), and upon
a finding of continuing and deliberate non-compliance, determine to
authorize LGS to direct the expenditure of funds in the Trust Fund. The
§ 310-169 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-169
288:690
§ 310-170. Use of funds.
Court may also impose such other remedies as may be reasonable and
appropriate to the circumstances.
D. Interest accrued in the Affordable Housing Trust Fund shall only be
used to fund eligible affordable housing activities approved by COAH or
the Court.
A. The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a Spending Plan approved
by the Court. Funds deposited in the Affordable Housing Trust Fund
may be used for any activity approved by the Court to address the
Borough of Hillsdale's fair share obligation and may be set up as a grant
or revolving loan program. Such activities include, but are not limited
to: preservation or purchase of housing for the purpose of maintaining
or implementing affordability controls; housing rehabilitation; new
construction of affordable housing units and related costs; accessory
apartments; a market to affordable program; Regional Housing
Partnership programs; conversion of existing non-residential buildings
to create new affordable units; green building strategies designed to be
cost saving and in accordance with accepted national or State
standards; purchase of land for affordable housing; improvement of
land to be used for affordable housing; extensions or improvements of
roads and infrastructure to affordable housing sites; financial
assistance designed to increase affordability; administration necessary
for implementation of the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan; and/or
any other activity permitted by the Court and specified in the approved
Spending Plan.
B. Funds shall not be expended to reimburse the Borough of Hillsdale for
past housing activities.
C. At least 30% of all development fees collected and interest earned on
such fees shall be used to provide affordability assistance to low- and
moderate-income households in affordable units included in the
municipal Fair Share Plan. One-third of the affordability assistance
portion of development fees collected shall be used to provide
affordability assistance to those households earning 30% or less of the
median income for Housing Region 1, in which Hillsdale is located.
(1) Affordability assistance programs may include down payment
assistance, security deposit assistance, low interest loans, rental
assistance, assistance with homeowners association or
condominium fees and special assessments, and assistance with
emergency repairs. The specific programs to be used for
affordability assistance shall be identified and described within the
Spending Plan.
(2) Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low or
moderate income units in the municipal Fair Share Plan to make
§ 310-169 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-170
288:691
§ 310-171. Monitoring.
The Borough of Hillsdale shall provide annual reporting of Affordable
Housing Trust Fund activity to the New Jersey DCA, COAH, LGS, or other
entity designated by the State of New Jersey, with a copy provided to
Fair Share Housing Center and posted on the municipal website, using
forms developed for this purpose by the New Jersey DCA, COAH or LGS.
The reporting shall include an accounting of all Affordable Housing Trust
Fund activity, including the sources and amounts of funds collected and the
amounts and purposes for which any funds have been expended.
§ 310-172. Ongoing Collection of Fees.
them affordable to households earning 30% or less of median
income. The specific programs to be used for very low income
affordability assistance shall be identified and described within the
Spending Plan.
(3) Payments in lieu of constructing affordable housing units on site, if
permitted by Ordinance or by Agreement with the Borough of
Hillsdale, and funds from the sale of units with extinguished
controls shall be exempt from the affordability assistance
requirement.
D. The Borough of Hillsdale may contract with a private or public entity to
administer any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share Plan,
including its programs for affordability assistance.
E. No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development fees may
be expended on administration, including, but not limited to, salaries
and benefits for municipal employees or consultants' fees necessary to
develop or implement a new construction program, prepare a Housing
Element and Fair Share Plan, and/or administer an affirmative
marketing program or a rehabilitation program.
(1) In the case of a rehabilitation program, the administrative costs of
the rehabilitation program shall be included as part of the 20% of
collected development fees that may be expended on
administration.
(2) Administrative funds may be used for income qualification of
households, monitoring the turnover of sale and rental units, and
compliance with COAH's monitoring requirements. Legal or other
fees related to litigation opposing affordable housing sites or
related to securing or appealing a judgment from the Court are not
eligible uses of the Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
A. The ability for the Borough of Hillsdale to impose, collect and expend
development fees shall be permitted through the expiration of the
repose period covered by its Judgment of Compliance and shall
continue thereafter so long as the Borough of Hillsdale has filed an
§ 310-170 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-172
288:692
adopted Housing Element and Fair Share Plan with the Court or with a
designated State administrative agency, has petitioned for a Judgment
of Compliance from the Court or for Substantive Certification or its
equivalent from a State administrative agency authorized to approve
and administer municipal affordable housing compliance and has
received approval of its Development Fee Ordinance from the entity
that will be reviewing and approving the Housing Element and Fair
Share Plan.
B. If the Borough of Hillsdale is not pursuing authorization to impose and
collect development fees after the expiration of its Judgment of
Compliance, it may be subject to forfeiture of any or all funds remaining
within its Affordable Housing Trust Fund. Any funds so forfeited shall
be deposited into the "New Jersey Affordable Housing Trust Fund"
established pursuant to Section 20 of P.L. 1985, c. 222 (C. 52:27D-320).
C. After the expiration of the Judgment of Compliance, if the Borough does
not pursue or obtain continued authorization, the Borough of Hillsdale
shall not impose a residential development fee on a development that
receives preliminary or final site plan approval, retroactively impose a
development fee on such a development, or expend any of its collected
development fees.
§ 310-172 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 310-172
288:693
Part IV, Board of Health Legislation
Chapter 323
GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH
§ 310-172 HILLSDALE CODE § 310-172
323:694
ARTICLE I
Administration and Enforcement
[Adopted 10-7-1985 as Ord. No. 3-85]
§ 323-1. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DULY AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE — Any individual licensed by the
State of New Jersey to perform the duties of a Sanitary Inspector and in the
employ of the local Board of Health.
HEALTH OFFICER — Any individual licensed by the State of New Jersey to
perform the duties of a Health Officer and in the employ of the local Board
of Health.
§ 323-2. Notices and orders.
A. Whenever the Health Officer or his or her duly licensed authorized
agent shall determine that there exists a violation of the New Jersey
State Sanitary Code, or New Jersey State health laws, or local health
ordinance, or State of New Jersey DEP, said officer or agent shall issue a
notice of violation and order to terminate directing the discontinuance
of the illegal action or condition and the correction of the violation.
B. The notice and orders shall contain at least the following information:
(1) The name and address of the owner.
(2) The address at which the violation occurred.
(3) The name and address of the person to whom the order is directed.
(4) If it be other than the owner, a copy shall be delivered to the owner
or his or her agent stating that the owner bears joint responsibility
for bringing about compliance with the person named.
(5) A citation to the sections of the law, ordinance or regulation
violated.
(6) An order to terminate violations within a time specified in the
order.
(7) The amount of penalty assessed if any, and if cumulative.
(8) An explanation of the method of computation.
(9) Shall be signed by the appropriate Health Official.
C. The Health Officer or his or her duly licensed authorized agent shall
permit such time period for correction as is reasonable within the
context of the situation.
§ 323-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 323-2
323:695
§ 323-3. Compliance required.
If the notice of violation and orders to terminate have not been complied
with, the Health Officer or his or her duly licensed authorized agent, in
addition to any other available remedies likely to bring about compliance,
may request the legal counsel of the municipality to institute the
appropriate processing at law or in equity to retain, correct or abate such
violations.
§ 323-4. Violations and penalties.
D. Extensions. The Health Officer or his or her duly licensed authorized
agent may grant extensions of time whenever he or she shall determine
that despite diligent effort, compliance cannot be accomplished within
the time specified in the notice.
A. Any person, corporation or anyone shall be subject to a penalty of not
more than five hundred dollars ($500.) but not less than five dollars
($5.), if that person violates any provision of this Article or fails to
comply with an order issued by the Health Official. [Amended
6-3-1997 by Ord. No. 97-2]
B. Anyone who knowingly refuses entry or access to the Health Officer or
an inspector lawfully authorized to inspect any premises, building or
structure pursuant to the laws cited in this Article, or who unreasonably
interferes with such an inspection, shall be subject to a fine of two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.).
C. A person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each day that he or she
fails to comply with a notice of violation order validly issued by a duly
authorized Health Official.
D. A person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each violation of any
provision of the laws cited in this Article.
E. No such penalty shall be assessed except upon notice of violation and
order to terminate and upon expiration of the time period delineated in
the notice.
F. The Health Official may separately serve a notice of penalty assessment
and order to pay a penalty whenever he or she shall not have done so in
the original notice and orders.
G. The Health Official shall assess a monetary penalty whenever such shall
be likely to assist in bringing about compliance. The penalty shall be no
less than five dollars ($5.) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.)
for each violation. All penalty assessments shall be made payable to the
Board of Health and sent or delivered in person to the Clerk of the
Department of Health. [Amended 6-3-1997 by Ord. No. 97-2]
H. Penalties pursuant to this Article may be collected in a summary
proceeding pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement Law (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1
§ 323-2 HILLSDALE CODE § 323-4
323:696
et seq.). Jurisdiction to enforce such penalties is conferred upon judges
of the Municipal Court in addition to the courts specified by N.J.S.A.
2A:58-2. Suit may be brought by a municipality or the State of New
Jersey. Payment of a money judgment pursuant hereto shall be
remitted, in the case of suit brought by the municipality, to the Chief
Financial Officer and, in the case of a suit brought by the State of
New Jersey, to the State Treasurer. [Amended 5-13-1997 by Ord. No.
97-8]
§ 323-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 323-4
323:697

ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code by Board of Health
[Adopted 6-3-1997 by Ord. No. 97-2]
§ 323-5. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Board of Health of the
Borough of Hillsdale of a general and permanent nature, as revised, codified
and consolidated into chapters and sections by General Code Publishers
Corp. and consisting of Chapters 323 through 369, are hereby approved,
adopted, ordained and enacted as Part III of the "Code of the Borough of
Hillsdale," hereinafter known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 323-6. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances of the Board of Health enacted prior to the
enactment of this Code, except such ordinances as are expressly saved from
repeal or continued in force and effect hereinafter.
§ 323-7. When effective.
All provisions of this ordinance and the Code shall take effect 30 days after
the date of the first publication.
§ 323-8. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Secretary of the Board of Health and shall remain there for use and
examination by the public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and if
this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified as provided by
law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Secretary
of the Board of Health, to be made available to persons desiring to examine
the same during all times while the said Code is in effect.
§ 323-9. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the Board of
Health to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Borough of Hillsdale" shall
be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the loose-leaf book containing the said Code, as amendments
and supplements thereto.
§ 323-10. Publication; filing.
The Secretary of the Board of Health, pursuant to law, shall cause to be
published, in the manner required, a copy of this adopting ordinance in
§ 323-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 323-10
323:699
a newspaper of general circulation in the borough. Sufficient copies of
the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Secretary for inspection
by the public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this adopting ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 323-11. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Secretary, or someone authorized and directed by
the Secretary, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing
the Code required to be filed in the Secretary's office for the use of the
public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to
the effective date of this codification, which shall be adopted specifically
as part of the Code, shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by
reference until such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements
to said Code book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted
therein.
§ 323-12. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Board of
Health to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not less than $5 nor
more than $500.
§ 323-13. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part
thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not
be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section or
parts thereof.
§ 323-14. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other section or parts thereof.
§ 323-15. Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Board of
Health and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
adopting ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 323-10 HILLSDALE CODE § 323-16
323:700
§ 323-16. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 323-15 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
§ 323-17. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
A. Any ordinance of the Board of Health adopted subsequent to November
9, 1993.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance, or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision, or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending,
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
G. Any provisions of an ordinance or resolution of the Board of Health
creating employments, positions or offices and fixing salaries and duties
therefor which are not provided in the Code hereby adopted and which
are not in conflict or inconsistent therewith, or any ordinance
pertaining to the salaries and compensation of Board of Health officers
and employees.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances of the Board of Health for
adoption and revision as part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4,
certain grammatical changes and other minor changes were made in
one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the Board of Health
that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the
ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended to read
as such.
B. In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance
as set forth in Schedule A232 attached hereto and made a part hereof
232. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 323-17B, the chapters and sections which were added
or amended by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code by a footnote referring
to Chapter 323, General Provisions, Board of Health, Article II. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicated amendments or additions will be replaced with the
§ 323-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 323-17
323:701
(chapter and section number references are to the ordinances as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code).
following history: "Amended (added) 6-3-1997 by Ord. No. 97-2." Schedule A, which
contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 323-17 HILLSDALE CODE § 323-17
323:702
Chapter 329
AIR POLLUTION
§ 329-1. Definitions.
As used in the code adopted by this chapter, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
CITY OF HACKENSACK — The Board of Health, Borough of Hillsdale, New
Jersey.
§ 329-2. Standards adopted by reference.
A code defining and prohibiting air pollution, providing for the inspection of
premises by any enforcing official, providing for the removal or abatement,
recovery of expenses incurred by the Board of Health in removing or
abating air pollution and prescribing penalties for violations is hereby
established pursuant to Chapter 188, Laws of 1950. A copy of said code is
annexed hereto and made a part thereof without the inclusion of the text
thereof herein.
§ 329-3. Title of standards.
The said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Air Pollution Control Code of the City of
Hackensack (1978)."
§ 329-4. Copies to remain on file.
Three (3) copies of the said "Air Pollution Code of the City of Hackensack"
(1978) have been placed on file in the office of the Health Officer of this
local Board of Health upon the introduction of this chapter and will remain
on file there for the use and examination of the public.
§ 329-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person, persons, firm or corporation or for that matter anyone who
violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this chapter or code
established herein or notice issued pursuant thereto shall, upon conviction
thereof, be liable to a penalty as set forth in § 323-4A of this code.
Chapter 331
EXTERMINATION
§ 331-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
§ 323-17 AIR POLLUTION § 331-1
329:703
CERTIFIED PROFESSIONAL EXTERMINATING FIRM — Includes persons,
sole proprietorships, associations or other business entities wherein at least
one (1) person is a certified professional exterminator engaged in rodent
elimination or eradication by use of rodenticides approved by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection. Wherever in this chapter
work is to be conducted by a professional exterminating firm, the work must
be supervised by a licensed professional exterminator.
CERTIFIED PROFESSIONAL EXTERMINATOR — Includes persons certified
by the State of New Jersey, Department of Environmental Protection as
competent and authorized to use or supervise the use of pesticides who is
engaged in rodent elimination or eradication by use of rodenticides.
CLEARANCE — The act or acts ridding a property of obstructions,
entanglements or obstacles, including trees and other growth, provided that
the area affected is five hundred (500) square feet or more.
CONSTRUCTION — The erection, alteration or repair of any building or
structure as requires municipal approval or a building permit.
DEMOLITION — The act or acts of pulling down, tearing down or otherwise
leveling all or part of a building or structure as requires municipal approval
or a building permit.
EXCAVATION — The act or acts of digging up or uncovering or removing
soil or material used as the foundation of a building or a structure as
requires municipal approval or a building permit.
HEALTH INSPECTOR/CODE COMPLIANCE OFFICER — Includes the
Health Officer or Code Compliance Officer or any duly authorized agent or
employee of the Board of Health or Code Compliance Office, Borough of
Hillsdale, County of Bergen, New Jersey.
PERSON — Includes any person, persons, partnerships, firm, association,
corporation and the owner of buildings or property subject to demolition,
construction or excavation.
REAL ESTATE PREMISES — Includes any vacant land or structure, whether
public or private, or whether adapted for vacant land or any use.
RODENT EXTERMINATION — Includes the elimination or eradication of
rats, mice and other rodents on said real estate premises such that said
real estate premises are completely freed of such rodents or there is not
evidence of rodent infestation remaining after implementation of accepted
measures such as poisoning and other means approved by the Health
Officer.
§ 331-2. Inspection and approval prior to demolition.
A. It shall be the duty of any person engaged in the demolition,
construction, excavation or clearance of any real estate premises in the
Borough of Hillsdale to first secure approval from the Health
Department/Code Compliance Office before commencement of such
demolition, construction, excavation or clearance.
§ 331-1 HILLSDALE CODE § 331-2
331:704
B. Before granting permission for the demolition, construction, excavation
or clearance of any real estate premises, a certified professional
exterminator shall inspect the premises and the immediate surrounding
premises to determine whether evidence of rodent infestation exists in
or about said real estate premises.
C. In the event that inspection reveals evidence of rodent infestation, the
Health Department/Code Compliance Office shall require a program of
rodent extermination undertaken and completed by a certified
professional exterminating firm. The program for rodent extermination
in the case of vacant land shall be baiting or dusting burrows approved
by the Health Department/Code Compliance Office until results of said
baiting indicate to the satisfaction of the Health Department/Code
Compliance Office that rodent infestation is nonexistent or eliminated.
D. Thirty (30) days prior to commencement of demolition, construction,
excavation or clearance, a certificate shall be issued by the Health
Department/Code Compliance Office.
E. After completion of a rodent extermination program as required herein,
the Health Department/Code Compliance Office shall reinspect the
premises and upon determination that the program has been effective,
shall issue a certificate from the Board of Health signifying its approval
of said extermination.
F. Notwithstanding the issuance of a certificate of approval, in the event
that evidence of reinfestation of said real estate premises is discovered
by the Health Department/Code Compliance Office, then, prior to
demolition, construction, excavation or clearance, the foregoing
provisions of this chapter shall apply, and new request for permission to
demolish, construct, excavate or clear shall be made by the persons
required herein.
G. Notification of the Code Compliance Officer. The Board of Health, upon
issuing a certificate of approval as set forth in § 331-2, shall notify the
Code Compliance officer of the Borough of Hillsdale of said issuance.
The issuance of a certificate of approval shall be a condition precedent
to the issuance of any permits pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23, the BOCA
National Building Code and municipal ordinances.
H. When in the opinion of the Health Officer/Code Compliance Officer or
their designee, whenever a situation exists which may contribute to the
breeding or propagation of rodents, including but not limited to
uncovered, overflowing or poorly maintained garbage and garbage
receptacles, accumulated debris, wood, branches, logs, leaves, compost
piles, accumulated junk, abandoned materials or the feeding of animals,
the condition shall be removed by the property owner after issuance of
a violation notice or verbal order. The Health Officer/Code Compliance
Officer shall also have the power to order extermination on private
property by a certified professional exterminator and require a written
report from the exterminator as to methods, chemicals and follow-up
§ 331-2 EXTERMINATION § 331-2
331:705
§ 331-3. Violations and penalties.233
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, either be imprisoned in the county jail or other place provided
by the municipality for the detention of prisoners for a term not exceeding
ninety (90) days, or shall be liable to a penalty of not less than five dollars
($5.) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.).
§ 331-4. Fees.234
Chapter 335
FEES
§ 335-1. Fees.
Chapter/Purpose of Fee Fee
Chapter 331, Extermination.
Application for a permit for demolition or
construction of any premises
$20.00
Permit fee for approval by the Health Officer/Code
Compliance officer for the demolition, construction,
excavation, clearance of any real estate premises
$5.00
visits used to abate a rodent situation. If the property owner does
not comply with violation notices in the time prescribed by the Health
Officer/Code Compliance Officer, said officer may order the property
to be cleaned and exterminated at the property owner's expense. Said
expense will be attached as a tax lien against the property.
A. Upon application to the Code Compliance Office for a permit for
demolition or construction of any premises, the applicant shall pay, in
addition to any other fees, an application fee as provided in Chapter
335, Fees, to the Health Department.
B. Upon approval by the Health Officer/Code Compliance officer for the
demolition, construction, excavation, clearance of any real estate
premises, the applicant shall pay a permit fee as provided in Chapter
335, Fees.
C. Upon reinspection by the Health Officer/Code Compliance Officer
pursuant to this chapter, the applicant shall pay a fee as provided in
Chapter 335, Fees, for each and every inspection.
233. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 323, General Provisions,
Board of Health, Art. II.
234. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 323, General Provisions,
Board of Health, Art. II.
§ 331-2 HILLSDALE CODE § 335-1
331:706
Chapter/Purpose of Fee Fee
Chapter 331, Extermination.
Inspection by the Health Officer/Code Compliance
Officer, each
$20.00
Chapter/Purpose of Fee Fee
Chapter 339, Food Establishments.
Late fees:
License valued less than $100.00 $25.00
License valued over $100.00 $50.00
Renewal fees:
Type of Establishment [Amended 11-4-2004 by
Ord. No. 04-03; 9-10-2013 by Ord. No. 13-01
(Board of Health)]
Annual License and
Renewal Fee
Agricultural market $400
Bakery $250
Catering trucks, food $250
Cattle and horses $200
Concession stand at Stonybrook Swim Club $400
Convenience store $350
Delicatessen $250
Food and vending machines, first machine $100
*Food peddlers, all mobile concessions $150
Additional machines, each $75
Hotels/motels $400/$850
Ice cream mobile vending $350
Laundry and dry cleaning $300
*Massage/spa $100
Miscellaneous retail food store $300
Nursery schools $250
Pet shop/dog grooming $250
Prepackaged candy $150
*Produce food stand $50
Restaurants:
1 to 49 seats $300
50 to 99 seats $400
§ 335-1 EXTERMINATION § 335-1
331:707
Type of Establishment [Amended 11-4-2004 by
Ord. No. 04-03; 9-10-2013 by Ord. No. 13-01
(Board of Health)]
Annual License and
Renewal Fee
100 plus seats $450
Rooming or boarding house $350
School food service $250
Supermarket $1000
*Swimming pool $300
Temporary retail food
1 to 3 days $150
4 to 7 days $200
Trucks dispensing dairy products, retail $200
*Reinspection fees $100
1st reinspection $200
2nd reinspection
3rd reinspection $300
For unsatisfactory inspection for each
reinspection
$500
*Late fee (on or after February of the license year) 50% of license value
Miscellaneous fees: The fee to be charged for each certified copy of a
marriage license, birth certificate, death certificate, other legal documents,
records, search of files and other miscellaneous items is as follows:
Chapter/Purpose of Fee Fee
Marriage certificate [Amended 3-2-2004 by Ord.
No. 04-02; 9-10-2013 by Ord. No. 13-02 (Board
of Health)]
Initial copy $25
Each additional copy $2
Correction $10
Birth certificate [Amended 3-2-2004 by Ord. No.
04-02; 9-10-2013 by Ord. No. 13-02 (Board of
Health)]
Initial copy $25
Each additional copy $2
Correction $10
§ 335-1 HILLSDALE CODE § 335-1
331:708
Chapter/Purpose of Fee Fee
Death certificate [Amended 3-2-2004 by Ord. No.
04-02; 9-10-2013 by Ord. No. 13-02 (Board of
Health)]
Initial copy $25
Each additional copy $2
Correction $10
All other legal documents or records [Amended
3-2-2004 by Ord. No. 04-02; 9-10-2013 by Ord.
No. 13-02 (Board of Health)]
Initial copy $25
Each additional copy $2
Type of Establishment [Amended 11-4-2004 by
Ord. No. 04-03]
Annual License
and Renewal Fee
Search of files
Each search $5.00
Nonresident child attending Board of Health Child
Health Conference from birth to five years of age
[Added 7-8-2003 by Ord. No. 03-14]
$30.00
Child Health Conference fees [Added 12-2-2014
by Ord. No. 15-01 (Board of Health)]
$35
Chapter 339
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health — See Ch. 35. Fees — See Ch. 335.
§ 335-1 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS § 335-1
339:709

ARTICLE I
Licenses
[Adopted 11-26-1991 by Ord. No. 91-2]
§ 339-1. Definitions. [Amended 11-12-1996 by Ord. No. 96-2]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGRICULTURAL MARKETS/FARM STANDS — Any fixed or mobile retail
food establishment which is engaged in the sale of raw agricultural
products, but may include as a minor portion of the operation the sale of
factory sealed or prepackaged food products that do not normally require
refrigeration.
FOOD — Any raw, cooked or processed edible substance, beverage or
ingredient used or intended for use or for sale in whole or part for human
consumption.
FOOD PROCESSING ESTABLISHMENT — A commercial establishment in
which food is processed and packaged for human consumption.
HEALTH AUTHORITY — The properly appointed agent of the local Board of
Health to act in the enforcement of its ordinances and sanitary laws of the
state.
MOBILE RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS — Any movable restaurant, truck, van,
trailer, cart, bicycle or other movable unit, including hand carried, portable
containers in or on which food or beverage is transported.
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS — Any fixed or mobile restaurant, coffee
shop, cafeteria, short-order cafe, luncheonette, grill, tearoom, sandwich
shop, snack/juice bar, soda fountain, tavern, bar, cocktail lounge, nightclub,
roadside stand, industrial feeding establishment, private, public or
nonprofit organization or institution serving food, catering kitchen,
commissary, box lunch establishment, retail bakery, bagelry, meat market,
delicatessen, grocery store, public food market or similar place in which
food or drink is prepared for retail sale or for service on the premises
or elsewhere and in any other retail eating or drinking establishment or
operation where food is served, handled or provided for the public with or
without charge.
TEMPORARY FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Any retail establishment which
operates at a fixed location for a temporary period of time in connection
with a fair, carnival, circus, public exhibition or similar transitory gathering,
including church suppers, picnics or similar organizational meetings,
mobile retail food establishments, as well as agricultural markets.
WHOLESALE FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Any fixed or mobile food or drink
processing or food or drink establishment, including roadside stands,
industrial feeding or preparation establishments, private, public or
nonprofit organization or institution serving or preparing food, catering
kitchens, commissary and box lunch establishments, food or drink
warehouses, bakeries, meat markets, delicatessens, grocery stores, public
§ 339-1 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS § 339-1
339:711
and private food markets or similar places where food is prepared, stored
or sold at wholesale and any other food or drink establishment selling to the
public at wholesale.
§ 339-2. License permit fees. [Amended 11-12-1996 by Ord. No.
96-2]
§ 339-3. Fee waivers.
The Board of Health reserves the right to waive any required licensing fee
for whatever reason it deems appropriate.
§ 339-4. Expiration of license.
Licenses issued or approved under the provisions of this article shall expire
annually on December 31 of each year, and application for renewal thereof
shall be submitted, together with the required fee prior to December 1 of
each year.
§ 339-5. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Health Officer or his or her delegated
representative.
§ 339-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-3-1997 by Ord. No.
97-2]
Any person, persons or body corporation or anyone required to have a
license as set forth in § 339-2A failing to have a license or permit shall be in
violation of this article and shall be subject to a fine of not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.) but not less than five dollars ($5.) for each day the
violation exists.
A. No person, persons or body corporations shall process, manufacture,
have, warehouse, offer for sale or sell articles of food or drink within the
limits of the Borough of Hillsdale without having first obtained a license
or permit from the Board of Health of the Borough of Hillsdale.
B. The following businesses and enterprises conducted with the Borough
of Hillsdale shall be required to secure a license to operate and shall
pay the appropriate fee as set forth. An establishment which fails to
obtain a renewal of an establishment license in the month of January in
any calendar year for previously licensed establishments, and failure to
obtain a retail food license before a new establishment opens for
business, a late fee of 50% of their annual license fee will be
administratively imposed.
§ 339-1 HILLSDALE CODE § 339-6
339:712
ARTICLE II
Food Handlers Course Training
[Adopted 5-2-1995 by Ord. No. 95-2]
§ 339-7. Mandatory training.
The Board of Health shall order the Health Officer to conduct a food
handlers course training program once a year. The Board may order
additional courses to address specific problems, complaints or continued
violations of a sanitary nature. All courses shall be in compliance with
current New Jersey State Department of Health guidelines for food course
training.
§ 339-8. Required attendance; certification.
All retail food establishments are required to maintain in their employ at
least the specified number of food handler personnel who have attended an
approved course of instruction for food handler training. Personnel required
to attend shall be food service workers who are directly engaged in delivery,
storage, processing and service of food product. Owners and managers shall
notify the Health Department when they are no longer in compliance with
the required number of course attendees. Records are to be kept of those
who have attended approved courses. Duration of certification shall be two
years from the date of course completion.
§ 339-9. Manner of attendance.
Establishments shall provide personnel to an approved food handler course
training program in the following manner:
§ 339-10. Violations and penalties.
Any establishment not in compliance with any provision of this article shall
be subject to fines and costs per offense as follows:
A. Take-out and miscellaneous establishments: one person per shift.
B. Restaurants of 49 seats and below: one person per shift.
C. Restaurants of 50 seats and above: two persons per shift.
D. Supermarkets: one store manager and one person from each
department per shift.
E. Hotels/motels: one person from each food handling department or
restaurant per shift.
A. First offense: $50 and costs.
B. Second offense: $100 and costs.
C. Third and each consecutive offense: $200 and costs.
§ 339-7 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS § 339-11
339:713
§ 339-11. Suspension of license.
The Board of Heath may suspend the retail food establishment license of
any person, partnership, corporation or establishment in violation of this
article for a period not more than three days, pursuant to the authority of
the Board of Health to license and regulate food establishments as provided
by N.J.S.A. 26:3-31c.
§ 339-11 HILLSDALE CODE § 339-11
339:714
Chapter 345
NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH
§ 345-1. Standards adopted.
A code defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions or acts
and each of them as a nuisance, prohibiting certain noises or sounds,
requiring the proper heating of apartments, prohibiting lease or rental
of certain buildings, prohibiting spitting in or upon public buildings,
conveyances or sidewalks, authorizing the inspection of premises by an
enforcing official, providing for the removal or abatement of certain
nuisances and recovery of expenses incurred by the Board of Health in
removing or abating such nuisances and prescribing penalties for violations
is hereby established pursuant to Chapter 188, Law 1950. A copy of said
code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof without the inclusion of the
text thereof herein.
§ 345-2. Title of standards.
The said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey
(1953)."
§ 345-3. Copies of standards to be on file.
Three (3) copies of the said Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey
(1953) have been placed on file in the office of the Health Officer of this
local Board of Health upon the introduction of this chapter and will remain
on file there for the use and examination of the public.
§ 345-4. Violations and penalties.235
Any person who violates, or neglects to comply with any provision of this
chapter or code established herein or notice issued pursuant thereto shall,
upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty of not less than five dollars
($5.) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.) for each violation.
Chapter 353
SANITARY INSPECTOR
§ 353-1. Office established.
The office of Sanitary Inspector of the Board of Health of the Borough of
Hillsdale is hereby established.
235. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 323, General Provisions,
Board of Health, Art. II.
§ 339-11 NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH § 353-2
345:715
§ 353-2. Appointment.
The Board of Health shall annually appoint a duly qualified person to fill the
office of Sanitary Inspector.
§ 353-3. Qualifications.
No person shall be deemed qualified to be appointed to the office of Sanitary
Inspector or to continue in said office unless he or she shall be and remain
the holder of license as Sanitary Inspector, first grade, issued by the State
of New Jersey.
§ 353-4. Term of office.
The term of the Sanitary Inspector shall commence on January 1 and
terminate on December 31 of each year.
§ 353-5. Duties; applicability of personnel policies. [Amended
3-5-1984 by Ord. No. 84-1]
§ 353-6. Compensation.
The compensation of the Sanitary Inspector for the services performed in
said office shall be in such amount and payable at such time or times as the
Board shall prescribe and designate by ordinance.
Chapter 358
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health — See Ch. 35.
Police Department — See Ch. 63.
Recycling — See Ch. 232.
Solid waste — See Ch. 252.
A. The duties of the Sanitary Inspector shall include the performance of
such health and inspection services as he or she may by law be required
to perform and such services not inconsistent with the license held by
him or her and as may be assigned to him or her by the Board of Health,
either directly or through its Health Officer acting as the general agent
of the Board.
B. The Sanitary Inspector shall be deemed full-time or part-time at the
discretion of the Board and shall be subject to the same personnel
policies as are applicable to persons employed by the Borough of
Hillsdale, which personnel policies are hereby, by this reference
thereto, adopted for the purpose of this chapter.
§ 353-2 HILLSDALE CODE § 353-6
358:716
ARTICLE I
Enforcement
[Adopted 10-10-1995 by Ord. No. 95-3]
§ 358-1. Enforcement agencies.
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-9, the Hillsdale Board of Health hereby
authorizes the following municipal agencies to enforce the Solid Waste
Management Act effective September 5, 1995:
(1) The Hillsdale Police Department.
(2) The Code Enforcement Office, Borough of Hillsdale.
B. This power is in addition to any and all enforcement powers exercised
by the Health Officer of the Borough of Hillsdale.
§ 358-1 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT § 358-1
358:717
Chapter 361
SWIMMING POOLS
Chapter 363
TOBACCO SALES
§ 363-1. Prohibition of sales to minors. [Amended 9-8-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-15]
§ 363-2. Identification required. [Amended 9-8-2015 by Ord. No.
15-15]
It shall be unlawful for a tobacco/cigarette retailer to sell or permit to
be sold cigarettes or other tobacco products to any individual without
requesting and examining identification from the purchaser positively
establishing the purchaser's age as 19 years or greater, unless the seller has
some other conclusive basis for determining the buyer is over the age of 19
years.
§ 363-3. Vending machine sales; display.
It shall be unlawful to offer for sale or to sell tobacco/cigarettes through
a tobacco/cigarette vending machine or from a freestanding or attached
display of tobacco/cigarettes in the Borough of Hillsdale.
§ 363-4. Removal of tobacco/cigarette machines.
All tobacco/cigarette machines made unlawful by the terms of this chapter
shall be removed within 30 days from the effective date of this chapter.
A. It shall be unlawful to sell any cigarettes made of tobacco or of any
other matter or substance which can be smoked, or any cigarette paper
or tobacco in any form, including smokeless tobacco, or any electronic
smoking devices that can be used to deliver nicotine or other
substances to the person inhaling from the device, including, but not
limited to, an electronic cigarette, cigar, cigarillo or pipe, or any
cartridge or other component of the device or related product to a
person under 19 years of age.
B. Sign requirements. The following six-inch-by-eight-inch sign shall be
posted in a conspicuous place near each cash register in all retail
establishments which sell tobacco products:
"SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO ANY PERSON UNDER THE AGE
OF 19 IS PROHIBITED BY LAW. Legal proof of age must be shown. A
person who sells or offers to sell a product to a person under 19 years
of age may be prosecuted in accordance with state and local
ordinances."
§ 358-1 HILLSDALE CODE § 363-5
361:718
§ 363-5. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Board of Health of the Borough of Hillsdale.
FREESTANDING OR ATTACHED TOBACCO/CIGARETTE DISPLAY — Any
display promotion of tobacco/cigarette products in any area of a store or
food establishment not specifically behind a sales counter and within the
grasp of the public so as to be self-service.
HEALTH OFFICER — The administrative officer of the Hillsdale Board of
Health and/or his or her authorized representatives.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, cooperative, association,
corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee or any
other legal entity.
TOBACCO — Any product made from the tobacco plant for the purpose
of smoking, chewing, inhaling and other personal use, including cigars,
chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff and cigarettes in any form.
TOBACCO RETAILER — Any person or entity that operates a store, stand,
booth, concession or place at which sales of tobacco are made to purchasers
for consumption or use. Shall also mean a person or entity that owns,
operates or uses a vending machine and/or vending machine location.
VENDING MACHINE — Any automated, self-service device which, upon
insertion of money, tokens or any form of payment, dispenses cigarettes or
other tobacco products in any form.
§ 363-6. Enforcement.
A. Whenever the Health Officer or his/her designee reasonably believes
there exists a violation of this chapter, he or she may issue a summons
and complaint not later than 90 days after discovery of the alleged
violation. The complaint shall be written and shall state with reasonable
particularity the nature of the violation, including reference to the
section of this chapter alleged to have been violated. The complaint
shall be delivered by the police or sent by certified mail to the alleged
violator.
B. The Health Officer or his designee or any other person charged with
enforcement of this chapter, after giving proper identification, may
inspect any matter, thing, premise, place, person, record, vehicle,
incident or event as necessary.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to molest, willfully oppose, verbally
abuse or otherwise obstruct the Health Officer or his designee who may
request the assistance of the Hillsdale Police Department, or other
police agency or peace officer when necessary to execute his or her
official duty in a manner prescribed by law.
§ 363-5 SWIMMING POOLS § 363-6
361:719
§ 363-7. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 365
WILDLIFE, FEEDING OF
§ 365-1. Purpose.
A chapter to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife in any public park or
on any other property owned or operated by the Borough of Hillsdale, so as
to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for
failure to comply.
§ 365-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal sense of taking fish and/or
game.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated.
D. Citizens may bring complaints against violators of this chapter through
the Health Department or Police Department.
A. Unless otherwise provided by law, statute or ordinance, any person
violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, pay a fine of $250 for a first offense, $400 for a second offense
and $500 for a third and each consecutive offense. Complaint shall be
made in Municipal Court of the Borough of Hillsdale or before such
other judicial officer having authority under the laws of the State of
New Jersey.
B. Defendants may, after reading and understanding the penalties, plead
guilty to the charges and after signing an affidavit, may pay the
appropriate fine to the Clerk of the Court, in lieu of a court appearance.
C. Each sale of tobacco/cigarettes to a minor shall constitute a separate
violation.
§ 363-6 HILLSDALE CODE § 365-3
365:720
§ 365-3. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned
or operated by the Borough of Hillsdale, any wildlife, excluding confined
wildlife (for example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or rehabilitation
center, or unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers, or feral
cats as part of an approved trap-neuter-release program).
§ 365-4. Enforcement.
§ 365-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this
ordinance shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
§ 365-6. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this chapter is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this chapter to
be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause, or reason, shall not
affect any other portion of this chapter.
Chapter 369
WATER SUPPLY, PROTECTION OF
§ 369-1. Findings.
The Board of Health does hereby find and determine as follows:
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the Borough of Hillsdale Police
Department and Board of Health.
B. Any person found to be in violation of this chapter shall be ordered to
cease the feeding immediately.
A. The Pascack Brook is one of the tributaries leading to the Oradell
Reservoir, a source of water supply for numerous municipalities in
Bergen County, including, among others, the Borough of Hillsdale.
B. The Pascack Brook if subject to frequent flooding, with high waters
rising over its banks and spreading for considerable distances over
nearby lands.
C. Flooding of this nature constitutes a twofold danger to public health:
pollution of wells used as sources of private water supply; and pollution
of the Pascak Brook and Oradell Reservoir as the result of the
infiltration and overflow of septic tanks, cesspools, leaching fields and
private sewage disposal systems.
§ 365-3 WATER SUPPLY, PROTECTION OF § 369-1
369:721
§ 369-2. Emergency declared.
For the reason enumerated in § 369-1 hereof, it is hereby declared that an
emergency exists in the Flood Plain District.
§ 369-3. Construction of private water and sewer systems.
[Amended 11-21-1960 by Ord. No. 60-3]
For and during the existence of the emergency in the Flood Plain District,
no well, cistern or other private water supply shall be dug, constructed,
installed, enlarged or extended within said District, and no septic tank,
cesspool, leeching field or private sewage disposal system shall be
constructed, installed, enlarged or extended within said District unless
every part thereof which is not watertight shall be located above elevation
fifty-six and five-tenths (56.5) feet above mean sea level, and the area of the
property is, in the judgment of the Board of Health, adequate for the proper
subsurface disposal of wastes. Nothing herein shall be deemed or construed
to prevent the repair, maintenance or improvement of any water supply or
sewage disposal facilities lawfully in existence as of the effective date of this
chapter.
§ 369-4. Appeals.
Appeals for exceptions to the provisions of § 369-3 hereof shall be
entertained by the Board of Health, but may be granted only upon
demonstration by credible evidence of exceptional and unique
circumstances and conditions, and upon affirmative proof that the property
for which such exception is sought is not subject to the general flooding
conditions described in § 369-1 hereof.
D. By reason of its depressed topography and flat contours, the area of the
Borough of Hillsdale that is most subject to flooding is that portion of
the Borough of Hillsdale shown as the shaded area on the map entitled
"Flood Plain District, Borough of Hillsdale, Bergen County, New Jersey,"
hereto annexed and hereby made part of this chapter. Said area is
hereby designated as the Flood Plain District.
E. Within the Flood Plain District there are situate a number of dwelling
houses, many of which have over the course of years been converted
from summer homes into year-round residences. The Flood Plain
District is without a public water supply system and without a public
sanitary sewer system, and, as a result, all of said dwelling houses are
dependent for their water supply upon private wells and for their
sewage disposal upon septic tanks, cesspools, leeching fields and
private sewage disposal systems.
F. Any increase in number of private wells and private sewage disposal
systems within the Flood Plain District will directly and substantially
contribute toward the pollution of the sources of public and private
water supply hereinbefore mentioned.
§ 369-1 HILLSDALE CODE § 369-5
369:722
§ 369-5. Violations and penalties.236
Any person violating any provision of this chapter, upon conviction thereof,
shall pay a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.), in the discretion of the Magistrate.
Appendix
Chapter A374
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
236. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 323, General Provisions,
Board of Health, Art. II.
§ 369-5 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § 369-5
A374:723

ARTICLE I
Cablevision of N.J., Inc.
[Adopted 12-1-1998 by Ord. No. 98-24237]
§ A374-1. Franchise granted.
The Borough of Hillsdale hereby grants to Cablevision of N.J., Inc., its
nonexclusive consent to place in, upon, along, across, above, over and under
the highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, public underground conduits,
manholes and other television conductors and fixtures necessary for the
maintenance and operation in the Borough of Hillsdale of a cable television
system and cable communications systems. Construction, pursuant to said
consent, is conditioned upon prior approval of the Board of Public Utilities.
§ A374-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Such meaning
or definition of terms is supplemental to those definitions of the Federal
Communications Commission, FCC Rules and Regulations, 47 CFR
Subsection 76.1, et seq., and the Cable Communications Policy Act, 47
U.S.C. 521 et seq., as amended, and the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A.
48:5A-1 et seq., and shall in no way be construed to broaden, alter or
conflict with the federal or state definitions:
ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT — Chapter 186 of the General Laws of
New Jersey, 1972, and subsequent amendments thereto; Section 48:5A-1 et
seq.
BOARD — The Board of Public Utilities.
COMPANY — Each grantee of rights under this ordinance and is known as
"Cablevision of N.J." Said term shall be applicable jointly, severally or in the
alternative as the context may require.
§ A374-3. Statement of fact.
A public hearing concerning the consent herein granted to the company was
held after proper public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of the
Act. Said hearing having been held as above stated and said hearing having
been fully open to the public, and the municipality having received at said
hearing all comments regarding the qualifications of the company to receive
this consent, the Borough of Hillsdale hereby finds the company possesses
the necessary legal, technical, financial and other qualifications and that
the company's operating and construction arrangements are adequate and
feasible.
237. Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Ch. A374, Cable Television
Franchise, adopted 5-9-1989 by Ord. No. 89-11, as amended.
§ A374-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A374-4
A374:725
§ A374-4. Duration of new franchise.
The consent herein granted shall expire 10 years from the date of the
expiration of the prior certificate of approval as issued by the Board of
Public Utilities.
§ A374-5. Expiration and subsequent renewal.
If Cablevision of N.J. seeks a successive consent it shall, prior to the
expiration of this consent, apply for a municipal consent and Certificate
of Approval in accordance with the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-11
and 48:5A-16 and applicable state and federal rules and regulations. The
company shall also petition the Board for a certificate of approval
authorizing continued operation during the period following expiration of
the consent granted herein, and until such time that a decision is made by
the municipal governing body relative to the renewal of said consent. Such
petition shall be filed at least 60 days prior to the expiration of the initial
ten-year consent.
§ A374-6. Payment of franchise fee.
The company shall on or before the 25th day of January of each year pay
to the Chief Fiscal Officer of the municipality a sum equal to 2% of the
gross from all recurring changes in the nature of subscription fees paid
by subscribers to its cable television reception service in the municipality,
which change is hereby imposed as a yearly franchise revenue fund,
pursuant to the Act.
§ A374-7. Construction timetables.
The company shall be required to complete any proposed construction
within the service area described in the application. The timetable as
presented in the application incorporated herein has been determined to be
reasonable by the Borough of Hillsdale.
§ A374-8. Extension of service.
Cablevision's system in the Borough is a residential full build. Cablevision
shall serve all residents of the Borough located in residentially zoned areas
without application of a line extension policy, though Cablevision's rate
tariffs for standard and nonstandard residential installations as set forth in
its application for franchise shall continue to apply. If a request for service
is made by a resident living in a nonresidentially zoned area, Cablevision
shall apply OCT's line extension policy at 20 homes per mile.
§ A374-9. Construction requirements.
A. Restoration. In the event that the company or its agents shall disturb
any pavement, street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways or other surfaces
in the natural topography, the company shall at its sole expense restore
§ A374-4 HILLSDALE CODE § A374-9
A374:726
§ A374-10. Territory.
The consent granted herein to the company shall apply to the entirety of the
Borough of Hillsdale and any property hereafter annexed thereto.
§ A374-11. Local office.
During the term of this franchise, and any renewal thereof, the company
shall maintain a local business office or agent for the purpose of receiving,
investigating and resolving all complaints regarding the quality of service,
equipment malfunctions and similar matters. Such local business office
shall be open during normal business hours, and in no event less than 9:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
§ A374-12. Municipal complaint officer.
§ A374-13. Performance bonds.
and replace such places or things so disturbed in as good condition as
existed prior to the commencement of said work.
B. Relocation. If at any time during the period of this consent, the Borough
of Hillsdale shall alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other
way or place, the company, upon reasonable notice by the Borough of
Hillsdale, shall remove, relay and relocate its equipment at the expense
of the company.
C. The company shall temporarily move or remove appropriate parts of its
facilities to allow moving of buildings, machinery or in other similar
circumstances. The expense shall be borne by the party requesting such
action except when requested by the Borough of Hillsdale, in which
case the company shall bear the cost.
D. Removal or trimming of trees. During the exercise of its rights and
privileges under this franchise, the company shall have the authority to
trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks and public
places of the Borough of Hillsdale; and keep branches of such trees
from coming in contact with the wires and cable of the company. Such
trimming shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper
clearance for the company's facilities.
A. The Borough Clerk is hereby designated as the complaint officer for the
Borough of Hillsdale pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26, Subdivision a.
B. All complaints shall be received and processed in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.5.
A. During the life of the franchise, the company shall give a corporate
surety bond to the Borough of Hillsdale, which bond shall be in the
amount of $25,000.
§ A374-9 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A374-13
A374:727
§ A374-14. Establishing rate structure for cable television reception
services.
The Borough of Hillsdale, having determined that the rates proposed in the
application for cable television reception service are reasonable, approves
them as presented, subject to review and regulation by the Board of Public
Utilities, if permitted by law.
§ A374-15. Basic service.
The basic service includes those channels which the company is required to
carry by FCC rules and any channel which the company carries without a
separate or additional charge.
§ A374-16. Local access and origination cablecasting.
§ A374-17. Free services.
B. Such bond shall be to ensure the faithful performance of all
undertakings of the company as represented in its application for
municipal consent incorporated herein.
A. The cable operator shall provide access time to noncommercial public,
governmental and educational entities to the extent such access was
promised to the Borough of Hillsdale in the municipal consent
application.
B. In addition, the company will provide a public access channel for the
cablecasting of noncommercial, public, educational and governmental
access programming. When not utilized locally, the cable operator will
program the channel with system-wide programs of a similar nature.
Further, the cable operator will provide publicity of local programs. Use
of the channel is free of charge to franchise residents.
A. The company will provide one outlet of free basic cable service to
municipal buildings, including the Borough Hall, firehouse, DPW and
public library. Additional outlets shall be made available at the
company's cost of labor and materials.
B. The company will provide one outlet of free basic cable service to all
schools in the Borough. Additional outlets shall be made available at the
company's cost of labor and materials.
C. The company will provide a public access studio for the use of franchise
residents. Use of the studio is free of charge, on a first-come, firstserved
basis. In addition to a studio facility, the company will provide a
field camera and editing facilities for public access use. The company
will provide television production training courses free of charge to
franchise residents.
D. The cable operator will provide closed-circuit video-audio lines between
any schools or public buildings on a cost-plus-materials basis.
§ A374-13 HILLSDALE CODE § A374-17
A374:728
§ A374-18. Surcharges.
The cable operator agrees not to seek surcharges for any of the local access,
free services or similar matters included in this agreement or in other
related agreements.
§ A374-19. Interconnecting.
§ A374-20. Equipment and personnel.
The Borough of Hillsdale finds that the equipment and/or personnel be
provided by the company for public, educational or governmental use as
provided in the application for municipal consent is reasonable. The
company shall provide a studio for public access programming within a
radius of 10 miles of the municipal building of the Borough of Hillsdale.
§ A374-21. Emergency uses.
The company shall be required to have the capability at the head end to
override the audio portion of the system in order to permit the broadcasting
of emergency messages by the Borough of Hillsdale. The company shall in
no way be held liable for any injury suffered by the Borough of Hillsdale or
any other person, during an emergency, if for any reason the municipality
is unable to make full use of the cable television system as contemplated
herein. The Borough of Hillsdale shall also establish reasonable procedures
for such uses.
§ A374-22. Liability insurance.
The company agrees to maintain and keep in full force and effect at its
sole expense at all times during the term of this consent sufficient liability
insurance naming the Borough of Hillsdale as an insured and insuring
against loss by any such claim, suit, judgment, execution or demand in the
minimum amounts of $1,000,000 for bodily injury or death to one person
and $3,000,000 for property damage resulting from any one accident. The
company shall file with the Borough Clerk proper evidence of such coverage
and shall notify the Borough of Hillsdale of any changes in coverage,
cancellation or nonrenewal. The company shall not cancel or change
coverage without first giving the Borough of Hillsdale 10 days' advance
notice.
E. The cable operator will pay $1 per subscriber per year to be used by the
Borough for production materials.
A. The Borough of Hillsdale has determined that it is necessary and
feasible for it to contract with the company for providing
interconnecting services.
B. The company shall apply for Board of Public Utilities approval of the
terms and conditions of such contract, if applicable.
§ A374-17 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A374-23
A374:729
§ A374-23. Incorporation of application.
All of the commitments and statements contained in the application and any
amendment thereto submitted in writing to the Borough by the company,
except as modified herein, are binding upon the company as terms and
conditions of this consent. The application and any other relevant writings
submitted by the company shall be annexed hereto and made a part hereof
by reference thereto to the extent that they do not conflict with state or
federal law.
§ A374-24. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by an any court
of federal or state agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding
shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
§ A374-25. Consistency with future federal and state rules,
regulations and orders.
It is understood that, should any state or federal agency or body modify,
change or alter any of its provisions with respect to cable television
generally, such modifications, changes or alterations shall be incorporated
into this consent consistent with the applicable dates specified in the
change.
§ A374-26. Repealer.
All ordinances and resolutions inconsistent with the provisions of this
ordinance are hereby repealed as to such inconsistencies.
§ A374-27. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon publication of notice of final passage
and approval thereof as required by law.
§ A374-23 HILLSDALE CODE § A374-27
A374:730
ARTICLE II
Cablevision of Oakland, Inc.
[Adopted 12-1-1998 by Ord. No. 98-25]
§ A374-28. Franchise granted.
The Borough of Hillsdale hereby grants to Cablevision of Oakland, Inc.,
its nonexclusive consent to place in, upon, along, across, above, over, and
under the highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, public underground
conduits, manholes and other television conductors and fixtures necessary
for the maintenance and operation in the Borough of Hillsdale of a cable
television system and cable communications systems. Construct on,
pursuant to said consent, is conditioned upon prior approval of the Board of
Public Utilities.
§ A374-29. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Such meaning
or definition of terms is supplemental to those definitions of the Federal
Communications Commission, F.C.C. Rules and Regulations, 47 CFR
Subsection 76.1 et seq., and the Cable Communications Policy Act, 47 USC
521 et seq.; as amended, and the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et
seq., and shall in no way be construed to broaden, alter or conflict with the
federal or state definitions:
ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT — Chapter 186 of the General Laws of
New Jersey, 1972, and subsequent amendments thereto; Section 48:5A-1 et
seq.
BOARD — The Board of Public Utilities.
COMPANY — Each grantee of rights under this ordinance and is known as
Cablevision of Oakland, Inc. Said term shall be applicable jointly, severally
or in the alternative as the context may require.
§ A374-30. Statement of fact.
A public hearing concerning the consent herein granted to the company
was held after proper public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions
of the Act. Said hearing having been held as above stated and said hearing
having been fully open to the public, and the municipality having received
at said hearing all comments regarding the qualifications of the Company
to receive this consent, the Borough of Hillsdale hereby finds the Company
possesses the necessary legal, technical, financial and other qualifications
and that the company's operating and construction arrangements are
adequate and feasible.
§ A374-28 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A374-31
A374:731
§ A374-31. Duration of new franchise.
The consent herein granted shall expire 10 years from the date of the
expiration of the prior certificate of approval as issued by the Board of
Public Utilities.
§ A374-32. Expiration and subsequent renewal.
If Cablevision of Oakland, Inc., seeks a successive consent it shall, prior to
the expiration of this consent, apply for a municipal consent and Certificate
of Approval in accordance with the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-11
and 48:5A-16 and applicable state and federal rules and regulations. The
Company shall also petition the Board for a certificate of approval
authorizing continued operation during the period following expiration of
the consent granted herein, and until such time that a decision is made by
the municipal governing body relative to the renewal of said consent. Such
petition shall be filed at least 60 days prior to the expiration of the initial
ten-year consent.
§ A374-33. Payment of franchise fee.
The company shall on or before the 25th day of January of each year pay
to the Chief Fiscal Officer of the municipality a sum equal to 2% of the
gross from all recurring changes in the nature of subscription fees paid
by subscribers to its cable television reception service in the municipality,
which change is hereby imposed as a yearly franchise revenue fund,
pursuant to the Act.
§ A374-34. Construction timetables.
The company shall be required to complete any proposed construction
within the service area described in the application. The timetable as
presented in the application incorporated herein has been determined to be
reasonable by the Borough of Hillsdale.
§ A374-35. Extension of service.
Cablevision's system in the Borough is a residential full build. Cablevision
shall serve all residents of the Borough located in residentially zoned areas
without application of a line extension policy, though Cablevision's rate
tariffs for standard and nonstandard residential installations as set forth in
its application for franchise shall continue to apply. If a request for service
is made by a resident living in a nonresidentially zoned area, Cablevision
shall apply OCT's line extension policy at 20 homes per mile.
§ A374-36. Construction requirements.
A. Restoration. In the event that the company or its agents shall disturb
any pavement, street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways or other surfaces
in the natural topography, the company shall at its sole expense restore
§ A374-31 HILLSDALE CODE § A374-36
A374:732
§ A374-37. Territory.
The consent granted herein to the company shall apply to the entirety of the
Borough of Hillsdale and any property hereafter annexed thereto.
§ A374-38. Local office.
During the term of this franchise, and any renewal thereof, the company
shall maintain a local business office or agent for the purpose of receiving,
investigating and resolving all complaints regarding the quality of service,
equipment malfunctions and similar matters. Such local business office
shall be open during normal business hours, and in no event less than 9:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
§ A374-39. Municipal complaint officer.
§ A374-40. Performance bonds.
and replace such places or things so disturbed in as good condition as
existed prior to the commencement of said work.
B. Relocation. If at any time during the period of this consent the Borough
of Hillsdale shall alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other
way or place, the company, upon reasonable notice by the Borough of
Hillsdale, shall remove, relay and relocate its equipment at the expense
of the company.
C. The company shall temporarily move or remove appropriate parts of its
facilities to allow moving of buildings, machinery or in other similar
circumstances. The expense shall be borne by the party requesting such
action except when requested by the Borough of Hillsdale, in which
case the company shall bear the cost.
D. Removal or trimming of trees. During the exercise of its rights and
privileges under this franchise, the company shall have the authority to
trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks and public
places of the Borough of Hillsdale; and keep branches of such trees
from coming in contact with the wires and cable of the company. Such
trimming shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper
clearance for the company's facilities.
A. The Borough Clerk is hereby designated as the complaint officer for the
Borough of Hillsdale pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26, Subdivision a.
B. All complaints shall be received and processed in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.5.
A. During the life of the franchise, the company shall give a corporate
surety bond to the Borough of Hillsdale, which bond shall be in the
amount of $25,000.
§ A374-36 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A374-40
A374:733
§ A374-41. Establishing rate structure for cable television reception
services.
The Borough of Hillsdale, having determined that the rates proposed in the
application for cable television reception service are reasonable, approves
them as presented, subject to review and regulation by the Board of Public
Utilities, if permitted by law.
§ A374-42. Basic service.
The basic service includes those channels which the company is required to
carry by FCC rules and any channel which the company carries without a
separate or additional charge.
§ A374-43. Local access and origination cablecasting.
§ A374-44. Free services.
B. Such bond shall be to ensure the faithful performance of all
undertakings of the company as represented in its application for
municipal consent incorporated herein.
A. The cable operator shall provide access time to noncommercial public,
governmental and educational entities to the extent such access was
promised to the Borough of Hillsdale in the municipal consent
application.
B. In addition, the company will provide a public access channel for the
cablecasting of noncommercial, public, educational and governmental
access programming. When not utilized locally, the cable operator will
program the channel with system-wide programs of a similar nature.
Further, the cable operator will provide publicity of local programs. Use
of the channel is free of charge to franchise residents.
A. The company will provide one outlet of free basic cable service to
municipal buildings, including the Borough Hall, firehouse, DPW and
public library. Additional outlets shall be made available at the
company's cost of labor and materials.
B. The company will provide one outlet of free basic cable service to all
schools in the Borough. Additional outlets shall be made available at the
company's cost of labor and materials.
C. The company will provide a public access studio for the use of franchise
residents. Use of the studio is free of charge, on a first-come, firstserved
basis. In addition to a studio facility, the company will provide a
field camera and editing facilities for public access use. The company
will provide television production training courses free of charge to
franchise residents.
§ A374-40 HILLSDALE CODE § A374-45
A374:734
§ A374-45. Surcharges.
The cable operator agrees not to seek surcharges for any of the local access,
free services or similar matters included in this agreement or in other
related agreements.
§ A374-46. Interconnecting.
§ A374-47. Equipment and personnel.
The Borough of Hillsdale finds that the equipment and/or personnel to
be provided by the company for public, educational or governmental use
as provided in the application for municipal consent is reasonable. The
company shall provide a studio for public access programming within a
radius of 10 miles of the municipal building of the Borough of Hillsdale.
§ A374-48. Emergency uses.
The company shall be required to have the capability at the head end to
override the audio portion of the system in order to permit the broadcasting
of emergency messages by the Borough of Hillsdale. The company shall in
no way be held liable for any injury suffered by the Borough of Hillsdale or
any other person, during an emergency, if for any reason the municipality
is unable to make full use of the cable television system as contemplated
herein. The Borough of Hillsdale shall also establish reasonable procedures
for such uses.
§ A374-49. Liability insurance.
The company agrees to maintain and keep in full force and effect at its
sole expense at all times during the term of this consent sufficient liability
insurance naming the Borough of Hillsdale as an insured and insuring
against loss by any such claim, suit, judgment, execution or demand in the
minimum amounts of $1,000,000 for bodily injury or death to one person
and $3,000,000 for property damage resulting from any one accident. The
company shall file with the Borough Clerk proper evidence of such coverage
and shall notify the Borough of Hillsdale of any changes in coverage,
cancellation or nonrenewal. The company shall not cancel or change
coverage without first giving the Borough of Hillsdale 10 days' advance
notice.
A. The Borough of Hillsdale has determined that it is necessary and
feasible for it to contract with the company for providing
interconnecting services.
B. The company shall apply for Board of Public Utilities approval of the
terms and conditions of such contract, if applicable.
§ A374-45 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A374-50
A374:735
§ A374-50. Incorporation of application.
All of the commitments and statements contained in the application and any
amendment thereto submitted in writing to the Borough by the company,
except as modified herein, are binding upon the company as terms and
conditions of this consent. The application and any other relevant writings
submitted by the company shall be annexed hereto and made a part hereof
by reference thereto to the extent that they do not conflict with state or
federal law.
§ A374-51. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court
of federal or state agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding
shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
§ A374-52. Consistency with future federal and state rules,
regulations and orders.
It is understood that should any state or federal agency or body modify,
change or alter any of its provisions with respect to cable television
generally, such modifications, changes or alterations shall be incorporated
into this consent consistent with the applicable dates specified in the
change.
§ A374-53. Repealer.
All ordinances and resolutions inconsistent with the provisions of this
ordinance are hereby repealed as to such inconsistencies.
§ A374-54. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon publication of notice of final passage
and approval thereof as required by law.
§ A374-50 HILLSDALE CODE § A374-54
A374:736
Chapter A375
TELEPHONE COMPANY
§ A375-1. Franchise granted.238
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:17-10, N.J.S.A. 48:17-11, and
N.J.S.A. 48:17-12, permission and consent is hereby granted to Bell Atlantic
New Jersey Telephone Company (the "company"), its successors and
assigns, to install, operate, inspect, maintain, repair, replace and remove
its communications facilities and other transmission or process equipment,
including underground facilities, such as conduits, manholes, cables, wires
and all other facilities appurtenant thereto, and above-ground facilities,
such as cables, wires, antennas, poles, posts, supports, guys, pedestals,
cable termination and distribution cabinets over, under and across all of
the various public streets and ways, which include the roads, avenues,
rights-of-way, sidewalks, highways, bridges, waterways and other public
places and parts thereof, throughout their entire length, and to effect the
necessary street openings and lateral connections to curb poles, property
lines and other facilities in the Borough of Hillsdale (the "Borough") for said
company's local and through lines and other communications facilities in
connection with the transaction of its business. In the event that any public
street or way where the company has facilities is vacated by the Borough,
the Borough agrees to reserve unto said company the rights granted the
company by the present ordinance.
§ A375-2. Location of facilities.
All posts, pedestals, cabinets and other facilities shall located and placed
existing or proposed curblines within streets or rights-of-way shown on
official map(s) of the Borough; the poles and posts, however, shall be located
within eighteen (18) inches of the face of such curbline or as may otherwise
be mutually agreed by both parties or at the points or places now occupied
by the poles, posts, pedestals, cabinets or other facilities of the company,
its successors and assigns, and where there are no curblines, at other
convenient points or places in, upon, along, adjacent or across the public
streets and ways as may be mutually agreed upon between the parties.
§ A375-3. Burying of equipment.
The company may bury its local and through communications facilities such
as cables, conduit, manholes and associated equipment, fixtures, process
equipment and appurtenances within the right-of-way of the various public
streets and ways and at such locations as shall be mutually agreed upon by
the parties for said company's local and through lines and communications
facilities. Underground conduits and associated facilities, as
aforementioned, shall be placed at least eighteen (18) inches below the
surface of said public streets and ways and with the exception of lateral
238. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II.
§ A374-54 TELEPHONE COMPANY § A375-3
A375:737
branches to curb poles and property lines and other facilities, the same
shall generally not be constructed more than ten (10) feet from the curbline,
unless obstructions make it necessary to deviate from such course or unless
the parties mutually agree to another location. Manholes shall be located
at such points along the line of underground conduits as may be necessary
or convenient for placing, maintaining and operating the facilities, as
aforementioned, which the company may from time to time use in
connection with its underground conduit system and shall be so constructed
as to conform to the cross-sectional and longitudinal grade of the surface so
as not to interfere with the safety or convenience of persons or vehicles.
§ A375-4. New construction or relocation work; notice.
Before proceeding with any new construction or relocation work in an
area covered by this ordinance, the company shall give prior notice, in
writing, thereof to the Borough, through its designated representative,
of its intention to perform such work. The company shall obtain such
street opening or excavation permits as may be lawfully required by any
applicable ordinances regulating such openings or excavations. Any such
area affected by the company in constructing its facilities shall be restored
to as good condition as it was before the commencement of the work
thereon. No public streets or ways shall be encumbered for a period longer
than shall be reasonable to execute the work.
§ A375-5. Indemnification of Borough.
The company agrees to indemnify and save harmless the Borough from and
against all claims and liabilities resulting from any injury or damage to the
person or property of any person, firm or corporation caused by or arising
out of road conditions resulting from any negligent or faulty excavations,
installation or maintenance connected with the work or equipment of said
company and not attributable to the fault or negligence of the Borough,
except that if such injury or damage shall be caused by the joint or
concurring negligence or fault of the company and the Borough, the same
shall be borne by them to the extent of their respective fault or negligence.
§ A375-6. Changes in curbline; relocation of equipment.
Whenever a curbline shall be established on streets where one does not
now exist or where an established curbline shall be relocated in order
to widen an existing street or to extend an existing street or establish
a new street in conjunction with road construction/reconstruction being
performed by the Borough or its duly authorized representative or agent,
the company shall change the location of its above-ground facilities covered
by this ordinance in accordance with applicable law, so that the same
shall be back of and adjacent to the new curbline so long as the Borough
has acted in accordance with applicable law and with reasonable care in
establishing the new curbline and providing notice thereof. Where new
drainage facilities are proposed by the Borough in conjunction with road
§ A375-3 HILLSDALE CODE § A375-6
A375:738
construction/reconstruction projects, the company shall change the location
of its underground facilities covered by this ordinance.
§ A375-7. Joint use of poles.
Any company or corporation having legal authority to place its facilities in
the public streets and ways of the Borough may jointly use the company's
poles, posts, pedestals or other structures for all lawful purposes, provided
that the company consents to such use, on terms and conditions acceptable
to the company and not inconsistent with the provisions of the present
ordinance.
§ A375-8. Use of poles by Borough.
The company shall provide space, to the extent available, on its poles so
long as said poles are occupied by the company and space, to the extent
available, in its main conduits existing on the date of passage of this
ordinance, but not exceeding one (1) duct of standard size, for the sole
benefit of the Borough during the pendancy of this ordinance. Such space
shall be provided for the exclusive use of the Borough, which use shall be
limited to accommodating the wires or electrical conductors required for
one-way signal control in connection with municipal police patrol, fire alarm
signal control and traffic signal control systems only; but for no other uses
or purposes, either alone or in conjunction therewith; nor for circuits for
the supply of electrical energy for traffic or other signals; nor for wires,
conductors, cable or the equivalent which provide a means of transmitting
any signal to a private, commercial or residential location and which is
normally provided by a nongovernmental supplier; provided, further, that
no such use or attachment by the Borough shall interfere with the plant
or facilities of or the use thereof by the company. All costs or expenses
incurred by the company in connection therewith shall be paid by the
Borough. It shall be the obligation of the Borough to attach its wires to the
poles or place its electric conductors in the conduits or manholes of the
company, provided that before proceeding with said work, either by itself
or by a person, firm or corporation engaged to perform such work, the
Borough shall give the company thirty (30) days' prior notice, in writing. All
such work shall be performed under the supervision of said company. The
Borough will indemnify and save harmless the company from and against all
claims, liabilities or demands arising in any manner in connection with the
Borough's wires or facilities or their installation, maintenance, operation
or removal or the Borough's use or enjoyment of the company's plant or
facilities provided under this § A375-8.
§ A375-9. Rights of county and state.
If any or all of the said streets or ways are later taken over by the County
of Bergen or the State of New Jersey, such county or state shall have such
rights and privileges and be subject to the same terms, conditions and
limitations of use as apply herein to the Borough; provided, however, that
satisfactory prior arrangements as may be necessary are made with the
§ A375-6 TELEPHONE COMPANY § A375-9
A375:739
Borough and the company for the full protection of the respective interest
of each.
§ A375-10. Definitions.
The term "Borough" as used in this ordinance shall be held to apply to and
include any form of municipality or government into which the Borough or
any part thereof may at any time hereafter be changed, annexed or merged.
§ A375-11. Applicability.
The permission and consent hereby granted shall apply to and cover all
communications facilities of the company existing at any time and related
structures, process equipment and appurtenances heretofore or hereafter
erected, constructed, reconstructed, removed, located, relocated, replaced,
maintained, repaired or operated by the company, its predecessors,
successors or assigns within the Borough. This ordinance shall cancel and
supersede all prior consent ordinances between the Borough and the
company regarding the subject matter hereof.
§ A375-12. Expiration of franchise.
This ordinance shall continue in full force and effect for a period of fifty
(50) years from the date it becomes effective subject to the right of the
company to seek such changes herein as may be deemed necessary and
reasonable from time to time prior to the expiration of said period. The
company shall maintain its property within the Borough and shall comply
with applicable law for the provision of safe, adequate and proper service
within the Borough at just and reasonable rates. At and after expiration of
the term of this ordinance, the company shall safeguard the public interest
in continuous and uninterrupted service within the Borough.
§ A375-13. Severability.
In the event that any provision herein shall for any reason be illegal or
unenforceable under applicable law, such illegality or unenforceability shall
not affect any other provisions of this ordinance and this ordinance shall
be construed as if such illegal or unenforceable provisions had never been
contained herein.
§ A375-14. Payment of expenses.
The company shall pay the expenses incurred for advertising required in
connection with the passage of this ordinance, after the date of its first
reading, within thirty (30) days after the company has received a bill
for said advertising from the publisher. Following final passage of this
ordinance, the Borough Clerk shall provide the company with written notice
thereof by certified mail. As provided by applicable law, this ordinance shall
not become effective until acceptance thereof by the company and approval
thereof by the Board of Regulatory Commissioners.
§ A375-9 HILLSDALE CODE § A375-14
A375:740
Chapter A376
FIRE OFFICIAL AND FIRE DEPARTMENT STANDARD
OPERATING GUIDE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 29. Fire prevention — See Ch. 146.
§ A376-1. General procedures.
§ A376-2. Emergency call out procedure.
A. The Hillsdale Fire Prevention Bureau will continue to operate under the
supervision of the Code Compliance Official.
B. The Fire Official and staff are not emergency first responders, and when
serving in this official capacity shall not be considered same or
represent the Hillsdale Fire Department.
C. The Fire Official and staff shall work in harmony with all agencies of the
Borough of Hillsdale, the Hillsdale Fire Department and surrounding
jurisdictions to insure the safety of life and property of the citizens of
Hillsdale.
D. The Fire Official shall be provided by the Fire Department with a fire
pager which shall be worn whenever practical.
E. The Fire Official may respond to any fire.
F. If the Fire Official or any assistant fire officials are trained fire fighters
and wish to become members of the Hillsdale Fire Department, they
may do so subject to all the requirements for such membership and
participation.
G. All Fire Officials must be certified and trained in donning self-contained
breathing apparatus (SCBA) and have such apparatus available for use
at all times.
H. The Fire Official shall continue to receive run call slips from the Police
Department in order that the incidence of false alarms may be tracked.
I. Every agenda of the meetings of the Board of Fire Officers shall include
at the beginning of the meeting the following: "Report of the Fire
Official." At such time the Fire Official may address the Board, or any
written communication from the Fire Official shall be read at that time.
A. The Fire Official shall always post at the Police Station and Fire House a
schedule of assistant fire officials (who all shall be duly certified for the
position) and the order of emergency call out in the event assistance is
required by any agency or official of the Borough.
§ A375-14 FIRE OFFICIAL AND FIRE DEPARTMENT § A376-2
A376:741
§ A376-3. Interaction between Fire Official and incident
commander.
B. Emergency call out of the Fire Official by the Fire Department will be
determined by the Fire Chief or superior officer of the Hillsdale Fire
Department in charge of a fire (hereafter referred to as the incident
commander) when he or she determines that there is a need for the Fire
Official. The incident commander shall in all instances contact the
Police Department for a call out of the Fire Official.
C. Emergency call out of the Fire Official shall be done by the Police
Department as follows:
(1) During business hours, the call should be to the Code Compliance
office. If there is no response (or only a voice mail response), then a
metrocall page will be sent by the Police Department to the on-call
Fire Official as listed on the schedule for assignment by the Code
Compliance Official.
(2) During nonbusiness hours, the call shall be made by telephone first
to the Fire Official on duty. If he or she is not reached directly by
the Police Department (i.e., spoken to directly as opposed to
leaving messages), then a metrocall page will be sent by the Police
Department to the on-call Fire Official as listed on the schedule for
assignment by the Code Compliance Official.
(3) In the event that there is no confirmation within 15 minutes from
the Fire Code Official on-call Fire Official as listed on the schedule
for assignment by the Code Compliance Official that he or she will
contact the incident commander over Fire Com 3, then the Police
Department shall send a metrocall page to the next on-call Fire
Code Official as listed on the roster.
(4) In the event that no Hillsdale Fire Code Official is available, a
Westwood or Woodcliff Lake inspector shall be contacted by the
Police Department.
A. Upon contacting the incident commander by Fire Com 3, the Fire
Official and incident commander shall exchange information, and the
Fire Official shall make a determination as to whether he or she will
report to the scene. The Fire Official shall immediately notify the
incident commander whether he or she is going to the scene of the fire.
B. If the Fire Official is a member of the Hillsdale Fire Department and is
responding to the fire:
(1) Where practicable, he or she shall first report to the firehouse, ride
to the scene on fire apparatus and perform the fire suppression
duties assigned to him or her by the incident commander prior to
commencing the duties of the Fire Official.
§ A376-2 HILLSDALE CODE § A376-3
A376:742
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition Of Legislation.
The following is a chronological listing of legislation of the Borough of
Hillsdale adopted since the publication of the Code, indicating its inclusion
in the Code or the reason for its exclusion. [Enabling legislation which is
not general and permanent in nature is considered to be non-Code material
(NCM).] Information regarding legislation which is not included in the Code
nor on this list is available from the office of the Borough Clerk. The last
legislation reviewed for the original publication of the Code was Ord. No.
97-3, adopted 1-22-1997. A complete listing, including disposition, of all
legislation reviewed in conjunction with the original publication of the Code
is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
(2) If the Fire Official drives directly to the fire, he or she shall park out
of the way of the scene and obey fire lines and then perform the fire
suppression duties assigned to him or her by the incident
commander prior to commencing the duties of the Fire Official.
C. If the Fire Official is not a member of the Hillsdale Fire Department and
is responding to the fire, he or she shall park out of the way of the scene
and obey fire lines.
D. Regardless of whether the Fire Official is a member or is not a member
of the Hillsdale Fire Department:
(1) If the Fire Official is the first to arrive at a fire, he or she shall notify
responding fire units that he or she is at the scene on Fire Channel
3 and inform them of any observations of smoke, alarms, etc.
(2) The Fire Official may begin a fire investigation by talking to
persons who observed the fire but may not enter a structure or
direct fire site, in the capacity of Fire Official, until cleared to do so
by the incident commander. The Fire Official may, however, at any
time, request from the incident commander permission to start a
Fire Official investigation within a structure or within the direct fire
site.
§ A376-3 FIRE OFFICIAL AND FIRE DEPARTMENT § DL-1
A376:743
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
Ord. No. 94-1
(Board of
Health)
5-4-1994 Salaries NCM
Ord. No. 94-2
(Board of
Health)
Not adopted
Ord. No. 94-3
(Board of
Health)
11-1-1994 Tobacco sales Ch. 363
Ord. No. 95-1
(Board of
Health)
5-2-1995 Food handlers
course training
Ch. 339,
Art. II
Ord. No. 95-2
(Board of
Health)
4-4-1995 Salaries NCM
Ord. No. 95-3
(Board of
Health)
10-10-1995 Solid waste
management
Ch. 358
Ord. No. 96-1
(Board of
Health)
6-4-1996 Salaries NCM
Ord. No. 96-2
(Board of
Health)
11-12-1996 Food handlers
course training
Ch. 339,
Art. II
Ord. No. 97-4 3-11-1997 Salaries NCM
Ord. No. 97-5 4-8-1997 Salaries NCM
Ord. No. 97-6 4-8-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded
by Ord. No.
12-04
Ord. No. 97-1
(Board of
Health)
5-6-1997 Salaries NCM
Ord. No. 97-7 5-13-1997 Salaries NCM
Ord. No. 97-8 5-13-1997 Adoption of Code
by Borough Council
Ch. 1, Art. II
Ord. No. 97-9 5-13-1997 Fees amendment Ch. 138
(See Ch. 1,
Art. III)
§ DL-1 HILLSDALE CODE § DL-1
A376:744
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
Ord. No.
97-10
5-13-1997 Library amendment Ch. 184
(See Ch. 1,
Art. III)
Ord. No.
97-11
5-13-1997 Penalties
amendment
Ch. 226
(See Ch. 1,
Art. III)
Ord. No.
97-12
5-13-1997 Fees amendment Ch. 335
(See Ch. 1,
Art. III)
Ord. No. 97-2
(Board of
Health)
6-3-1997 Adoption of Code
by Board of Health
Ch. 323,
Art. II
Ord. No.
97-13
7-8-1997 Public access to
records
Ch. 230,
Art. I
Ord. No.
97-14
7-2-1997 Zoning amendment Ch. 310
Ord. No.
97-15
7-8-1997 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
97-16
8-12-1997 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
97-17
Tabled
Ord. No.
97-18
Tabled
Ord. No.
97-19
9-9-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded
by Ord. No.
12-04
Ord. No.
97-20
11-12-1997 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
97-21
11-12-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded
by Ord. No.
12-04
Ord. No. 98-1 3-10-1998 Court, Municipal
amendment
Ch. 17
Ord. No. 98-2 3-10-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded
by Ord. No.
12-04
§ DL-1 FIRE OFFICIAL AND FIRE DEPARTMENT § DL-1
A376:745
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
Ord. No. 98-3 4-14-1998 Fees amendment;
solicitors,
distributors and
canvassers
amendment;
penalties
amendment;
grading,
construction,
paving and
repairing
amendment; land
use amendment
Chs. 138;
224, Art. II;
226; 260,
Art. I; 310
Ord. No. 98-4 4-14-1998 Land use
amendment
Ch. 310
Ord. No. 98-5 4-14-1998 Salaries NCM
Ord. No. 98-6 4-14-1998 Swimming Pool
Commission
amendment; fees
amendment
Chs. 71; 138
Ord. No. 98-7 4-14-1998 Salaries NCM
Ord. No. 98-8 6-9-1998 Salaries NCM
Ord. No. 98-9 6-9-1998 Tobacco products:
use by minors
Ch. 274,
Art. I
Ord. No.
98-10
6-9-1998 Property
maintenance:
residential property
amendment
Ch. 228,
Art. II
Ord. No.
98-11
7-14-1998 Land use
amendment
Ch. 310
Ord. No.
98-12
7-14-1998 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
98-13
8-11-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded
by Ord. No.
12-04
Ord. No.
98-14
8-11-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded
by Ord. No.
12-04
Ord. No.
98-15
8-11-1998 Official flag Ch. 32
§ DL-1 HILLSDALE CODE § DL-1
A376:746
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
Ord. No.
98-16
9-8-1998 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
98-17
10-13-1998 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
98-18
10-13-1998 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
98-19
10-13-1998 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
98-20
12-8-1998 Idling of vehicles Ch. 294
Ord. No.
98-21
12-8-1998 Fees amendment;
littering
amendment;
peddling and
soliciting
amendment; land
use amendment
Chs. 138;
196; 224;
310
Ord. No.
98-22
12-8-1998 Acquisition of
property
NCM
Ord. No.
98-23
12-8-1998 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
98-24
12-1-1998 Cable television
franchise:
Cablevision of N.J.,
Inc.
Ch. A374,
Art. I
Ord. No.
98-25
12-1-1998 Cable television
franchise:
Cablevision of
Oakland, Inc.
Ch. A374,
Art. II
Ord. No. 99-1 3-9-1999 Salaries NCM
Ord. No. 99-2 3-9-1999 Salaries NCM
Ord. No. 99-3 3-9-1999 Swimming Pool
Commission
amendment; fees
amendment
Chs. 71 and
138
Ord. No. 99-4 3-9-1999 Salaries NCM
Ord. No. 99-5 4-13-1999 Salaries NCM
Ord. No. 99-6 4-13-1999 Salaries NCM
Ord. No. 99-7 5-4-1999 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 FIRE OFFICIAL AND FIRE DEPARTMENT § DL-1
A376:747
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
Ord. No. 99-8 5-11-1999 Municipal lien
searches
Ch. 190
Ord. No. 99-9 5-11-1999 Assistant Code
Compliance Officer
Ch. 51, Art.
XII
Ord. No.
99-10
5-11-1999 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
99-11
5-11-1999 Fees amendment;
land use
amendment
Chs. 138
and 310
Ord. No.
99-12
6-8-1999 Fees amendment Ch. 138
Ord. No.
99-13
6-8-1999 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
99-14
5-18-1999 Agreement NCM
Ord. No.
99-15
6-8-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded
by Ord. No.
12-04
Ord. No.
99-16
Defeated
Ord. No.
99-17
8-17-1999 Length of service
awards program
Ch. 45
Ord. No.
99-18
9-7-1999 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
99-19
9-7-1999 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
99-20
12-14-1999 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
99-21
12-14-1999 Borough
Administrator
amendment
Ch. 51, Art.
V
Ord. No.
99-22
12-14-1999 Agreement NCM
Ord. No. 00-1 2-8-2000 Bond NCM
Ord. No. 00-2 2-8-2000 Condemnation of
land
NCM
Ord. No. 00-3 2-8-2000 Acquisition of land NCM
Ord. No. 00-4 2-8-2000 Acquisition of land NCM
§ DL-1 HILLSDALE CODE § DL-1
A376:748
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
Ord. No.
00-05
3-14-2000 Salaries NCM
Ord. No. 00-6 4-11-2000 Salaries NCM
Ord. No. 00-7 3-14-2000 Swimming Pool
Commission
amendment; Fees
amendment
Chs. 71 and
138
Ord. No. 00-8 4-11-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded
by Ord. No.
12-04
Ord. No. 00-9 4-11-2000 Police Department Ch. 63
Motion 5-2-2000 Fire Official and
Fire Department
Standard Operating
Guide
Ch. A376
Ord. No.
00-10
6-13-2000 Acquisition of
property
NCM
Ord. No.
00-11
8-8-2000 Fees amendment Ch. 138
Ord. No.
00-12
Tabled
Ord. No.
00-13
9-12-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded
by Ord. No.
12-04
Ord. No.
00-14
9-12-2000 Drunk driving free
school zones
Ch. 132
Ord. No.
00-15
10-10-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded
by Ord. No.
12-04
Ord. No.
00-16
11-13-2000 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
00-17
Tabled
Ord. No.
00-18
11-13-2000 Carpenter and
Helper positions
created
NCM
Ord. No.
00-19
11-13-2000 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 FIRE OFFICIAL AND FIRE DEPARTMENT § DL-1
A376:749
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
Ord. No.
01-01
3-6-2001 Swimming Pool
Commission
amendment; fees
amendment
Chs. 71; 138
Ord. No.
01-02
3-6-2001 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
01-03
3-6-2001 Fees amendment;
fire prevention:
enforcement of
Uniform Code
amendment
Chs. 138;
146, Art. I
Ord. No.
01-04
3-6-2001 Parks and
recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 220
Ord. No.
01-05
4-3-2001 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
01-06
4-3-2001 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
01-07
4-3-2001 Summer camp fees NCM
Ord. No.
01-08
4-3-2001 Public defender
position created
NCM (see
Ch. 51, Art.
III)
Ord. No.
01-09
4-3-2001 Court administrator
position created
NCM
Ord. No.
01-10
5-1-2001 Acquisition of
property
NCM
Ord. No.
01-11
5-1-2001 Street vacation NCM
Ord. No.
01-12
5-1-2001 Defense and
indemnification
amendment
Ch. 21
Ord. No.
01-13
12-4-2001 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
01-14
7-10-2001 Hazardous
materials
Ch. 171
Ord. No.
01-15
7-10-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded
by Ord. No.
12-04
§ DL-1 HILLSDALE CODE § DL-1
A376:750
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
Ord. No.
01-16
7-10-2001 Acquisition of
property
NCM
Ord. No.
01-17
9-4-2001 Acquisition of
property
NCM
Ord. No.
01-18
9-4-2001 Acquisition of
property
NCM
Ord. No.
01-19
10-2-2001 Fees amendment;
parades and street
meetings
amendment
Chs. 138;
216
Ord. No.
01-20
Defeated
Ord. No.
01-21
12-4-2001 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 88
Ord. No.
01-22
12-4-2001 Assistant finance
manager position
created
NCM
Ord. No.
02-01
3-12-2002 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
02-02
3-12-2002 Swimming Pool
Commission
amendment; fees
amendment
Ch. 71, Ch.
138
Ord. No.
02-03
3-12-2002 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
02-04
3-12-2002 Summer camp fees NCM
Ord. No.
02-05
4-9-2002 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
02-06
3-12-2002 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
02-07
5-14-2002 Penalties
amendment; streets
and sidewalks:
grading,
construction,
paving and
repairing
amendment
Ch. 226; Ch.
260, Art. I
Ord. No.
02-08
7-16-2002 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 FIRE OFFICIAL AND FIRE DEPARTMENT § DL-1
A376:751
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
Ord. No.
02-09
8-13-2002 Land use
amendment
Ch. 310
Ord. No.
02-10
Tabled
Ord. No.
02-11
9-10-2002 Length of service
awards program
amendment
Ch. 45
Ord. No.
02-12
10-8-2002 Land use
amendment
Ch. 310
Ord. No.
02-13
10-8-2002 Parking lots:
nonprofit use of
Municipal West
Parking Lot
Ch. 218,
Art. I
Ord. No.
03-01
2-11-2003 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
03-02
2-11-2003 Swimming Pool
Commission
amendment; fees
amendment
Ch. 71; Ch.
138
Ord. No.
03-03
3-11-2003 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
03-04
Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
03-05
Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
03-06
3-11-2003 Unfit buildings Ch. 116
Ord. No.
03-07
4-8-2003 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
03-08
4-8-2003 Director of Public
Health Nursing
Ch. 51, Art.
XIII
Ord. No.
03-09
4-15-2003 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
03-10
5-13-2003 Enforcement of
Uniform Code
amendment;
vehicles and traffic
amendment
Chs. 146,
Art. I; 292
Ord. No.
03-11
Tabled
§ DL-1 HILLSDALE CODE § DL-1
A376:752
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
Ord. No.
03-12
6-10-2003 Police Department
graphic table of
organization
amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
03-13
7-8-2003 Mobile telephones Ch. 204
Ord. No.
03-14
7-8-2003 Board of Health
fees amendment
Ch. 335
Ord. No.
03-15
12-9-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded
by Ord. No.
12-04
Ord. No.
04-01
2-10-2004 Personnel practices Ch. 59
Ord. No.
04-02
2-10-2004 Defense and
indemnification
Ch. 21
Ord. No.
04-02 (Board
of Health)
3-2-2004 Board of Health
fees amendment
Ch. 335
Ord. No.
04-03
2-10-2004 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 63
Ord. No.
04-04
Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
04-05
2-10-2004 Swimming Pool
Commission
amendment; fees
amendment
Ch. 71; Ch.
138
Ord. No.
04-06
Summer camp and
recreation program
fees
NCM
Ord. No.
04-07
Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
04-08
Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
04-09
2-10-2004 Community
Activities Director
Ch. 51, Art.
XIV
Ord. No.
04-10
4-13-2004 Land use
amendment
Ch. 310
Ord. No.
04-11
Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded
by Ord. No.
12-04
§ DL-1 FIRE OFFICIAL AND FIRE DEPARTMENT § DL-1
A376:753
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
Ord. No.
04-12
Bond NCM
Ord. No.
04-13
5-11-2004 Contribution
disclosure
statements
Ch. 305
Ord. No.
04-14
7-13-2004 Public professional
service contracts
Ch. 12
Ord. No.
04-15
Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
04-16
7-13-2004 Land use
amendment
Ch. 310
Ord. No.
04-17
8-3-2004 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
04-18
8-10-2004 Fees amendment Ch. 138
Ord. No.
04-19
10-5-2004 Acquisition of
property
NCM
Ord. No.
04-20
10-5-2004 Recreation program
fees
NCM
Ord. No.
04-03 (Board
of Health)
11-4-2004 Board of Health
fees amendment
Ch. 335
Ord. No.
04-21
12-14-2004 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
05-01
2-8-2005 Fees amendment Ch. 138
Ord. No.
05-02
2-8-2005 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
05-03
3-8-2005 Street vacation NCM
Ord. No.
05-04
3-15-2005 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
05-05
4-12-2005 Summer camp and
recreation program
fees
NCM
Ord. No.
05-06
4-12-2005 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
05-07
5-10-2005 Length of service
awards program
amendment
Ch. 45
§ DL-1 HILLSDALE CODE § DL-1
A376:754
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
Ord. No.
05-08
5-10-2005 Land use
amendment
Ch. 310
Ord. No.
05-09
5-10-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded
by Ord. No.
12-04
Ord. No.
05-10
6-6-2005 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
05-11
7-19-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded
by Ord. No.
12-04
Ord. No.
05-12
7-19-2005 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
05-13
8-16-2005 Property
maintenance
Repealed by
Ord. No.
10-06
Ord. No.
05-14
9-13-2005 Land use
amendment
Ch. 310
Ord. No.
05-15
9-13-2005 Flood hazard areas
amendment
Ch. 154
Ord. No.
05-16
10-11-2005 Fees amendment Ch. 138
Ord. No.
05-17
11-9-2005 Lifetime health
benefits
NCM
Ord. No.
05-18
11-9-2005 Lifetime health
benefits
NCM
Ord. No.
05-19
11-9-2005 Acquisition of land NCM
Ord. No.
05-20
12-13-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded
by Ord. No.
12-04
Ord. No.
05-21
12-13-2005 Acquisition of land NCM
Ord. No.
05-22
12-13-2005 Acquisition of land NCM
Ord. No.
05-23
12-13-2005 Summer camp and
recreation program
fees
NCM
§ DL-1 FIRE OFFICIAL AND FIRE DEPARTMENT § DL-1
A376:755
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
Ord. No.
06-01
2-7-2006 Swimming Pool
Commission
amendment; fees
amendment
Chs 71; 138
Ord. No.
06-02
Salaries
amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
06-03
Establish CAP Bank NCM
Ord. No.
06-04
Position of Borough
Electrician
repealed; position
of Manager of
Public Buildings
and Grounds
created
NCM
Ord. No.
06-05
4-11-2006 Summer camp and
recreation program
fees
NCM
Ord. No.
06-06
4-11-2006 Land use: site plan
design standards,
stormwater
management
requirements
Ch. 310,
Art. XXVI
Ord. No.
06-07
Salaries
amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
06-08
6-20-2006 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
06-09
6-20-2006 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
06-10
10-10-2006 Stormwater quality
control
amendments
Chs. 96;
196; 260;
365
Ord. No.
06-11
10-10-2006 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
06-12
Not yet
adopted
Ord. No.
06-13
Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded
by Ord. No.
12-04
Ord. No.
06-14
12-12-2006 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 HILLSDALE CODE § DL-1
A376:756
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
Ord. No.
06-15
Not yet
adopted
Ord. No.
06-16
12-12-2006 Parking fees
amendment
Chs. 138;
218, Art. II
Ord. No.
07-01
2-6-2007 Land use
amendment
Ch. 310
Ord. No.
07-02
2-6-2007 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
Ord. No.
07-03
2-13-2007 Fees amendment Ch. 138
Ord. No.
07-04
2-13-2007 Fees amendment Ch. 138
Ord. No.
07-05
2-13-2007 Land use
amendment
Ch. 310
(footnote
only)
Ord. No.
07-06
3-6-2007 Storm sewers: illicit
connections
Ch. 258,
Art. I
Ord. No.
07-07
3-6-2007 Storm sewers:
spilling, dumping or
disposal of
materials other
than stormwater
Ch. 258,
Art. II
Ord. No.
07-08
3-6-2007 Swimming Pool
Commission
amendment; fees
amendment
Chs. 71; 138
Ord. No.
07-09
3-6-2007 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
07-10
3-6-2007 Fees amendment Ch. 138
Ord. No.
07-11
Not adopted
Ord. No.
07-12
4-4-2007 Parking lots:
nonprofit use of
Municipal West
Parking Lot
amendment
Ch. 218,
Art. I
Ord. No.
07-13
4-4-2007 Penalties
amendment
Ch. 226
§ DL-1 FIRE OFFICIAL AND FIRE DEPARTMENT § DL-1
A376:757
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
Ord. No.
07-14
4-4-2007 Fees amendment Ch. 138
Ord. No.
07-15
4-4-2007 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
07-16
4-4-2007 Land use
amendment
Ch. 310
Ord. No.
07-17
4-10-2007 Fees amendment;
records: public
access amendment
Chs. 138;
230
Ord. No.
07-18
5-1-2007 2007 summer camp
and recreation
program fees
NCM
Ord. No.
07-19
5-8-2007 Fees amendment Ch. 138
Ord. No.
07-20
5-8-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded
by Ord. No.
12-04
Ord. No.
07-21
6-4-2007 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
07-22
7-3-2007 Acquisition of land NCM
Ord. No.
07-23
9-5-2007 Sale of land NCM
Ord. No.
07-24
9-5-2007 Fees amendment;
commercial and
movie filming
Chs. 138;
140
Ord. No.
07-25
9-5-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded
by Ord. No.
12-04
Ord. No.
07-26
11-5-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded
by Ord. No.
12-04
Ord. No.
07-27
11-5-2007 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
07-28
12-4-2007 Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 29
Ord. No.
08-01
2-12-2008 Swimming Pool
Commission
amendment; fees
amendment
Chs. 71; 138
§ DL-1 HILLSDALE CODE § DL-1
A376:758
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
Ord. No.
08-02
Tabled
Ord. No.
08-03
3-4-2008 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
08-04
3-4-2008 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
08-05
3-4-2008 Land use
amendment
Ch. 310
Ord. No.
08-06
3-18-2008 2008 summer camp
and recreation
program fees
NCM
Ord. No.
08-07
3-4-2008 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
Ord. No.
08-08
5-13-2008 Parks and
recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 220
Ord. No.
08-09
7-1-2008 Minimum and
maximum
compensation rates
NCM
Ord. No.
08-10
9-2-2008 Assistant Payroll
Manager
Ch. 51, Art.
XV
Ord. No.
08-11
9-2-2008 COAH Coordinator Ch. 51, Art.
XVI
Ord. No.
08-12
10-14-2008 Retirement:
Defined
Contribution
Retirement
Program
Ch. 68, Art.
I
Ord. No.
08-13
10-7-2008 Land use
amendment
Ch. 310
Ord. No.
08-14
10-7-2008 Fees amendment Ch. 138
Ord. No.
09-01
2-10-2009 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
09-02
3-3-2009 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
Ord. No.
09-03
3-3-2009 Swimming Pool
Commission
amendment; fees
amendment
Chs. 71; 138
§ DL-1 FIRE OFFICIAL AND FIRE DEPARTMENT § DL-1
A376:759
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
Ord. No.
09-04
5-5-2009 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
09-05
3-3-2009 2009 summer camp
and recreation
program fees
NCM
Ord. No.
09-06
3-3-2009 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
09-07
3-3-2009 Salaries
amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
09-08
5-5-2009 Public professional
service contracts
amendment
Ch. 12
Ord. No.
09-09
5-5-2009 Land use
amendment
Ch. 310
Ord. No.
09-10
5-5-2009 Land use
amendment
Ch. 310
Ord. No.
09-11
6-1-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded
by Ord. No.
12-04
Ord. No.
09-12
6-9-2009 Solid waste:
dumpsters and
refuse containers
Ch. 252,
Art. II
Ord. No.
09-13
6-9-2009 Storm sewers:
retrofitting of storm
drain inlets
Ch. 258,
Art. III
Ord. No.
10-01 (Board
of Health)
2-2-2010 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
10-01
3-2-2010 Swimming pool
commission
amendment; fees
amendment
Chs. 71, 138
Ord. No.
10-02
3-2-2010 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
10-03
3-2-2010 2010 summer camp
and recreation
program fees
NCM
Ord. No.
10-04
3-2-2010 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 HILLSDALE CODE § DL-1
A376:760
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
Ord. No.
10-05
4-28-2010 Vacation of
property
NCM
Ord. No.
10-06
4-6-2010 Property
maintenance
Ch. 228
Ord. No.
10-07
6-8-2010 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
Ord. No.
10-08
7-13-2010 Land use
amendment
Ch. 310
Ord. No.
10-09
7-13-2010 Sale of property NCM
Ord. No.
10-10
8-10-2010 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
10-11
9-7-2010 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
10-12
Land use
amendment
Not yet
adopted
Ord. No.
10-13
12-14-2010 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
10-14
1-2-2011 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
11-01
4-5-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded
by Ord. No.
12-04
Ord. No.
11-02
2-8-2011 2011 summer camp
and recreation
program fees
NCM
Ord. No.
11-03
2-8-2011 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
11-04
2-8-2011 Swimming Pool
Commission
amendment; fees
amendment
Chs. 71; 138
Ord. No.
11-05
2-8-2011 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
11-06
4-5-2011 Fees amendment Ch. 138
Ord. No.
11-07
4-5-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded
by Ord. No.
12-04
§ DL-1 FIRE OFFICIAL AND FIRE DEPARTMENT § DL-1
A376:761
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
Ord. No.
11-08
4-5-2011 Fees amendment Ch. 138
Ord. No.
11-09
5-3-2011 Officers and
employees: Public
Information Officer
amendment
Ch. 51, Art.
I
Ord. No.
11-10
5-3-2011 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
Ord. No.
11-11
5-3-2011 Criminal history
background checks
Ch. 126
Ord. No.
11-12
7-12-2011 Fees amendment Ch. 138
Ord. No.
11-13
8-9-2011 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
11-14
8-9-2011 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
11-15
10-4-2011 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
11-16
9-6-2011 Land use
amendment
Ch. 310
Ord. No.
11-17
10-4-2011 Land use
amendment
Ch. 310
Ord. No.
11-18
10-4-2011 Fees amendment Ch. 138
Ord. No.
11-19
10-4-2011 Public professional
service contracts
amendment;
contribution
disclosure
statements
amendment
Chs. 12; 305
Ord. No.
11-20
1-1-2012 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
12-01
Sale of property NCM
Ord. No.
12-02
3-6-2012 2012 summer camp
and recreation
program fees
NCM
§ DL-1 HILLSDALE CODE § DL-1
A376:762
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
Ord. No.
12-03
3-6-2012 Swimming Pool
Commission
amendment; fees
amendment
Chs. 71; 138
Ord. No.
12-04
3-6-2012 Vehicles and traffic Ch. 292
Ord. No.
12-05
4-3-2012 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
12-06
4-3-2012 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
12-07
4-10-2012 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
Ord. No.
12-08
Not adopted
Ord. No.
12-09
5-1-2012 Land use
amendment
Ch. 310
Ord. No.
12-10
5-1-2012 Land use
amendment
Ch. 310
Ord. No.
12-11
6-4-2012 Fees amendment;
outdoor cafes
amendment
Chs. 138;
212
Ord. No.
12-12
8-14-2012 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
12-13
12-11-2012 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
12-14
10-9-2012 Acquisition of
property
NCM
Ord. No.
12-15
10-9-2012 Acquisition of
property
NCM
Ord. No.
12-16
11-12-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 292
Ord. No.
12-17
12-11-2012 Acquisition of real
property
NCM
Ord. No.
12-18
12-4-2012 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
12-19
12-4-2012 2012 summer camp
and recreation fees
NCM
Ord. No.
13-01
3-5-2013 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 FIRE OFFICIAL AND FIRE DEPARTMENT § DL-1
A376:763
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
Ord. No.
13-02
3-5-2013 Swimming Pool
Commission
amendment; fees
amendment
Chs. 71; 138
Ord. No.
13-03
4-2-2013 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
13-04
4-2-2013 2013 summer camp
and recreation fees
NCM
Ord. No.
13-05
4-2-2013 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
13-06
4-2-2013 Disorderly conduct
repealer
Ch. 130,
reference
only
Ord. No.
13-07
4-9-2013 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
Ord. No.
13-08
7-9-2013 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
13-09
9-10-2013 Length of service
awards program
amendment
Ch. 45
Ord. No.
13-01 (Board
of Health)
9-10-2013 Fees amendment Ch. 335
Ord. No.
13-02 (Board
of Health)
9-10-2013 Fees amendment Ch. 335
Ord. No.
13-10
11-12-2013 Fees amendment Ch. 138
Ord. No.
13-11
10-8-2013 Fire Department
Bylaws amendment
See Ch. 29
Ord. No.
13-12
10-8-2013 Fees amendment Ch. 138
Ord. No.
13-13
11-12-2013 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
14-01
4-8-2014 Summer camp and
recreation program
fees
NCM
Ord. No.
14-02
4-8-2014 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 HILLSDALE CODE § DL-1
A376:764
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
Ord. No.
14-03
4-8-2014 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
14-04
4-8-2014 Swimming Pool
Commission
amendment; fees
amendment
Ch. 71; Ch.
138
Ord. No.
14-05
3-11-2014 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
14-06
4-8-2014 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
14-07
4-8-2014 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
Ord. No.
14-08
6-10-2014 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
14-09
6-10-2014 Hydraulic
fracturing
Ch. 175
Ord. No.
14-10
Tabled
Ord. No.
14-11
Not adopted
Ord. No.
14-12
8-12-2014 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
14-13
8-12-2014 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
14-14
9-9-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 292
Ord. No.
14-15
10-14-2014 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
14-16
11-12-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 292
Ord. No.
14-17
12-9-2014 Streets and
sidewalks: openings
and excavations
amendment
Ch. 260,
Art. II
Ord. No.
15-01 (Board
of Health)
12-2-2014 Fees amendment Ch. 335
Ord. No.
15-01
Tabled
§ DL-1 FIRE OFFICIAL AND FIRE DEPARTMENT § DL-1
A376:765
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
Ord. No.
15-02
2-10-2015 Fees amendment Ch. 138
Ord. No.
15-03
2-10-2015 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
15-04
2-10-2015 Summer camp and
recreation program
fees
NCM
Ord. No.
15-05
Not adopted
Ord. No.
15-06
2-10-2015 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
15-07
2-10-2015 Brush, grass and
weeds: bamboo
Ch. 106,
Art. I
Ord. No.
15-08
3-10-2015 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
15-09
3-10-2015 Swimming Pool
Commission
amendment; fees
amendment
Ch. 71; Ch.
138
Ord. No.
15-10
4-14-2015 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
Ord. No.
15-11
5-12-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 292
Ord. No.
15-12
6-9-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 292
Ord. No.
15-13
7-7-2015 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
15-14
7-7-2015 Licenses and
permits amendment
Ch. 188
Ord. No.
15-15
9-8-2015 Tobacco sales
amendment
Ch. 363
Ord. No.
15-16
8-11-2015 Fire prevention:
key boxes
amendment; fire
hydrants
Ch. 146,
Art. III; Ch.
146, Art. IV
Ord. No.
15-17
9-8-2015 Idling of vehicles
amendment
Ch. 294
Ord. No.
15-18
Tobacco sales
amendment
Not adopted
§ DL-1 HILLSDALE CODE § DL-1
A376:766
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
Ord. No.
15-19
11-10-2015 Payroll: direct
deposit
Ch. 57, Art.
I
Ord. No.
15-20
12-8-2015 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
16-01
2-9-2016 Swimming Pool
Commission
amendment; fees
amendment
Ch. 71; Ch.
138
Ord. No.
16-02
2-9-2016 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
16-03
3-1-2016 Property
maintenance
amendment
Ch. 228
Ord. No.
16-04
3-1-2016 Summer camp and
recreation program
fees
NCM
Ord. No.
16-05
3-1-2016 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
16-06
3-8-2016 Land use
amendment
Ch. 310
Ord. No.
16-07
4-5-2016 Officers and
employees:
Borough Clerk
amendment
Ch. 51, Art.
VI
Ord. No.
16-08
4-5-2016 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
Ord. No.
16-09
5-3-2016 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
16-10
6-8-2016 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
16-11
7-5-2016 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
16-12
9-6-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 292
Ord. No.
16-13
10-18-2016 Peddling and
soliciting
amendment
Ch. 224
Ord. No.
17-01
2-7-2017 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 FIRE OFFICIAL AND FIRE DEPARTMENT § DL-1
A376:767
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
Ord. No.
17-02
3-7-2017 Swimming Pool
Commission
amendment; fees
amendment
Ch. 71; Ch.
138
Ord. No.
17-03
3-7-2017 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
17-04
3-7-2017 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
17-05
3-7-2017 Summer camp and
recreation program
fees
NCM
Ord. No.
17-06
3-7-2017 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
17-07
4-17-2017 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
Ord. No.
17-08
5-2-2017 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
17-09
6-13-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 292
Ord. No.
17-10
7-12-2017 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 63
Ord. No.
17-11
Tabled
Ord. No.
17-12
7-12-2017 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 88
Ord. No.
17-13
Tabled
Ord. No.
17-14
Tabled
Ord. No.
17-15
Tabled
Ord. No.
17-16
9-5-2017 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
17-17
9-5-2017 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 63
Ord. No.
18-01
2-6-2018 Street vacation NCM
§ DL-1 HILLSDALE CODE § DL-1
A376:768
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
Ord. No.
18-02
2-6-2018 Swimming Pool
Commission
amendment; fees
amendment
Ch. 71; Ch.
138
Ord. No.
18-03
2-6-2018 Salaries NCM
18-04 4-3-18 Amends Recreation
Department,
Summer Camp fees,
Ch. 138, 138-29
Summer Camp and
Recreation Program
Fees
138 4-2-2019
(4/19)
18-05 4-3-18 Salaries, Special NCM 4-2-2019
(4/19)
18-06 9-4-18 Amends Ch. 264
Swimming Pools,
Private, 264-6
Swimming Pool
Removal Permit
264 4-2-2019
(4/19)
18-07 5-1-18 Budget and CAP
Bank, Special
NCM 4-2-2019
(4/19)
18-08 Salaries, Special NCM 4-2-2019
(4/19)
18-09 9-4-18 Amends Ch. 310
Land Use, 310-4
Definitions, 310-53
Schedule of Uses
and Requirements,
310-55 Regulations
Applicable to All
Districts (Sheds)
310 4-2-2019
(4/19)
18-10 6-12-18 Amends Ch. 310
Land Use, Adds
Article XXXIV
Development Fees
310-163—310-172
(Affordable Housing
Fees, Trust Fund)
310 4-2-2019
(4/19)
§ DL-1 FIRE OFFICIAL AND FIRE DEPARTMENT § DL-1
A376:769
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
18-11 6-12-18 Amends Ch. 310
Land Use, Deletes
and replaces in
entirety Article
XXXIII with
Affordable Housing
Regulations
310-137—310-162
310 4-2-2019
(4/19)
18-12 6-12-18 Amends Ch. 310
Land Use, 310-4
Definitions, 310-48
adds MU-1 Mixed-
Use 1, adds
310-53.1 Mixed-Use
1 District
(regulations),
310-58.1 Parking
Areas in Mixed Use
Districts, amends
310-59 Required
Off-Street Parking
Spaces, amends
310-113 Parking,
amends 310-65
Signs Permitted in
the Commercial and
Mixed-Use
Districts, amends
310-49 Zoning Map
for MU-1 District
310 4-2-2019
(4/19)
18-13 6-12-18 Amends Ch. 310
Land Use, 310-48
adds MU-2 Mixed-
Use 2, adds
310-53.2 Mixed-Use
2 District
(regulations),
amends 310-49
Zoning Map for
MU-2 District
310 4-2-2019
(4/19)
18-14 6-12-18 Bond, Special NCM 4-2-2019
(4/19)
18-15 6-12-18 Appropriation,
Special
NCM 4-2-2019
(4/19)
§ DL-1 HILLSDALE CODE § DL-1
A376:770
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
18-16 6-12-18 Amends Ch. 310
Land Use, Article
XXVII Performance
Guarantees, repeals
and replaces
310-119, 310-120,
310-120.1,
310-120.2,
310-120.3, 310-121,
310-121.1,
310-121.2, 310-122,
310-122.1,
310-122.2
310 4-2-2019
(4/19)
18-17 9-4-18 Amends Ch. 208
Noise, replaces
entire Chapter 208,
superseded by Ord.
No. 19-05
208 4-2-2019
(4/19)
18-18 12-4-18 Amends Ch. 310
Land Use, adds
310-22.1
Residential
Continuing
Certificate of
Inspection
310 4-2-2019
(4/19)
18-19 7-10-18 Land Donation,
Special
NCM 4-2-2019
(4/19)
18-20 9-4-18 Salaries, Special NCM 4-2-2019
(4/19)
18-21 12-11-18 Amends Ch. 310
Land Use, adds
310-55I, 15 Certain
Uses Relating to
Marijuana
Prohibited
(Prohibited Uses)
310 4-2-2019
(4/19)
18-22 12-4-18 Amends Ch. 51
Officers and
Employees, adds
Article XVII CCI
Inspector,
51-65—51-69
51 4-2-2019
(4/19)
§ DL-1 FIRE OFFICIAL AND FIRE DEPARTMENT § DL-1
A376:771
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
19-01 2-5-19 Amends Ch. 138
Fees, Swimming
Pool Commission
fees (Ch. 71)
138 4-2-2019
(4/19)
19-02 2-5-19 CAP Bank, Special NCM 4-2-2019
(4/19)
19-03 4-2-19 Salaries, Special NCM 4-2-2019
(4/19)
19-04 4-2-19 Amends Recreation
Department,
Summer Camp fees,
Ch. 138, 138-29
Summer Camp and
Recreation Program
Fees
138 4-2-2019
(4/19)
19-05 4-2-19 Amends Ch. 208
Noise Control,
replaces entire Ch.
208, 208-1—208-10
208 4-2-2019
(4/19)
19-06 4-2-19 Salaries, Special NCM 4-2-2019
(4/19)
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
19-07 5-14-2019 Bond NCM 27
19-08 5-14-2019 Salaries NCM 27
19-09 6-11-2019 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM 27
19-10 7-16-2019 Salaries NCM 27
19-11 7-16-2019 Flood Hazard
Areas Amendment
Ch. 154 27
19-12 Not Adopted
19-13 Not Adopted
19-14 8-6-2019 Police Department
Amendment
Ch. 63 27
19-15 9-3-2019 Salaries NCM 27
19-16 11-12-2019 Smoking Ch. 246 27
19-17 12-31-2019 Salaries NCM 27
19-18 12-31-2019 Salaries NCM 27
20-01 2-4-2020 NCM NCM 27
§ DL-1 HILLSDALE CODE § DL-1
A376:772
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
20-02 2-4-2020 Salaries NCM 27
20-03 2-4-2020 Police Department
Amendment
Ch. 63 27
20-04 3-3-2020 Swimming Pool
Commission
Amendment; Fees
Amendment
Ch. 71; Ch.
138
27
20-05 3-3-2020 Salaries NCM 27
20-06 4-14-2020 Exceed Budget;
Cap Bank
NCM 27
§ DL-1 FIRE OFFICIAL AND FIRE DEPARTMENT § DL-1
A376:773

LAND USE
310 Attachment 1
Schedule of Uses and Requirements
Borough of Hillsdale
[Amended 10-24-1978 by Ord. No. 78-22; 11-14-1980 by Ord. No. 80-20; 7-11-1989 by Ord. No. 89-18; 12-12-1989 by Ord. No. 89-24; 7-10-1990 by Ord. No. 90-10; 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-8;
8-13-2002 by Ord. No. 02-09; 10-8-2002 by Ord. No. 02-12; 4-13-2004 by Ord. No. 04-10; 5-10-2005 by Ord. No. 05-08; 9-13-2005 by Ord. No. 05-14; 2-6-2007 by Ord. No. 07-01; 4-22-2019]
SCHEDULE OF USES AND REQUIREMENTS
District R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 MU-1 MU-2 C-Commercial I-Industrial REC-Recreational
TC-Townhouse
Complex
SC-Senior Citizen
Housing
Principal Permitted
Use (For uses
permitted in all
districts, § 310-53)
1. One-family
dwellings
2. Public parks
and
playgrounds
1. One-family
dwellings
2. Public parks
and
playgrounds
1. One-family
dwellings
2. Public parks
and
playgrounds
1. One-family
dwellings
2. Public parks
and
playgrounds
1. Same as C
Commercial
except #5, 7, 8
2. Multifamily
housing 20 U/
AC above
ground floor
Same as
MU-1
1. Professional
offices.
2. Retail business and
personal service
establishments
such as but not
limited to: grocery
stores, drug stores,
hardware stores,
liquor stores,
barber and beauty
shops, tailor and
dry cleaning
pickup shops.
3. Offices, banks and
fiduciary
institutions.
4. Restaurants (except
drive-in and drivethrough
restaurants).
5. Lodge buildings or
meeting hall for
any fraternal
organization.
6. Medical and dental
clinics.
7. Commercial or
business schools.
8. Public parks and
playgrounds.
Light industrial use
which could not
cause injurious or
obnoxious noise,
vibration, smoke,
gas fumes, odors,
dust or other
objectionable
conditions.
a. Laboratories:
research,
experimental or
testing
b. Light, non-nuisance
manufacturing,
processing,
fabrication,
assemblage,
packaging and
warehousing of
products
c. Public utility
installations
1. One-family
dwellings
2. Public parks and
playgrounds
3. Recreational
activities of the
field or country
club type,
including
swimming,
bathing,
picnicking,
tennis, iceskating, banquets
and like events
1. Townhouse
buildings
2. Same as R-1
1. Same as R-2
2. Senior citizen
housing
Accessory Uses (See
§ 310-55H)
Private garage
Swimming pool
Storage
building
Tennis courts,
etc. (See § 310-
55H)
Same as R-1 Same as R-1 1. Same as R-1
2. Residential
professional
offices
§ 310-53.1B
Surface parking
Signs
Fences and walls
Outdoor dining
Same as
MU-1
1. Funeral homes
2. Nursing homes
3. Public and private
schools
Storage building Same as R-1 1. See § 310-51D
2. Same as R-1
Senior citizen
housing: community
rooms, lounges,
recreation rooms,
self-service laundry,
game rooms, public
kitchens, public
medical clinics,
offices, other use:
Same as R-2
310 Attachment 1:1 Publication, May 2020
HILLSDALE CODE

Zone Standards 
District R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 MU-1 MU-2 C-C I-I REC
Maximum building height
35 feet - 33 feet 40 feet, 3-story - 30 feet 30 feet - 30 feet 48 feet
Building Coverage (maximum %) 20 20 25 25 65 70 80 50 20 20  15
Min. Lot Area 22,500 15,000 10,000 7,500 87,120 30,000 7,500 20,000 15,000 15,000 -
Lot Frontage and Width (minimum feet) 150 100 100 75 N/A 100 50 100 100 100 200 square
Lot Depth (minimum feet) 150 150 100 100 N/A N/A N/A N/A 150 150 feet 200 square feet
Front Yard (minimum depth) 60 feet 50 feet 30 feet 10-15 feet 5-15 feet 5 feet 25 feet - - 50 feet 
Side Yard (minimum depth) 25 feet 10 - - 25 feet 5 feet None 30 feet - - 35 feet 
Rear Yard (minimum depth) 50 feet - 25 feet - 25 feet 25 feet 10 feet 10 feet - - 35 feet
Impervious Coverage 30% 30% 30% 30% 80% 90% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
Floor Area Ratio 22% 27% 30% 35% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
Minimum Total Floor Area
Requirements
1-story - 2,500
square feet
2-story - 1,800
square feet
Ground floor -
900 square feet
Second floor
and any
additional floor
area as defined
in this Chapter
310
1-story - 1,800
square feet
2-story - 1,200
square feet
Ground floor -
600 square feet
second floor
1-story - 1,500
square feet
2-story - 1,000
square feet
Ground floor -
500 square feet
second floor
1-story - 1,200
square feet
2-story - 800
square feet
Ground floor -
400 square feet
second floor
1-bedroom - 700
square feet
2-bedroom - 850
square feet
3-bedroom - 1,100
square feet
Same as
MU-1
N/A N/A Same as R-2 1. Same as R-2 for
single-family
dwellings
2. N/A for
townhouse
complex
Senior citizen
housing: N/A
Other use: Same as
R-2
310 Attachment 1:3 Publication, May 2020