
Hammonton, NJ Code of Ordinances


CODE OF THE TOWN OF HAMMONTON



Current through
Ordinance 024-2018, passed 6-25-2018



 







 



Town of Hammonton



100 Central Avenue



Hammonton, NJ 08037



www.townofhammonton.org



 



Phone: 609-567-4300



Email: townclerk@townofhammonton.org



CHAPTER 1.
GENERAL PROVISIONS



[HISTORY; Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton as
indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]



ARTICLE I.
Adoption of Code by Mayor and Common Council



   § 1-1.   Adoption of Code.



   § 1-2.   Code supersedes prior ordinances.



   § 1-3.   When effective.



   § 1-4.   Copy of Code on file.



   § 1-5.   Amendments to Code.



   § 1-6.   Publication; filing.



   § 1-7.   Code book to be kept up-to-date.



   § 1-8.   Sale of Code book.



   § 1-9.   Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.



   § 1-10.   Severability of Code provisions.



   § 1-11.   Severability of ordinance provisions.



   § 1-12.   Repealer.



   § 1-13.   Ordinances saved from repeal.



   § 1-14.   Changes in previously adopted ordinances.



Article I.
Adoption of Code by Mayor and Common Council



[Adopted 7-23-2001 by Ord. No. 26-2001]



§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.



   Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Town of Hammonton
of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Town Mayor and Common
Council of the Town of Hammonton, as revised, codified and consolidated into
chapters and sections by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of
Chapters 1 through 275, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved,
adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Town of Hammonton,"
hereinafter known and referred to as the "Code."



§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.



   This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except such
ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or continued in
force.



§ 1-3. When effective.



   This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and
publication according to law.



§ 1-4. Copy of Code on file.



   A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of
the Town Clerk/Administrator and shall remain there for use and examination
by the public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this
ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the
Clerk/Administrator of the Town of Hammonton by impressing thereon the Seal
of the Town, as provided by law, and such certified copy shall remain on file
in the office of the Clerk/Administrator of the Town, to be made available to
persons desiring to examine the same during all times while said Code is in
effect.



§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.



   Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Town of Hammonton" shall be
understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. Whenever
such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they
shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the
loose-leaf book containing said Code as amendments and supplements thereto.



§ 1-6. Publication; filing.



   The Clerk/Administrator of the Town of Hammonton, pursuant to law,
shall cause this Adopting Ordinance to be published, in the manner required,
in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town. Sufficient copies of the
Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk/Administrator for
inspection by the public at all times during regular office hours. The
enactment and publication of this Adopting Ordinance, coupled with
availability of copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be
deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions
of the Code for all purposes.



§ 1-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.



   It shall be the duty of the Clerk/Administrator or someone authorized
and directed by the Clerk/Administrator to keep up-to-date the certified copy
of the book containing the Code required to be filed in his or her office for
the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted
subsequent to the effective date of this codification which shall be adopted
specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included
therein by reference until such changes or new ordinances are printed as
supplements to said Code book, at which time such supplements shall be
inserted therein.



§ 1-8. Sale of Code book.



   To be provided upon request, in a manner determined by the Municipal
Clerk.



§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.



   It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by
additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper
with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Town
of Hammonton to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or
any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to one or more
of the following: a fine of not more than $1,000, imprisonment for not more
than 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, in the
discretion of the Judge imposing the same.



§ 1-10. Severability of Code provisions.



   Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an
independent section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a
part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall
not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other
sections or parts thereof.



§ 1-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.



   Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the
holding of any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or
ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or
constitutionality of any other sections or parts thereof.



§ 1-12. Repealer.



   All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
Adopting Ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.



§ 1-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.



   The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:



   A.   Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 9-25-2000.



   B.   Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under
any legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or
any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.



   C.   Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date
of this ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result there from.



   D.   Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding
pending or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this
ordinance, brought pursuant to any legislative provision.



   E.   Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore
granted or conferred.



   F.   Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering,
widening, relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street,
road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.



   G.   Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring
funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of the
Town's indebtedness.



   H.   Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.



   I.   The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the
approval of the municipal budget.



   J.   The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.



   K.   All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and
manner of payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.



   L.   Any ordinance adopting or amending the Zoning Map.



   M.   Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or
pension fund for municipal employees.



§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.



   A.   In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and
revision as part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain
grammatical changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Town Mayor and Common Council that all
such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed
had been previously formally amended to read as such.



   B.   In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth
in Schedule A attached hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith, to
become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance. (Chapter and
section number references are to the ordinances as they have been renumbered
and appear in the Code.) Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-14B, the
articles and sections which were amended, added or deleted by this ordinance
are indicated throughout the Code by a footnote referring to Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I. During routine supplementation, footnotes
indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be replaced with the
following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 7-23-2001 by Ord. No. 26-2001."
Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file
in the Town offices.



   C.   Global changes.



      (1)   Violations and penalties. In the following sections,
penalties have been amended or added to provide that persons convicted of
violating a chapter/article of shall be subject to one or more of the
following: a fine not exceeding $1,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding
90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days: §§ 22-13A
and B; 51-16; 72-12; 75-11; 79-13; 79-27; 82-22; 82-33; 85-6; 88-11; 99-2;
104-7; 119-6; 137-7; 137-11; 144-8; 147-6; 151-6; 154-4A; 172-7; 180-7;
184-20; 184-24; 193-4; 200-7; 202-5; 204-5; 204-12; 204-28; 217-21; 220-7;
223-9; 226-12B(1); 226-26; 226-31; 230-10B; 233-4; 241-16; 241-28A; 241-43;
244-7; 247-4; 247-8; 247-23; 247-30; 247-37; 247-44B; 247-48; 251-9; 257-10;
261-8; 264-20; 267-6; 267-18A; 274-4; 275-11; 27-26; 275-29.



      (2)   Statutory references. Statutory references have been
updated in the text to the current N.J.S.A. reference as necessary to replace
repealed or outdated references to enhance the unconsolidated reference.



      (3)   Gender-neutral language. Throughout the Code,
gender-neutral language has been used, using he/she, his/her, him/her
construction or substituting proper nouns for pronouns where possible. Simple
conversions such as "policeman" to "police officer," "Councilman" to "Council
member" and "Chairman" to "Chairperson" have been made.



      (4)   Nomenclature changes. Throughout the Code, the following
nomenclature changes have been made:



         (a)    Supervisor of Recreation has been changed to
Recreation Supervisor.



         (b)    Town Clerk has been changed to Town
Clerk/Administrator.



         (c)    Department of Environmental Protection and Energy
has been changed to Department of Environmental Protection.



CHAPTER 3.
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton as
indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]



ARTICLE I.
Equal Employment Opportunity



   § 3-1.   Purpose; compliance with statutory provisions.



   § 3-2.   Title.



   § 3-3.   Procurement and promulgation of service contracts by town.



   § 3-4.   Designation of employee to implement provisions.



   § 3-5.   Violations and penalties.



ARTICLE II.
Affirmative Marketing



   § 3-6.   Applicability.



   § 3-7.   Use of media for marketing purposes.



   § 3-8.   Community contact persons.



   § 3-9.   Random selection method.



   § 3-10.   Responsibility for administration of program.



   § 3-11.   Preference for certain households.



   § 3-12.   Duration and monitoring of program.



Article I.
Equal Employment Opportunity



[Adopted 9-10-1979 by Ord. No. 13-1979 as Ch. 61A of the 1971 Code]



§ 3-1. Purpose; compliance with statutory provisions.



   A.   In recognition of the important policy issues addressed by
these affirmative action regulations and in further recognition of the
essential need to maintain viable procurement, service and construction
contract procedures so that the business operations of state and local
government may proceed in an efficient and timely manner, these affirmative
action regulations shall be adopted to promote equal employment opportunity
to all persons, regardless of race, color, religion, sex or national origin,
by prohibiting discrimination in employment, by ensuring equitable
representation of minorities and women that will be consistent with both
population parity and/or available work force and requiring affirmative
action in the performance of contracts funded by the State of New Jersey.



   B.   These regulations establish affirmative action employment
standards and practices necessary to comply with equal employment opportunity
standards required by P.L. 1975, c. 127 (N.J.S.A. 10:5-31 to 10:5-38).



§ 3-2. Title.



   This article shall be known as and may be cited as the "Affirmative
Action Ordinance of the Town of Hammonton."



§ 3-3. Procurement and promulgation of service contracts by town.



   The Town of Hammonton, as a political subdivision of the state, shall
be deemed to be the public agency for purposes of procurement and
promulgating of service contracts as well as construction contracts.



§ 3-4. Designation of employee to implement provisions.



   There shall be designated by the public agency an officer or employee
who will maintain liaison with and assist the State Treasurer in the
implementation of P.L. 1975, c. 127 (N.J.S.A. 10:5-31 to 10:5-38).



§ 3-5. Violations and penalties.



   Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of
this article established herein or notice issued pursuant thereto shall, upon
conviction, be liable to a penalty or fine for each violation.



Article II.
Affirmative Marketing



[Adopted 12-27-1999 by Ord. No. 36-1999]



§ 3-6. Applicability.



   The Town of Hammonton in Atlantic County has a fair-share obligation of
352 units of which 258 are new affordable housing opportunities. This article
will apply to all new developments that contain proposed low- and
moderate-income units that are listed below and any future developments that
may occur. Current approved developments include Plymouth Place Apartments.



§ 3-7. Use of media for marketing purposes.



   A.   The affirmative marketing plan is a regional marketing strategy
designed to attract buyers and/or renters of all majority and minority
groups, regardless of sex, age or number of children, to housing units which
are being marketed by a developer/sponsor, municipality and/or designated
administrative agency of affordable housing. The plan will address the
requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:93-11. In addition, the plan prohibits
discrimination in the sale, rental, financing or other services related to
housing on the basis of race, color, sex, religion, handicap, age, familial
status/size or national origin. The Town of Hammonton is in the housing
region consisting of Atlantic County, Cape May County, Cumberland County and
Salem County. The affirmative marketing program is a continuing program and
will meet the following requirements:



      (1)   All newspaper articles, announcements and requests for
applications for low- and moderate-income units will appear in the following
daily regional newspapers/publications:



         (a)   Press of Atlantic City.



         (b)   The Times Journal.



         (c)   Today's Sunbeam.



      (2)   The primary marketing will take the form of at least one
press release sent to the above publications and a paid display advertisement
in each of the above newspapers. Additional advertising and publicity will be
on an as-needed basis.



      (3)   The advertisement will include the:



         (a)   Street address;



         (b)   Direction to housing units;



         (c)   Number of bedrooms per unit;



         (d)   Range of selling prices/rents;



         (e)   Size of units;



         (f)   Household income limits; and



         (g)   Location of applications, including business hours
and where/how applications may be obtained.



      (4)   All newspaper articles, announcements and requests for
applications for low- and moderate-income housing will appear in the
following neighborhood-oriented weekly newspapers, religious publications and
organizational newsletters within the region:



         (a)   Hammonton News.



         (b)   Hammonton Gazette.



         (c)   Times Journal.



         (d)   The Gazette Leader.



         (e)   Elmer Times.



         (f)   The Daily Journal.



      (5)   If applicable, the following regional radio and/or cable
television station(s) will be used: N/A.



   B.   The following is the location of applications, brochure(s),
sign(s), and/or poster(s) used as part of the affirmative marketing program
including specific employment centers within the region:



      (1)   Municipal building.



      (2)   Municipal library.



      (3)   Developer's sales/rental office on site.



      (4)   Senior Centers in Atlantic, Cape May, Cumberland and
Salem Counties.



§ 3-8. Community contact persons.



   A.   The following is a listing of community contact person(s)
and/or organization(s) in Atlantic County, Cape May County, Cumberland County
and Salem County that will aid in the affirmative marketing program with
particular emphasis on contacts that will reach out to groups that are least
likely to apply for housing within the region: Directors of Housing within
the respective counties.



   B.   Applications will be mailed to prospective applicants upon
request.



   C.   Additionally, applications will be sent to the chief
administrative employees of each of the following agencies in the Counties of
Atlantic, Cape May, Cumberland and Salem:



      (1)   Office on Aging.



      (2)   Housing Agency or Authority.



      (3)   Library.



      (4)   Area Community Action Agencies.



§ 3-9. Random selection method.



   The following is a description of the random selection method that will
be used to select occupants of low- and moderate-income housing: such
procedures as may be established by the Council on Affordable Housing:



§ 3-10. Responsibility for administration of program.



   The Town of Hammonton is ultimately responsible for administering the
affirmative marketing program. The Town of Hammonton has delegated this
responsibility to the Hammonton Planning Board. The Hammonton Planning Board
will income-qualify low- and moderate-income households; place
income-eligible households in low- and moderate-income units upon initial
occupancy; provide for the initial occupancy of low- and moderate-income
units with income qualified households; continue to qualify households for
re-occupancy of units as they become vacant during the period of
affordability controls; assist with advertising and outreach to low- and
moderate-income households if in contract; and enforce the terms of the deed
restriction and mortgage loan as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.1. The (municipal
contact person) within the Town of Hammonton is the designated housing
officer to act as liaison to the Hammonton Planning Board. The Hammonton
Planning Board will provide counseling services to low- and moderate-income
applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit issues, mortgage
qualification, responsibilities of homeownership, rental lease requirements
and landlord/tenant law. Service providers shall be selected to perform the
above services.



§ 3-11. Preference for certain households.



   Households who live or work in the COAH-established housing region may
be given preference for sales and rental units constructed within that
housing region. Applicants living outside the housing region will have an
equal opportunity for units after regional applicants have been initially
serviced. The Town of Hammonton intends to comply with N.J.A.C. 5:93-11.7.
Developers of low and moderate housing units may assist in the marketing of
the affordable units in their respective developments if so designated by the
Town of Hammonton.



§ 3-12. Duration and monitoring of program.



   A.   The marketing program will commence at least 120 days before
the issuance of either temporary or permanent certificates of occupancy. The
marketing program will continue until all low- and moderate-income housing
units are initially occupied and for as long as affordable units are deed
restricted and occupancy or re-occupancy of units continues to be necessary.



   B.   The Hammonton Planning Board will comply with monitoring and
reporting requirements as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-11.6 and 5:93-12.1.



CHAPTER 6.
BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton as
indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]



ARTICLE I.
(Reserved) (§ 6-1)



ARTICLE II.
Board of Park Commissioners (§ 6-5 — § 6-10)



ARTICLE III.
Environmental Commission (§ 6-11 — § 6-21)



ARTICLE IV.
Rent Control Board (§ 6-22 — § 6-33.1)



ARTICLE V.
Historic Preservation Commission (§ 6-34 — § 6-38)



ARTICLE VI.
Water and Sewer Subcommittee (§ 6-39 — § 6-42)



ARTICLE VII.
Hammonton Lake Water Quality Advisory Committee (§ 6-43 — § 6-51)



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Fire Department — See Ch. 25.



   Department of Parks and Recreation — See Ch. 41.



   Police Department — See Ch. 51.



ARTICLE II.
Board of Park Commissioners



[Adopted 9-13-1971 by Ord. No. 10-1971 as Ch. 43 of the 1971 Code]



   § 6-5.   Designation of Board.



   § 6-6.   Composition; terms of office; alternate members.



   § 6-7.   Service without compensation.



   § 6-8.   Duties and responsibilities.



   § 6-9.   Authority and power.



   § 6-10.   Funds to maintain and operate parks.



§ 6-5. Designation of Board.



   From and after the first day of January in the year 1931, there shall
be within the Town of Hammonton a board known and designated as the "Board of
Park Commissioners," the members of which shall hold office and perform the
duties as herein described.



§ 6-6. Composition; terms of office; alternate members.



   A.   The Board of Park Commissioners shall be composed of two
members of the Council and five residents, all to be appointed by the Council
upon the nomination of the Mayor. The two members of the Board appointed from
Council shall hold office for one year. The five resident members shall serve
terms of two years with three of the members terms expiring in one year and
the remaining two members terms expiring in the alternate year. Vacancies in
the board occurring by resignation or otherwise shall be filled for the
unexpired term only.



[Amended 3-17-2008 by Ord. No. 8-2008]



   B.   Alternate members.



[Added 3-22-2004 by Ord. No. 4-2004]



      (1)   By nomination of the Mayor, and appointment of Council,
two alternates shall be selected to serve on the Board of Park Commissioners.
Such selection shall be made by January 1 of each year.



      (2)   The two alternate members shall be designated at the
time of appointment as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2" and shall
serve during the absence or disqualification of any regular member or
members. Of the alternate members first appointed, Alternate No. 2 shall
serve for one year and Alternate No. 1 shall serve for two years. Thereafter,
alternate members shall be appointed for the same term of office as are
regular members. Vacancies shall be filled by nomination of the Mayor, and
appointment of Council, for the unexpired term only. An alternate member may
participate in discussions of the proceedings but may not vote except in the
absence or disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed
in order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate member.



§ 6-7. Service without compensation.



   The members of the Board shall serve without compensation, and they
shall annually, from their number, elect a President and Secretary.



§ 6-8. Duties and responsibilities.



Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Parks and Recreation Areas. The Board of Park
Commissioners shall have charge of and conduct all parks and open places for
public rest and recreation which shall be located within the Town and to
which the Town has acquired title or may hereafter acquire title, and shall
lay out, embellish and maintain the same in the manner which shall seem best
to the Board and under rules and regulations made by the Board.



§ 6-9. Authority and power.



   The Board of Park Commissioners shall have full and complete authority
and power, exclusive of Council, to expend the moneys raised for park
purposes, other than for the acquisition of land, and all moneys so raised
for such purposes shall be paid out by the Town Treasurer upon warrants
signed by the Mayor, Town Clerk/Administrator and Town Treasurer, bills
having been previously approved by the Board of Park Commissioners and
ordered paid by the Council.



§ 6-10. Funds to maintain and operate parks.



   The Board of Park Commissioners shall meet and determine what sum may
be necessary in the first instance for laying out, constructing and
embellishing the public parks, and thereafter annually for the care and
maintenance of the same, and shall recommend to the Council, in writing, the
amount so to be raised. The Council shall not raise any money for park
purposes, either by issue of bonds or by taxation, excepting upon and after
recommendation by the Board of Park Commissioners. The sum actually raised by
the Council in any year shall not in any case exceed the sum recommended by
the Board, but the Council may raise any less amount.



ARTICLE III.
Environmental Commission



[Adopted 3-10-1975 by Ord. No. 8-1975; amended in its entirety 8-23-2010 by
Ord. No. 16-2010]



   § 6-11.   Creation of Commission.



   § 6-12.   Limitation on functions.



   § 6-13.   Membership and terms.



   § 6-14.   Powers.



   § 6-15.   Acquisition of property.



   § 6-16.   Control of acquired land.



   § 6-17.   Records and reports.



   § 6-18.   Organization.



   § 6-19.   Removal of members.



   § 6-20.   Appropriation.



   § 6-21.   Appointment of assistants; compensation.



§ 6-11. Creation of Commission.



   There is considered to be a need in the interest of the public health,
safety and welfare for the creation of an Environmental Commission for the
Town of Hammonton pursuant to Chapter 245 of the Public Laws of 1968 as
amended by Chapter 35 of the Public Laws of 1972 of the State of New Jersey
(N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq.), which Commission shall be known as the
"Environmental Commission of the Town of Hammonton."



§ 6-12. Limitation on functions.



   A.   The function of said Environmental Commission shall be limited
to advising the Planning Board, the governing body of the Town of Hammonton
and all subsidiary agencies thereof on the areas as hereinafter delineated,
and receiving and disseminating information on said issues, and securing
federal and state funding for said purposes.



   B.   Said Commission shall not have the power to legislate or make
final determinations on any pending subdivision or other similar applications
but shall be permitted to review the same for the purpose of making
recommendations to the appropriate Town agencies.



§ 6-13. Membership and terms.



   Said Environmental Commission shall consist of seven members to be
appointed by the Mayor of the Town of Hammonton, with one member being a
member of the Hammonton Planning Board and with all members being residents
of the Town of Hammonton. Three members of said Commission shall be appointed
for terms expiring December 31, 1977, two of said members shall be appointed
for terms expiring December 31, 1976, and two of said members shall be
appointed for terms expiring December 31, 1975. The Planning Board member of
said Commission shall be appointed for a term not to exceed the remainder of
his/her term on the Planning Board. All subsequent appointments of members to
the Commission, except for the filling of vacancies for unexpired terms,
shall be for terms of three years beginning the first day of January of the
first year of said term.



§ 6-14. Powers.



   The Environmental Commission of the Town of Hammonton shall have the
following powers:



   A.   Promote the conservation and development of the environmental
quality of the Town of Hammonton.



   B.   Plan, implement and inform the public about local conservation
programs.



   C.   Compile and keep an index of all open areas, publicly or
privately owned, including open marshlands, swamps and other wetlands.



   D.   Conduct research into the possible use of the open areas and
the preservation or protection of their resources, such as air and water.



   E.   Recommend to the Planning Board plans and programs for
inclusion in a municipal master plan and the development and use of such
areas.



   F.   Advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts,
plans and pamphlets which, in its judgment, it deems necessary for its
purposes.



   G.   Identify all scenic, historic, park and recreation sites and
make recommendations for their protection and improvement.



   H.   Make recommendations as to legislation for control of
excavation and soil erosion and other activities affecting the landscape.



   I.   Review all proposed road locations and subdivisions for their
environmental impact.



   J.   Promote good architectural and landscape design for all
developments with adequate provision for park and green areas therein.



   K.   Manage donated or purchased lands for conservation purposes and
operate conservation programs.



   L.   Act as the coordinating agency of the community on conservation
matters and a liaison between local conservation needs and regional, state
and federal agencies ministering to those needs.



   M.   Manage Town trees, street trees and removal of large trees
within the Town limits.



§ 6-15. Acquisition of property.



   The Commission, with the approval of the Mayor and Common Council of
the Town of Hammonton, may from time to time acquire property, both real and
personal, in the name of the Town of Hammonton by gift, purchase, grant,
bequest, devise or lease for any of its purposes, including but not limited
to use as living museums, sites for scientific study, areas for teaching of
natural history and conservation, places of historic or prehistoric interest
and scenic beauty and habitat for rare and endangered plants and animals, and
shall administer the same for such purposes, subject to the terms of the
conveyance or gift. Such an acquisition may be to acquire the fee or any
lesser interest, development right, easement, including conservation
easement, covenant or other contractual right, including conveyance on
conditions or with limitations or reversions, as may be necessary to acquire,
maintain, improve, protect, limit the future use of or otherwise conserve and
properly utilize open spaces and other land and water areas in the Town of
Hammonton.



§ 6-16. Control of acquired land.



   The Environmental Commission may, subject to the approval of the Mayor
and Council of the Town of Hammonton, have control of lands acquired for the
purposes herein stated and may adopt suitable rules and regulations for the
use thereof and the conduct of all persons while on or using the same.



§ 6-17. Records and reports.



   The Commission shall keep records of its meetings and activities and
shall make an annual report on or before the first day of January and submit
the same to the Mayor and Council of the Town of Hammonton, which report
shall be comprehensive and detailed, covering operations, receipts,
disbursements and expenditures for the full year.



§ 6-18. Organization.



   A.   The Mayor shall designate one of the members to serve as
Chairman and presiding officer of the said Commission.



   B.   The said Commission is authorized to adopt bylaws governing its
procedural operation.



§ 6-19. Removal of members.



   The Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton may remove any
member of the Commission for cause, on written charges served upon the member
and after a hearing thereon at which the member shall be entitled to be heard
in person or by counsel.



§ 6-20. Appropriation.



   The Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton shall annually
fix, determine and appropriate a sum sufficient for the care, custody,
policing and maintenance of such lands acquired for the uses and purposes
herein stated, and for the expenses of the said Commission, which shall be
raised by taxation in the same manner as other taxes.



§ 6-21. Appointment of assistants; compensation.



   The Commission may appoint a secretary or Clerk and such number of
custodians, supervisors and assistants for the lands acquired for the uses
and purposes herein mentioned as it shall think necessary, but the salaries
of all such clerks, custodians, supervisors and assistants shall be fixed and
determined by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton, and, in
addition thereto, the total salaries of all such persons shall be within the
limits of funds appropriated to the said Commission.



ARTICLE IV.
Rent Control Board



[Adopted 3-8-1976 by Ord. No. 2-1976]



   § 6-22.   Legislative purpose.



   § 6-23.   Statutory authority.



   § 6-24.   Legislative necessity.



   § 6-25.   Definitions.



   § 6-26.   Establishment of Board; membership; terms; compensation.



   § 6-27.   Determination of standards.



   § 6-28.   Recommendations following investigation.



   § 6-29.   Powers of Board.



   § 6-30.   Acceleration of rentals by owners.



   § 6-31.   Time limit for report on investigation.



   § 6-32.   Recommendation of penalties; Board as prosecutor.



   § 6-33.   Continuation of moratorium.



   § 6-33.1. Termination of Board; Quality of Life Committee.



§ 6-22. Legislative purpose.



   It is deemed in the public interest that controls be created for the
protection of all inhabitants of the Town of Hammonton in apartment complexes
as hereinafter defined and that an investigation be made to determine the
amount of increase that should be permitted for rental units in the Town of
Hammonton within such complexes so as to grant the owners of said complexes
sufficient increase to cover increased expenses and a fair return on their
investment, while protecting the tenants from undue raises not justified by
either the expenses or investment involved. Editor's Note: See Ch. 217, Rent
Control.



§ 6-23. Statutory authority.



   Under the police powers created by the laws of the State of New Jersey
and under the cases decided there under, the Mayor and Common Council of the
Town of Hammonton has the authority to control rental increases, provided
that the controls are reasonable and in the public interest.



§ 6-24. Legislative necessity.



   It is necessary that a Rent Control Board be created to investigate the
actual increase in cost and capital investment in each apartment complex in
the Town of Hammonton for the purpose of determining the amount of rent
increase that is reasonable in the premises and to further protect the
health, safety and welfare of all citizens of the Town of Hammonton,
including those inhabiting such apartment complexes.



§ 6-25. Definitions.



   As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:



   APARTMENT COMPLEX



   As regulated hereunder, any property or facility in which there exists
four or more rental units.



§ 6-26. Establishment of Board; membership; terms; compensation.



[Amended 3-9-1981 by Ord. No. 2-1981; 8-10-1981 by Ord. No. 18-1981]



   A.   There is hereby established a Rent Control Board of the Town of
Hammonton, consisting of seven members to be appointed by the Mayor and
confirmed by Town Council. Two of the seven members appointed to the Board
shall be Council members of the Town of Hammonton. The other five members
appointed to the Board shall be citizens and residents of the Town of
Hammonton. Three initial members (one Council member and two citizens of the
Town of Hammonton) shall serve for one-year terms, and three (one Council
member and two citizens of the Town of Hammonton) shall serve for two-year
terms and one for a three-year term. All subsequent members shall serve for
two-year terms. There shall be no compensation for the members of this Board.



   B.   The Mayor and Town Council shall appoint two alternate members.
Alternate members shall be designated as Alternate No. 1 and Alternate No. 2
and shall serve in rotation during the absence or disqualification of regular
member or members. The term of each alternate member shall be two years.



§ 6-27. Determination of standards.



   The Rent Control Board is hereby instructed, authorized, empowered and
directed to conduct that investigation necessary to determine standards for
future rental increases in apartment complexes within the Town of Hammonton.
The Rent Control Board created herein is charged with the responsibility of
conducting the investigation and surveys of the investment, expenses and
return on investment of all owners of apartment complexes in the Town of
Hammonton. The Rent Control Board shall complete said investigation within
the period of 90 days from the date the members thereof are appointed and
qualified to serve. The Rent Control Board thereafter shall annually review
the costs and expenses of all apartment complexes and the capital structure
thereof on an annual basis for the purpose of determining whether there
should be a revision of such standards.



§ 6-28. Recommendations following investigation.



   The Rent Control Board shall, from its first investigation, make the
following recommendations:



   A.   The amount of increase that should be permitted, if any, for
all apartment complexes in the Town of Hammonton as of the return date of
said preliminary investigation.



   B.   A set of uniform standards which will control all rental
increases pending a subsequent review and amendment of said standards by a
subsequent investigation. Said standards should provide guidelines for rental
increases referable to specific guidelines and published standards.



   C.   Establishment of a procedure under which owners of apartment
complexes or tenants may appeal the findings of the Rent Control Board.



   D.   Establishment of a procedure under which the Rent Control Board
may hold hearings on any violation of its standards.



   E.   Establishment of standards to determine the amount of rent
chargeable on a new apartment complex or to a new tenant in his/her first
lease contract.



§ 6-29. Powers of Board.



   The Rent Control Board shall have all the powers necessary to carry out
the investigatory powers and recommendations of this article, including the
right to hold hearings, the right to compel the presentation of all financial
data on each apartment complex within the Town of Hammonton and the power to
review all publications and statistical data available in said area of rent
control, as well as the standards imposed in other municipalities.



§ 6-30. Acceleration of rentals by owners.



   The owners of apartment complexes shall have the right, after the
submission of the report and recommendations of the Rent Control Board and
the implementation of these recommendations through appropriate municipal
action, to accelerate all rentals in any leases that are renewed after March
10, 1976, during the period that this moratorium extension exists, of an
amount equal to that amount that the Rent Control Board finds is a proper
increase over the rents in existence as of the effective date of this
article, with said increased rentals being retroactive to the date of the
renewal. This right to accelerate is expressly dependent upon the increase
being approved by the Rent Control Board and the accelerated difference being
amortized over the remaining period of the lease.



§ 6-31. Time limit for report on investigation.



   At any time within 90 days but no later than 90 days from the date that
the members of this Rent Control Board are appointed and qualified, the Rent
Control Board shall report its findings on its first investigation as
required by this article. Said recommendations as to regulations and
standards on present and future rental increases shall be submitted to the
Mayor and Council for further action and, if adopted by the Mayor and
Council, shall remain in effect until the next annual investigation provided
herein.



§ 6-32. Recommendation of penalties; Board as prosecutor.



   The Rent Control Board shall make recommendations in said report as to
the penalties to be inserted in any rent control ordinance enacted to
implement the findings and reports of said Rent Control Board. Said Rent
Control Board shall have the power after due hearings to prosecute violators
in the Municipal Court of the Town of Hammonton or any other appropriate
judicial forum.



§ 6-33. Continuation of moratorium.



   The existing moratorium upon all raising of rents in apartment
complexes as hereinabove defined is continued for an additional 120 days
beyond the expiration date of the moratorium imposed by Ordinance No. 21 of
1975, which express date will be July 20, 1976.



§ 6-33.1. Termination of Board; Quality of Life Committee.



[Added 4-28-2008 by Ord. No. 15-2008]



   The Rent Control Board, established by Ordinance No. 2-1976 on March 8,
1976, shall cease to exist at 12:00 midnight on December 31, 2008 (the
termination date). After the termination date, the functions previously
performed by the Rent Control Board shall be performed by the Council
committee known as the "Quality of Life Committee." Between the date of
approval of this amendment and the termination date, the Rent Control Board
shall continue to function at those meetings where it has a quorum. In those
circumstances where it is unable to muster a quorum, the Quality of Life
Committee shall be authorized to act in its place and stead.



ARTICLE V.
Historic Preservation Commission



   § 6-34.   Purpose.



   § 6-35.   Membership.



   § 6-36.   Terms of office.



   § 6-37.   Appointment.



   § 6-38.   Functions.



[Adopted 5-22-1989 by Ord. No. 17-1989; amended in its entirety 11-27-1989 by
Ord. No. 41-1989]



§ 6-34. Purpose.



   It is deemed to be in the public interest for the Town of Hammonton to
create an Historic Preservation Commission, which shall review those
structures and areas within the Town that are or may be of historic or
architectural significance. It is determined as a fact that, in light of the
creation of an historical district in the Town of Hammonton pursuant to a
study conducted under the auspices of the County of Atlantic and because of
ongoing studies of other historic areas within the Town, an independent
commission is created to administer the review function and advisory function
as such relate to those structures which could be classified as either
architecturally significant, historically significant or as landmarks of the
Town of Hammonton.



§ 6-35. Membership.



[Amended 3-27-2006 by Ord. No. 3-2006]



   A.   The Historic Preservation Commission of the Town of Hammonton
shall consist of seven regular members and two alternate members. One of the
regular members shall be a Class A member who shall be knowledgeable in
building design, construction or architectural history and may reside within
or without the Town of Hammonton. One of the regular members shall be a Class
B member who has demonstrated interest and/or knowledge of local history and
may reside within or without the Town of Hammonton. The remaining five
regular members shall be Class C members who shall hold no other municipal
office nor employment except for membership on either the Planning Board or
the Board of Adjustment.



   B.   All appointees shall be designated by class at the time of
their appointment.



   C.   The alternate members shall meet the same classifications as
Class C members and shall be designated as Alternate No. 1 and Alternate No.
2, with said designations being made by the Mayor at the time of appointment.



§ 6-36. Terms of office.



[Amended 3-27-2006 by Ord. No. 3-2006]



   The terms of the original appointees to the Historic Preservation
Commission shall be as follows:



   A.   Two of the original appointees shall be appointed for terms to
expire December 31, 1992; one of said original appointees shall be for a term
to expire December 31, 1991; one of said appointees shall be for a term to
expire December 31, 1990; and the last original appointee shall be for a term
expiring December 31, 1989. The regular Class C member appointed in the year
2006 shall be appointed for a term to expire December 31, 2009. The regular
Class C member appointed in the year 2006 filling the unexpired term shall be
for a term to expire December 31, 2007.



   B.   As to alternate members, one of said alternate members shall be
appointed at the time of original appointment for a term to expire December
31, 1990, and the second alternate member shall be appointed for a term to
expire December 31, 1989.



   C.   At the expiration of each appointment, the term of the regular
appointee replacing the original appointee as a member of the Commission
shall be four years. At the expiration of each alternate member's term, a
successor shall be appointed for a two-year term. All terms thereafter shall
be for four years for regular members and two years for alternate members.



   D.   Should a vacancy occur during any appointee's term, whether
such be a regular or alternate member, said vacancy shall be filled by an
appointment for only the unexpired term then remaining.



§ 6-37. Appointment.



[Amended 3-27-2006 by Ord. No. 3-2006]



   All appointments to the Historic Preservation Commission shall be made
by the Mayor of the Town of Hammonton.



§ 6-38. Functions.



[Amended 3-27-2006 by Ord. No. 3-2006]



   A.   The Historic Preservation Commission shall have all of the
functions as enumerated in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-109.



   B.   In addition to said responsibilities as set forth in § 6-38A,
the Historic Preservation Commission shall be expressly directed to make
recommendations to the Planning Board for the purpose of maintaining,
preserving and/or restoring those structures and areas that are historically
or architecturally significant within the Town of Hammonton and for making
recommendations for inclusion into the National Register of appropriate
structures and areas. The Planning Board shall have the right to amend any
recommendation before submission of the same to the Mayor and Council.



ARTICLE VI.
Water and Sewer Subcommittee



   § 6-39.   Former MUAC functions.



   § 6-40.   Water and Sewer Subcommittee.



   § 6-41.   MUAC references.



   § 6-42.   Formal action on water or sewer projects.



[Adopted 4-24-2006 by Ord. No. 5-2006 Editor's Note: This ordinance repealed
former Art. VI, Utilities Advisory Committee, adopted 4-13-1992 by Ord. No.
13-1992. ]



§ 6-39. Former MUAC functions.



   All functions originally performed by the MUAC shall now be the
responsibility of Mayor and Council.



§ 6-40. Water and Sewer Subcommittee.



   The Mayor is hereby authorized to appoint a water and sewer
subcommittee consisting of the Mayor or his designee, and up to two members
of Council to review designated projects, and thereafter report its findings
to the full Mayor and Council for appropriate action.



§ 6-41. MUAC references.



   Any reference to the "MUAC" in Chapter 226, Sewers and Chapter 275,
(Water), or in any other portion of this Code, shall hereinafter be construed
as making reference to "Mayor and Council" or its duly appointed water and
sewer subcommittee.



§ 6-42. Formal action on water or sewer projects.



   No formal action may be taken with respect to any water or sewer
project except by Mayor and Council at an official public meeting.



ARTICLE VII.
Hammonton Lake Water Quality Advisory Committee



   § 6-43.   Name.



   § 6-44.   Objective.



   § 6-45.   Membership; terms of office; alternates; attendance by
Recreation Supervisor.



   § 6-46.   Election of Chairperson; quorum; participation of
alternates.



   § 6-47.   Meetings.



   § 6-48.   Parliamentary authority.



   § 6-49.   Secretary of Committee.



   § 6-50.   Functions.



   § 6-51.   Recordkeeping.



[Adopted 5-21-2007 by Ord. No. 12-2007]



§ 6-43. Name.



   The name of the committee shall be the Hammonton Lake Water Quality
Advisory Committee.



§ 6-44. Objective.



   A.   The committee shall have as its objective the revitalization
and preservation of Hammonton Lake and enhancement of recreational, social
and cultural activities associated therewith.



§ 6-45. Membership; terms of office; alternates; attendance by Recreation
Supervisor.



[Amended 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 35-2007]



   A.   The Committee shall be comprised of seven members and three
alternates as follows, and all appointments shall be made by the Mayor, with
confirmation of the Council, and officially begin January 1, 2008:



      (1)   One Class I member serving a four-year term.



      (2)   One Class II member serving a three-year term.



      (3)   Three Class III members serving two year terms.



      (4)   One member shall be a representative of the Parks
Commission serving a one-year term.



      (5)   One member shall be a representative of the
Environmental Commission serving a one-year term.



      (6)   Alternate No. 1 serving a four-year term.



      (7)   Alternate No. 2 serving a three-year term.



      (8)   Alternate No. 3 serving a two-year term.



   B.   The Chairperson and Vice Chairperson will be appointed by the
Committee.



   C.   The Recreation Supervisor shall attend all meetings.



§ 6-46. Election of Chairperson; quorum; participation of alternates.



[Amended 3-26-2018 by Ord. No. 011-2018]



   The Chairperson of this Committee shall be elected by a majority vote
of the voting members. A quorum shall consist of four members. The three
alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings but may
not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member.



§ 6-47. Meetings.



   Meetings shall be held as designated by the Chairperson of this
Committee.



§ 6-48. Parliamentary authority.



   The rules contained in Robert's Rules of Order, Revised, shall govern
this Committee.



§ 6-49. Secretary of Committee.



   The Committee shall have a Secretary, who shall be compensated for
his/her time by Mayor and Council.



§ 6-50. Functions.



   The specific function of the Committee shall be as follows:



   A.   Study, implement and encourage actions consistent with the 1995
Hammonton Lake Management Plan.



   B.   Investigate appropriate measures to improve water quality to
protect the indigenous flora and fauna associated with the lake.



   C.   Promote practices that eliminate point source pollution and
minimize nonpoint source pollution impacting Hammonton Lake.



   D.   Educate residents of Hammonton and surrounding communities of
actions they can take to improve the water quality of Hammonton Lake.



   E.   Encourage Town residents to fully utilize the lake for passive
and active recreation such as swimming, boating, fishing, hiking, and
ancillary activities such as picnics, playground use Town holiday events, and
the like.



§ 6-51. Recordkeeping.



   The Commission shall keep records of its meetings and activities and
shall periodically report to the Board of Park Commissioners and shall also
make an annual report on or before the first day of January and submit the
same to the Mayor and Council of the Town of Hammonton, which report shall be
comprehensive and detailed, covering operations, receipts, disbursements and
expenditures for the full year.



CHAPTER 12.
CODE BOOKS



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton
3-14-1994 by Ord. No. 6-1994. Amendments noted where applicable.]



   § 12-1.   Purpose.



   § 12-2.   Distribution.



   § 12-3.   [Reserved.]



   § 12-4.   Violations and penalties.



§ 12-1. Purpose.



   The ordinances and zoning laws of the Town of Hammonton have been
codified in books. These Code books are important to the elected officials,
the appointed officials and the citizenry because they represent the laws of
the Town of Hammonton. In order to ensure that individuals have an
opportunity to review the laws, and to ensure that all Code books are kept
current, the Mayor and Council have formulated a procedure which is set forth
in this chapter as to how the Code books will be distributed and how they
will be collected.



§ 12-2. Distribution.



   Published online.



§ 12-3. [Reserved.]



§ 12-4. Violations and penalties.



   The town shall assess a penalty of $150 to anyone who fails to return
the Code book as per the requirements of this chapter.



CHAPTER 14.
COURT, MUNICIPAL



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton as
indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]



ARTICLE I.
Court, Judge and Court Administrator (§ 14-1 — § 14-8)



ARTICLE II.
Prosecutor (§ 14-9 — § 14-13)



ARTICLE III.
Public Defender (§ 14-14 — § 14-18)



ARTICLE IV.
Application Fee for Public Defender Representation (§ 14-19 — § 14-22)



ARTICLE V.
Fees for Municipal Court Discovery (§ 14-23)



ARTICLE I.
Court, Judge and Court Administrator



   § 14-1.   Establishment.



   § 14-2.   Name.



   § 14-3.   Seal.



   § 14-4.   Appointment of Municipal Judge; term of office.



   § 14-5.   Compensation.



   § 14-6.   Powers, duties and jurisdiction.



   § 14-7.   Location; when Court held.



   § 14-8.   Municipal Court Administrator.



[Adopted 9-13-1971 by Ord. No. 10-1971 as Ch. 37 of the 1971 Code; amended in
its entirety 7-23-2001 by Ord. No. 26-2001]



§ 14-1. Establishment.



   A Municipal Court for the town is established, pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq., as amended and supplemented.



§ 14-2. Name.



   The name of the Municipal Court shall be the "Municipal Court of the
Town of Hammonton."



§ 14-3. Seal.



   The Municipal Court shall have a seal which shall bear the impression
of the name of the Court.



§ 14-4. Appointment of Municipal Judge; term of office.



   There shall be a Municipal Judge of the Municipal Court, who shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Town Council and
who shall serve for a term of three years from the date of his or her
appointment and until his or her successor is appointed and qualified.



§ 14-5. Compensation.



   The Municipal Judge shall receive such annual salary as may be
prescribed by the Council of the town, to be paid in the same manner as the
salaries of other municipal officers are paid, and which shall be in lieu of
all fees, costs and any other allowances whatsoever.



§ 14-6. Powers, duties and jurisdiction.



   The Municipal Court and the Municipal Judge thereof shall have, possess
and exercise all the functions, powers, duties and jurisdiction conferred by
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq., as amended and supplemented, or
by any other law.



§ 14-7. Location; when Court held.



   The Municipal Court shall be held in the Town Hall or such other public
place as may be designated by the Judge. The Municipal Judge shall sit at
such times as the business of the Court may require, subject to the rules
applicable to municipal courts.



§ 14-8. Municipal Court Administrator.



   A.   There shall be a Municipal Court Administrator, who shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Town Council who
shall serve for a term of one year from the date of appointment until a
successor is appointed and qualified.



   B.   The Municipal Court Administrator shall receive such annual
salary as provided for in the Salary Ordinance of the town, which salary
shall be in lieu of all fees, costs and any other allowances whatsoever.
Editor's Note: The Salary Ordinance is on file in the office of the Town
Clerk/Administrator.



   C.   The Municipal Court Administrator shall perform such functions
and duties as shall be prescribed for such position by law, the rules
applicable to municipal courts and by the Municipal Judge.



ARTICLE II.
Prosecutor



   § 14-9.   Purpose.



   § 14-10.   Position created.



   § 14-11.   Term.



   § 14-12.   Appointment.



   § 14-13.   Salary.



[Adopted 1-24-1972 by Ord. No. 1-1972]



§ 14-9. Purpose.



   This article is enacted to create the position of Prosecutor of the
Hammonton Municipal Court pursuant to a mandate from the office of the
Administrative Director of the Courts of the State of New Jersey that such
official be provided for each Municipal Court for the year 1972.



§ 14-10. Position created.



   There is hereby created the position of Prosecutor of the Hammonton
Municipal Court, which official shall be in charge of prosecuting all
defendants in said Municipal Court and of representing the interests of the
people of the Town of Hammonton on all appeals from decisions of the
Hammonton Municipal Court with the various reviewing courts with jurisdiction
over such matters.



§ 14-11. Term.



   The office of the Prosecutor of the Hammonton Municipal Court shall
bear a term of one year, which term shall annually commence on January 1 of
each given year and terminate at 11:59 p.m. on December 31 of each given
year, with the holder of said office to serve until a successor is appointed
and qualified. Said one-year term commencing January 1 shall apply to all
years subsequent to the original appointment, which original appointment
shall be effective February 1, 1972, and which original term shall terminate
at 11:59 p.m. on December 31, 1972.



§ 14-12. Appointment.



   The Prosecutor of the Hammonton Municipal Court shall be appointed by
the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton.



§ 14-13. Salary.



   The salary to be paid the Prosecutor of the Hammonton Municipal Court
shall be $4,500 per year.



ARTICLE III.
Public Defender



   § 14-14.   Purpose.



   § 14-15.   Duty to provide defense.



   § 14-16.   Appointment; term.



   § 14-17.   Payment of salary.



   § 14-18.   Certificate of insurance coverage.



[Adopted 1-25-1988 by Ord. No. 1-1988]



§ 14-14. Purpose.



   It is determined to be in the public interest and to promote the
administration of justice within the Town of Hammonton to establish an office
of the Public Defender in and for said town to represent indigents charged
with such crimes as the Municipal Judge determines mandate the provision of a
legal defendant without charge to the accused.



§ 14-15. Duty to provide defense.



   The Municipal Public Defender shall provide a defense for all indigents
requesting an attorney to represent them without charge where the Municipal
Judge determines that:



   A.   The accused cannot afford to retain private counsel; and



   B.   The gravamen of the offenses charged are sufficiently serious
to mandate that the accused should have counsel.



§ 14-16. Appointment; term.



   The Municipal Public Defender shall be appointed by a majority vote of
the Common Council of the Town of Hammonton at the annual reorganization
meeting of that governing body, and the term of the Municipal Public Defender
shall be for one year and shall expire on December 31 of each given year at
12:00 midnight.



§ 14-17. Payment of salary.



   The Municipal Public Defender shall be paid on a yearly salary basis,
with the amount and manner of payment subject to negotiation and agreement
between the Common Council and the selected Public Defender, and the contract
for the position shall be awarded without competitive bidding as a
professional service under the provisions of the Local Public Contracts Law
(N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.).



§ 14-18. Certificate of insurance coverage.



   The individual selected as the Municipal Public Defender shall be
required to provide a certificate of insurance from an insurance carrier
authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey and to provide legal
errors and omissions coverage, and said certificate shall indicate that the
minimum errors and omissions insurance coverage of $1,000,000 has been
obtained.



ARTICLE IV.
Application Fee for Public Defender Representation



   § 14-19.   Purpose; statutory authority.



   § 14-20.   Fee required.



   § 14-21.   Schedule of fees; waiver.



   § 14-22.   Accumulation of fees.



[Adopted 4-25-1994 by Ord. No. 9-1994]



§ 14-19. Purpose; statutory authority.



   N.J.S.A. 2B:24-1 sets forth the creation of a Municipal Public Defender
that can be retained by a municipality on a full-time, part-time or per-case
basis. The statute also allows a municipality to require any person applying
for representation by the Municipal Public Defender to pay an application
fee. It is the purpose of this article to create the application fee, to set
a limit on the amount that can be charged and to give the court discretion in
whether or not that fee should be waived.



§ 14-20. Fee required.



[Amended 5-11-1998 by Ord. No. 21-1998]



   The Town of Hammonton hereby requires any person applying for
representation by the Municipal Public Defender to pay an application fee of
not more than $100. This fee should be paid either upon application or upon
the direction of the Municipal Court Judge. The fee shall be required to be
paid whether or not any defendant who is approved for representation by the
Municipal Public Defender is acquitted or convicted. For purposes of this
article, a conviction shall mean any finding of guilt, either through trial,
plea or plea bargain. A defendant who applies for the Public Defender shall
only be required to pay an application fee for all listed charges on the
application for representation. An application fee may be charged for each
time a defendant applies for the Public Defender.



§ 14-21. Schedule of fees; waiver.



   It shall be the duty of the Municipal Court Judge to create a schedule
for purposes of determining the amount of application fee to be paid by any
defendant. The application fee shall be predicated upon a sliding scale
proportionate to that portion of any other guidelines which the Municipal
Court uses in order to determine if a defendant qualifies for the Municipal
Public Defender. It is the desire and purpose of the Town of Hammonton to
ensure that indigent defendants receive proper representation and that there
be a universal application of the fee schedule to all indigent defendants
predicated upon their respective income. Nothing in this article shall
prohibit the Municipal Court Judge in his or her discretion to waive the
application fee for any defendant.



§ 14-22. Accumulation of fees.



   The Municipal Court Administrator shall collect all application fees
and turn them over to the Town Treasurer. The Town Treasurer shall be
responsible to deposit all fees in the general treasury and keep an
accounting of all fees collected pursuant to this article.



ARTICLE V.
Fees for Municipal Court Discovery



   § 14-23.   Schedule of fees.



[Adopted 12-20-2004 by Ord. No. 30-2004]



§ 14-23. Schedule of fees.



   The following fee schedule is hereby established for Municipal Court
discovery.



   A.   All requests for discovery in matters pending in the Town of
Hammonton Municipal Court shall be submitted through the Municipal Prosecutor.



   B.   All fees for discovery for Hammonton Municipal Court shall be
in accordance with OPRA and/or N.J. Court Rules. [Amended 3-18-2013 by Ord.
No. 004-2013]



   C.   Where the discovery must be obtained from an entity other than
the Town of Hammonton, e.g., another police department, the actual costs paid
to the other entity shall be paid by the requestor.



CHAPTER 16.
ELECTION DISTRICTS



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton
9-13-1971 by Ord. No. 10-1971 as Ch. 20 of the 1971 Code; amended in its
entirety 12-18-2006 by Ord. No. 21-2006. Subsequent amendments noted where
applicable.]



   § 16-1.   (Reserved)



   § 16-2.   Districts described and defined.



§ 16-1. (Reserved)



§ 16-2. Districts described and defined.



[Amended 5-14-2012 by Ord. No. 12-2012]



   The said districts be and the same are hereby described and defined as
follows:



District 1



Beginning at the SE corner of the Town of Hammonton, Atlantic County at the
intersection of the Borough of Folsom and the Twp. of Hamilton, Atlantic
County shared borders:



   Thence, NW following along the Borough of Folsom and the Town of
Hammonton, Atlantic County shared borders to a point where said border
intersects with the physical centerline of 12th Street. (Rt. 54);



   Thence, NE following the physical centerline of 12th St. (Rt. 54)
crossing the right of way of the Atlantic City Expressway (SJTA) to its point
of intersection with the physical centerline of Grand St.;



   Thence, SE along the physical centerline of Grand St., to its point of
intersection with the physical centerline of 11th St.;



   Thence, NE along the physical centerline of 11th St., to its point of
intersection with the physical centerline of the New Jersey Transit Atlantic
City Line property;



   Proceed, SE, following along the physical centerline of the NJ Transit
Atlantic City Line property, to a point where said border intersects with the
Twp. of Mullica and the Town of Hammonton, Atlantic County shared border;



   Continue SW following along the Twp. of Mullica and the Town of
Hammonton, Atlantic Co. shared border crossing the right of way of the A.C.
Expressway (SJTA) to a point at the SE corner of the Town of Hammonton,
Atlantic Co. on the shared border with the Borough of Folsom and the Twp. of
Hamilton, Atlantic Co. which is also the point of beginning.



District 2



Beginning at a point in the Borough of Folsom and the Town of Hammonton,
Atlantic Co. shared borders where said border intersects with the physical
centerline of 12th St. (Rt. 54);



   Thence, NW following the Borough of Folsom, Atlantic Co. shared border,
crossing the right of way of Mayslanding Blue Anchor Rd., (Co. Rt. 561 Spur)
to a point where said border intersects with the Twp. of Winslow, Camden
County and Town of Hammonton, Atlantic Co. shared border;



   Proceed NE along the Twp. of Winslow, Camden Co. and Town of Hammonton,
Atlantic Co. shared border, crossing the right of way of the Atlantic City
Expressway (SJTA) then crossing the right of way of the S. Egg Harbor Rd.
(Co. Rt. 561) to a point where said border intersects with the physical
centerline of NJ Transit Atlantic City Line property;



   Thence, SE along the physical centerline of the NJ Transit Atlantic
City Line property, to its point of intersection with the physical centerline
of 13th St. (Co. Rt. 678);



   Continue SW along the physical centerline of 13th St. (Co. Rt. 678) to
its point of intersection with the physical centerline of Messina Ave.;



   Thence SE following along the physical centerline of Messina Ave., to a
point where said border intersects with the physical centerline of Pleasant
St.;



   Thence SW following along the physical centerline of Pleasant St. to a
point where said border intersects with the physical centerline of Grand St.;



   Thence SE following along the physical centerline of Grant St. to a
point where said border intersects with the physical centerline of right of
way of 12th St. (Rt. 54);



   Thence SW following along the physical centerline of 12th St. (Rt. 54)
crossing the right of way of Atlantic City Expressway (SJTA) to a point where
said border intersects with a point in the Borough of Folsom and the Town of
Hammonton, Atlantic Co. shared borders which is also the point of beginning.



District 3



Beginning at a point where the physical centerline of 12th St. (Rt. 54) is
intersected by the physical centerline of 4th St.;



   Thence NW following the physical centerline of 4th St. to a point where
said border intersects with the physical centerline of Fairview Ave. (Co. Rt.
678);



   Proceed SW along the physical centerline of the Fairview Ave. (Co. Rt.
678) to a point where said border intersects with the physical centerline of
3rd St. (Co. Rt. 724);



   Continue North then NW along the physical centerline of 3rd
St./Wiltsey's Mill Rd. (Co. Rt. 724) to its point of intersection with the
Town of Hammonton, Atlantic County and Twp. of Winslow Camden County shared
border;



   Proceed NE following along the Town of Hammonton Atlantic Co. and Twp.
of Winslow Camden Co. shared border to its point of intersection with the
Town of Hammonton, Atlantic Co. and Twp. of Water Camden Co. and Twp. of
Shamong Burling Co. shared border;



   Thence SE following along the Town of Hammonton Atlantic Co. and Twp.
of Shamong Burling Co. shared border to a point where said border intersects
with the physical centerline of Trenton Rd. (Rt. 206);



   Proceed South following along the physical centerline of Trenton Rd.
(Rt. 206) crossing the right of way of Waterford Rd. (Co. Rt. 536) then
crossing the right of way of Middle Rd. (Co. Rt. 613) to a point where said
border intersects with the physical centerline of White Horse Pike (Rt. 30);



   Thence NW following along the physical centerline of White Horse Pike
(Rt. 30) to its point of intersection with the physical centerline of 12th
St. (Rt. 54);



   Thence SW following along the physical centerline of 12th St. (Rt. 54)
to its point of intersection with the physical centerline of 4th St., which
is also the point of beginning.



District 4



Beginning at a point where the Town of Hammonton and the Twp. of Mullica,
Atlantic Co. shared borders is intersected by the physical centerline of
Sewell Ave.;



   Thence NW following along the physical centerline of Sewell Ave., to a
point where said border intersects with the physical centerline of the WHP
(Rt. 30);



   Proceed North then NW following along the physical centerline of the
WHP (Rt. 30) to its point of intersection with the physical centerline of
Trenton Rd. (Rt. 206);



   Thence, North following along the physical centerline of Trenton Rd.
(Rt. 206) crossing the right of way of Middle Rd. (Co. Rt. 613) then crossing
the right of way of Waterford Rd., (Co. Rt. 536) to its point of intersection
with the Town of Hammonton, Atlantic Co. and Twp. of Shamong Burling Co.
border;



   Thence SE following along the Town of Hammonton Atlantic Co. and Twp.
of Shamong Burlington Co. shared border to its point of intersection with the
centerline of the Mullica River (a waterway) which is also the Twp. of
Washington Burling Co. and the Twp. of Mullica Atlantic Co. shared border;



   Thence SW following along the Town of Hammonton and Twp. of Mullica
Atlantic Co. shared border crossing the right of way of Columbia Rd. (Co. Rt.
693) then crossing the right of way of Pleasant Mills Rd. (Co. Rt. 542) to
its point of intersection with the physical centerline of Sewell Ave., which
is also the point of beginning.



District 5



Beginning at a point where the Town of Hammonton and the Twp. of Mullica,
Atlantic Co. shared borders is intersected by the physical centerline of the
NJ Transit Atlantic City Line property;



   Thence NW following along the physical centerline of the NJ Transit
Atlantic City Line property, to a point where said border intersects with the
physical centerline of 11th St.;



   Then NE following along the physical centerline of the 11th St. to its
point of intersection with the physical centerline of Egg Harbor Rd. (Co. Rt.
561);



   Thence NW following along the physical centerline of Egg Harbor Rd.
(Co. Rt. 561) to its point of intersection with the physical centerline of
Grape St.;



   Thence NE following along the physical centerline of Grape St. to its
point of intersection with the physical centerline of Valley Ave.;



   Thence SE following along the physical centerline of Valley Ave. to its
point of intersection with the physical centerline of Broadway (Co. Rt. 680);



   Thence South following along the physical centerline of Broadway (Co.
Rt. 680) to its point of intersection with the physical centerline of
Greenwood Dr.;



   Thence West following along the physical centerline of Greenwood Dr.,
to its point of intersection with the physical centerline of Allen Lane;



   Thence South following along the physical centerline of Allen Lane to
its point of intersection with the physical centerline of Central Ave. (Co.
Rt. 542);



   Thence East following along the physical centerline of Central Ave.
(Co. Rt. 542) to its point of intersection with the physical centerline of
the WHP (Rt. 30);



   Thence South following along the physical centerline of the WHP (Rt.
30) to its point of intersection with the physical centerline of Sewell Ave.;



   Thence East following along the physical centerline of Sewell Ave. to
its point of intersection with the Town of Hammonton and the Twp. of Mullica
Atlantic Co. shared borders;



   Thence SW following along the Town of Hammonton and the Twp. of Mullica
Atlantic Co. shared borders to its point of intersection with the physical
centerline of the NJ Transit Atlantic City Line property which is also the
point of beginning.



District 6



Beginning at a point where the physical centerline of 12th St. (Rt. 54) is
intersected by the physical centerline of Grand St.;



   Thence NW following along the physical centerline of Grand St., to a
point where said border intersects with the physical centerline of Pleasant
St.;



   Thence NE following along the physical centerline of the Pleasant St.,
to its point of intersection with the physical centerline of Messina Ave.;



   Thence NW following along the physical centerline of Messina Ave. to
its point of intersection with the physical centerline of 13th St. (Co. Rt.
678);



   Thence NE following along the physical centerline of 13th St. (Co. Rt.
678) to its point of intersection with the physical centerline of the NJ
Transit Atlantic City Line property;



   Thence NW following along the physical centerline of the NJ Transit
Atlantic City Line property, to its point of intersection with the Town of
Hammonton, Atlantic Co. and the Twp. of Winslow, Camden Co. shared border;



   Thence NE following along the Town of Hammonton Atlantic Co. and the
Twp. of Winslow Camden Co. shared border, to its point of intersection with
the physical centerline of 3rd St./Wilsey Mill Rd. (Co. Rt. 724);



   Then South following along the physical centerline of 3rd St./Wilsey
Mill Rd. (Co. Rt. 724) to its point of intersection with the physical
centerline of 3rd St. (Co. Rt. 724);



   Thence SE following along the physical centerline of 3rd St. (Co. Rt.
724) to its point of intersection with the physical centerline of Fairview
Ave. (Co. Rt. 678);



   Thence NE following along the physical centerline of Fairview Ave. (Co.
Rt. 678) to its point of intersection with the physical centerline of 4th St.;



   Thence SE following along the physical centerline of 4th St. to its
point of intersection with the physical centerline of 12th St. (Rt. 54);



   Thence SW following along the physical centerline of 12th St. (Rt. 54)
to its point of intersection with the physical centerline of Grand St., which
is also the point of beginning.



District 7



Beginning at the point where the physical centerline of 11th St. is
intersected by the physical centerline of Grant St.;



   Thence, NW following along the physical centerline of Grand St., to a
point where said border intersects with the physical centerline of 12th St.
(Rt. 54);



   Thence, NE following along the physical centerline of the 12th St. (Rt.
54/Bellevue Ave.), to its point of intersection with the physical centerline
of the White Horse Pike (Rt. 54/Bellevue Ave.);



   Thence, SE following along the physical centerline of the White Horse
Pike (Rt. 30) to its point of intersection with the  physical centerline of
Central Ave. (Co. Rt. 542);



   Thence, West, following along the physical centerline of Central Ave.
(Co. Rt. 542), to its point of intersection with the physical centerline of
Allen Lane;



   Thence, North, following along the physical centerline of Allen Lane,
to its point of intersection with the physical centerline of Greenwood Dr.;



   Thence, West, following along the physical centerline of Greenwood Dr.
to its point of intersection with the physical centerline of Broadway (Co.
Rt. 680);



   Thence, North, following along the physical centerline of Broadway (Co.
Rt. 680) to its point of intersection with the physical centerline of Valley
Ave.;



   Thence, NW following along the physical centerline of Valley Ave. to
its point of intersection with the physical centerline of Grape St.;



   Thence, SW following along the physical centerline of Grape St. to its
point of intersection with the physical centerline of Egg Harbor Rd. (Co. Rt.
561);



   Thence, SE following along the physical centerline of Egg Harbor Rd.
(Co. Rt. 561) to its point of intersection with the physical centerline of
11th St.;



   Thence, SW following along the physical centerline of 11th St. to its
point of intersection with the physical centerline of Grand St., which is
also the point of beginning.



CHAPTER 19.
(RESERVED)



[Former Ch. 19, Employee Handbook, adopted 12-9-1996 by Ord. No. 16-1996, as
amended, was removed from the Code at the request of the Town. The current
Employee Handbook is on file in the Town offices.]



CHAPTER 22.
ETHICS, CODE OF



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton
8-26-1991 by Ord. No. 17-1991. Amendments noted where applicable.]



   § 22-1.   Title.



   § 22-2.   Findings.



   § 22-3.   Purpose and authority.



   § 22-4.   Definitions.



   § 22-5.   Ethical standards.



   § 22-6.   Financial disclosure statements.



   § 22-7.   Ethical Standards Board.



   § 22-8.   Facilities and staff.



   § 22-9.   Adoption of a Code of Ethics.



   § 22-10.   Powers of Ethical Standards Board.



   § 22-11.   Advisory opinions.



   § 22-12.   Complaints.



   § 22-13.   Enforcement; violations and penalties.



   § 22-14.   Preservation of records.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Officers and employees — See Ch. 35.



§ 22-1. Title.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Town of Hammonton
Code of Ethics."



§ 22-2. Findings.



   The Mayor and Council of the Town of Hammonton finds and declares that:



   A.   Public office and employment are a public trust.



   B.   The vitality and stability of representative democracy depend
upon the public's confidence in the integrity of its elected and appointed
representatives.



   C.   Whenever the public perceives a conflict between the private
interest and the public duties of a government officer or employees, that
confidence is imperiled.



   D.   Governments have the duty both to provide their citizens with
standards by which they may determine whether public duties are being
faithfully performed and to apprise their officers and employees of the
behavior which is expected of them while conducting their public duties.



§ 22-3. Purpose and authority.



   A.   It is the purpose of this chapter to provide a method of
assuring that standards of ethical conduct and financial disclosure
requirements for officers and employees of the Town of Hammonton shall be
clear, consistent, uniform in their application and enforceable and to
provide those officers or employees with advice and information concerning
possible conflicts of interest which might arise in the conduct of their
public duties.



   B.   It is the further purpose of this chapter to implement the
provision of the Local Government Ethics Law, P.L. 1991, c. 29 (N.J.S.A.
40A:9-22.1 et seq.).



   C.   This chapter is enacted under the authority of the Local
Government Ethics Law, P.L. 1991, c. 29 (N.J.S.A 40A:9-22.1 et seq.) and
under the further authority granted to the Town of Hammonton under the
provision of Titles 40 and 40A of the New Jersey Statutes.



§ 22-4. Definitions.



   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:



   AGENCY



   Any agency, board, governing body, including the chief, superintendent,
department head, office, commission or other instrumentality within the Town
of Hammonton, and independent local authority created by or appointed under
the authority of the Town of Hammonton which performs functions other than of
a purely advisory nature.



   BUSINESS ORGANIZATION



   Any corporation, partnership, firm, enterprise, franchise, association,
trust, sole proprietorship, union or other legal entity.



   EMPLOYEE



   Any person, whether compensated or not, whether part-time or full-time,
employed by or serving on an agency or board who is not a local government
officer.



   INTEREST



   Ownership or control of more than 10% of the profits, assets or stock
of a business organization, but shall not include the control of assets in a
nonunion profit entity or labor union.



   MEMBER OF IMMEDIATE FAMILY



   The spouse or dependent child of an officer or employee residing in the
same household.



   OFFICER Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I).



   Any person, whether compensated or not, whether part-time or full-time,
who is one of the following:



   A.   Mayor and members of Council.



   B.   Town Clerk/Administrator.



   C.   Deputy Town Clerk.



   D.   Chief Financial Officer.



   E.   Construction Code Official.



   F.   Superintendent of Sewers.



   G.   Superintendent of Water.



   H.   Chief of Police.



   I.   Captain, Police Department.



   J.   Tax Assessor.



   K.   Town Attorney.



   L.   Town Engineer.



   M.   Town Planning Consultant.



   N.   Town Auditor.



   O.   Municipal Judge.



   P.   Town Prosecutor.



   Q.   Town Public Defender.



   R.   Planning Board member.



   S.   Planning Board Attorney.



   T.   Zoning Board of Adjustment member.



   U.   Zoning Board of Adjustment Attorney.



   V.   Local Assistance Board member.



   W.   Director of Public Assistance.



   X.   Park Commission member.



   Y.   Municipal Utilities Authority member.



   Z.   Fire Chief.



   AA.   Assistant Fire Chief.



   BB.   Rent Control Board member.



   CC.   Municipal Court Administrator.



   DD.   Municipal Court Deputy Administrator.



   EE.   Any other person who is a managerial executive or confidential
employee, as defined in Section 3 of the New Jersey Employer - Employee
Relations Act (N.J.S.A. 34:13A-3) of the Town of Hammonton or of any agency
created under the authority of or appointed by the Town of Hammonton.



   OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE



   An officer or employee of the Town of Hammonton or any agency under the
authority of or appointed by the Town of Hammonton.



§ 22-5. Ethical standards.



   Officers and employees of the Town of Hammonton shall comply with the
following provisions:



   A.   No officer or employee of the Town of Hammonton or member of
his or her immediate family shall have an interest in a business organization
or engage in any business, transaction or professional activity which is in
substantial conflict with the proper discharge of his or her duties in the
public interest.



   B.   No officer or employee shall use or attempt to use his or her
official position to secure unwarranted privileges or advantages for himself
or herself or others.



   C.   No officer or employee shall act in his or her official
capacity in any matter where he or she, a member of his or her immediate
family or any business organization in which he or she has an interest has a
direct or indirect financial or personal involvement that might reasonably be
expected to impair his or her objectivity or independence of judgment.



   D.   No officer or employee shall undertake any employment or
service, whether compensated or not, which might reasonably be expected to
prejudice his or her independence of judgment in the exercise of his or her
official duties.



   E.   No officer or employee, member of his or her immediate family
or any business organization in which he or she has an interest shall solicit
or accept any gift, favor, political contribution, service, promise of future
employment or other thing of value based upon an understanding that the gift,
favor, loan, contribution, service, promise or other thing of value was given
or offered for the purpose of influencing him or her, directly or indirectly,
in the discharge of his or her official duties. This provision shall not
apply to the solicitation or acceptance of contributions to the campaign of
an announced candidate for elective public office if the officer has no
knowledge or reason to believe that the campaign contribution, if accepted,
was given with the intent to influence the officer in the discharge of his or
her official duties.



   F.   No officer or employee shall use or allow to be used his or her
public office or employment or any information not generally available to the
members of the public which he or she receives or acquires in the course of
and by reason of his or her office or employment for the purpose of securing
financial gain for himself or herself, any member of his or her immediate
family or any business organization with which he or she is associated.



   G.   No officer or employee or any business organization in which he
or she has an interest shall represent any person or party other than the
town in connection with any cause, proceeding, application or other matter
pending before any agency of the Town of Hammonton. This provision shall not
be deemed to prohibit an employee from representing another employee where
the representation is within the context of official labor union or similarly
representational responsibilities, nor shall this provision be applicable to
the Town Public Defender with respect to representation of defendants in the
Municipal Court.



   H.   No officer shall be deemed in conflict with these provisions
if, by reason of his or her participation in the enactment of any ordinance,
resolution or other matter required to be voted upon or which is subject to
executive approval or veto, no material or monetary gain accrues to him or
her as a member of any business profession, occupation or group to any
greater extent than any gain could reasonably be expected to accrue to any
other member of such business, profession, occupation or group.



   I.   No elected officer shall be prohibited from making an inquiry
for information on behalf of a constituent if no fee, reward or other thing
of value is promised to, given to or accepted by the officer or a member of
his or her immediate family, whether directly or indirectly, in return
therefor.



   J.   Nothing shall prohibit any officer or employee of the Town of
Hammonton or members of his or her immediate family from representing
himself, herself or themselves in a negotiation or proceeding concerning his,
her or their own interest.



   K.   No officer or employee elected or appointed in the town shall,
without receiving formal written authorization from the appropriate person or
body, disclose any confidential information concerning any other officer or
employee or any other person or any property or governmental affairs of the
town.



   L.   No officer or employee shall approve or disapprove or in any
way recommend the payment of any bill, voucher or indebtedness owed or
allegedly owed by the town in which he or she has a direct or indirect
personal, pecuniary or private interest.



   M.   No officer or employee elected or appointed in the town shall
request, use or permit the use of any public property, vehicle, equipment,
labor or service for personal convenience or the private advantage of
himself, herself or any other person. This prohibition shall not be deemed to
prohibit an official or employee from requesting, using or permitting the use
of such public property, vehicle, equipment, material, labor or service which
it is the general practice to make available to the public at large or which
is provided as a matter of stated public policy for the use of officials and
employees in the conduct of official business. Editor's Note: See Ch. 274,
Vehicles, Municipally Owned.



§ 22-6. Financial disclosure statements.



   A.   Officers of the town shall annually file a financial disclosure
statement. All financial disclosure statements shall include the following
information, which shall specify, where applicable, the name and address of
each source and the officer's job title:



      (1)   Each source of income, earned or unearned, exceeding
$2,000 received by the officer or a member of his or her immediate family
during the preceding calendar year. Individual client fees, customer receipts
or commission on transactions received through a business organization need
not be separately reported as sources of income. If a publicly traded
security is the source of income, the security need not be reported unless
the local government officer or member of his or her immediate family has an
interest in the business organization.



      (2)   Each source of fees and honorariums having an aggregated
amount exceeding $250 from any single source for personal appearances,
speeches or writings received by the local government officer or a member of
his or her immediate family during the preceding calendar year.



      (3)   Each source of gifts, reimbursements or prepaid expenses
having an aggregate value exceeding $400 from any single source, excluding
relatives, received by the local government officer or member of his or her
immediate family during the preceding calendar year.



      (4)   The name and address of all business organizations in
which the local government officer or a member of his or her immediate family
had an interest during the preceding calendar year.



      (5)   The address and brief description of all real property
in the state in which the local government officer or member of his or her
immediate family held an interest during the preceding calendar year.



   B.   The Town of Hammonton Ethical Standards Board shall prescribe a
financial disclosure statement form for filing purposes. If a financial
disclosure statement form has been promulgated by the New Jersey Local
Finance Board in accordance with the New Jersey Local Government Ethics Law
(N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.1 et seq.) then that form shall be used. The Town
Clerk/Administrator shall make the forms available to the officers and
employees required to file a financial disclosure statement.



   C.   The original statement shall be filed with the Town
Clerk/Administrator within 90 days after the effective date of the New Jersey
Local Government Ethics Law. All subsequent statements shall be filed on or
before April 30 of each year. A copy of the statement shall be filed with the
Town of Hammonton Ethical Standards Board.



   D.   All financial disclosure statements filed shall be public
records.



§ 22-7. Ethical Standards Board.



   A.   The Town of Hammonton Ethical Standards Board shall be composed
of six individuals who are residents of the Town of Hammonton and are at
least 18 years old at the time of the appointment. The members shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the consent and approval of Council. No more than
three members of the Board shall be of the same political party.



[Amended 7-27-1992 by Ord. No. 27-1992]



   B.   The members of the Town of Hammonton Ethical Standards Board
shall annually elect a Chairperson from among the membership.



   C.   The members shall serve for a term of five years, except that,
of the members initially appointed, two shall serve five years, two shall
serve four years and two shall serve three years. Each member shall serve
until his or her successor has been appointed and qualified. Any vacancy
occurring in the membership of the Board shall be filled in the same manner
as the original appointment for the unexpired term.



[Amended 7-27-1992 by Ord. No. 27-1992]



   D.   Members of the Board shall serve without compensation and shall
be reimbursed for necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their
duties under this chapter.



   E.   All hearings required pursuant to this chapter shall be
conducted in conformity with the rules and procedures, insofar as they may be
applicable, provided for hearings by a state agency in a contested case under
the Administrative Procedure Act, N.J.S.A. 52:14B-1 et seq.



   F.   In the event that a hearing is to be held, the officer or
employee charged with violation of this chapter shall be accorded due process
of law, including but not limited to the following:



      (1)   Right to counsel.



      (2)   Right to prehearing discover.



      (3)   Right to take sworn oral and written testimony from any
person.



      (4)   Reasonable notice of hearing.



      (5)   Right to subpoena persons and documents.



      (6)   Right to make a stenographic record of the hearing.



      (7)   Right of examination and cross-examination.



§ 22-8. Facilities and staff.



   A.   The Town Clerk/Administrator shall provide the Town of
Hammonton Ethical Standards Board with the facilities needed for the conduct
of its business and the preservation of its records and shall supply
equipment and supplies as may be necessary and as may be provided for in the
annual municipal budget.



   B.   All necessary expenses incurred by the Town of Hammonton
Ethical Standards Board and its members shall be paid, upon certification of
the Chairperson of the Board, by the Town Treasurer within the limits of the
funds appropriated in the annual budget or by emergency appropriations for
those purposes.



   C.   The Town of Hammonton Ethical Standards Board may request and
receive assistance from town officers and employees, including the Town
Clerk/Administrator and the Town Attorney, and may appoint employees,
including independent counsel, and clerical staff as are necessary to carry
out the provisions of this chapter within the limits of funds appropriated by
the Town Council for those purposes in the annual budget.



§ 22-9. Adoption of a Code of Ethics.



Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).



   A.   Within 15 days following the promulgation thereof, the Code of
Ethics and a notice of the date of the public hearing to be held on the Code
of Ethics shall be published in the newspaper designated for the publication
of official notices for the town and shall be distributed to the Town
Clerk/Administrator for circulation among the officers and employees serving
the town.



   B.   The Town of Hammonton Ethical Standards Board shall hold a
public hearing on the Code of Ethics not less than 30 days following its
promulgation at which any officer or employee of the town and any other
person wishing to be heard shall be permitted to testify.



   C.   As a result of the hearing, the Board may amend or supplement
the Code of Ethics as it deems necessary.



   D.   If the Commission fails to act within 60 days of submission,
the Code of Ethics shall be deemed approved.



   E.   A Code of Ethics requiring approval by the New Jersey Local
Finance Board shall take effect 60 days after approval by the Commission.



   F.   The Board shall forward a copy of the Code of Ethics to the
Town Clerk/Administrator and shall make copies available to officers and
employees serving the town.



§ 22-10. Powers of Ethical Standards Board.



   The Town of Hammonton Ethical Standards Board shall have the following
powers:



   A.   To initiate, receive, hear and review complaints and hold
hearings with regard to possible violation of the Municipal Code of Ethics or
financial disclosure requirements by local government officers or employees
serving the town.



   B.   To issue subpoenas for the production of documents and the
attendance of witnesses with respect to its investigation of any complaint or
to the holding of a hearing.



   C.   To forward the County Prosecutor or the Attorney General or
other governmental body any information concerning violation of the Code of
Ethics or financial disclosure requirements of officers or employees serving
the town which may warrant the institution of other legal proceedings by the
Attorney General.



   D.   To render advisory opinions to local officers or employees
serving the town as to whether a given set of facts and circumstances would
constitute a violation of any provision of the Code of Ethics or financial
disclosure requirements.



   E.   To enforce the provisions of the Code of Ethics and financial
disclosure requirements with regard to officers or employees serving the town
and to impose penalties for the violation thereof as are authorized by this
chapter.



   F.   To adopt rules and regulations and to do other things as are
necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter.



§ 22-11. Advisory opinions.



   A.   An officer or employee of the Town of Hammonton may request and
obtain from the Town of Hammonton Ethical Standards Board an advisory opinion
as to whether any proposed activity or conduct would, in its opinion,
constitute a violation of the Code of Ethics or any financial disclosure
requirements.



   B.   Advisory opinions shall not be made public, except when the
Board, by the vote of 2/3 of all of its members, directs that the opinion be
made public.



   C.   Public advisory opinion shall not disclose the name of the
officer or employee unless the Board, in directing that the opinion be made
public, so determines.



§ 22-12. Complaints.



   A.   The Town of Hammonton Ethical Standards Board, upon receipt of
a signed written complaint by any person alleging that the conduct of any
officer or employee of the Town of Hammonton serving in the town is in
conflict with the Code of Ethics or financial disclosure requirements, shall
acknowledge receipt of the complaint within 30 days of receipt and initiate
an investigation concerning the facts and circumstances set forth in the
complaint.



   B.   The Board shall make a determination as to whether the
complaint is within its jurisdiction or frivolous or without any reasonable
factual basis.



   C.   If the Board shall conclude that the complaint is within its
jurisdiction or frivolous or without any reasonable factual basis.



   D.   If the Board shall conclude that the complaint is within its
jurisdiction and has at least a minimal factual basis, the Board shall notify
the officer or employee of the Town of Hammonton against whom the complaint
was filed of the nature of the complaint and the facts and circumstances set
forth therein.



   E.   The officer or employee shall have the opportunity to present
the Board with any statement or information concerning the complaint which he
or she wishes.



   F.   If the Board determines that a reasonable doubt exists as to
whether the officer or employee of the Town of Hammonton is in conflict with
the Municipal Code of Ethics or any financial disclosure requirements, the
Board shall conduct a hearing concerning the possible violation and any other
facts and circumstances which may have come to the attention of the Board
with respect to the conduct of the officer or employee.



   G.   The Board shall render a decision as to whether the conduct of
the officer or employee is in conflict with the Code of Ethics or any
financial disclosure requirements. This decision shall be made by no less
than 2/3 of all members of the Board.



   H.   If the Board determines that the officer or employee is in
conflict with the code or any financial disclosure requirements, it may
impose any penalties which it believes appropriate, within the limits of this
chapter.



§ 22-13. Enforcement; violations and penalties.



   A.   An appointed officer or employee of the Town of Hammonton found
guilty by the Town of Hammonton Ethical Standards Board of the violation of
any provision of this chapter or of any Code of Ethics in effect pursuant to
this chapter shall be subject to one or more of the following: a fine of not
more than $1,000, imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days or a period
of community service not to exceed 90 days, which penalty may be collected in
a summary proceeding pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement Law, N.J.S.A.
2A:58-1. The Town of Hammonton Ethical Standards Board shall report its
findings to the officer or agency having the power of removal or discipline
of the appointed officer or employee and may recommend that further
disciplinary action be taken.



   B.   An elected officer or employee of the Town of Hammonton found
guilty by the Town of Hammonton Ethical Standards Board of the violation of
any provision of this chapter or of any Code of Ethics in effect pursuant to
this chapter shall be subject to one or more of the following: a fine of not
more than $1,000, imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days or a period
of community service not to exceed 90 days, which penalty may be collected in
a summary proceeding pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement Law, N.J.S.A.
2A:58-1.



   C.   The findings by the Town of Hammonton Ethical Standards Board
that an appointed officer or employee of the Town of Hammonton is guilty of
the violation of the provisions of this chapter or of any Code of Ethics in
effect pursuant to this chapter shall be sufficient cause for his or her
removal, suspension or demotion or disciplinary action by the officer or
agency having the power of removal or discipline. When a person who is in the
career service is found to have violated the provisions of this chapter or
any Code of Ethics in effect pursuant to this chapter, the procedure leading
to removal, suspension, demotion or other disciplinary action shall be
governed by any applicable procedures of Title 11A of the New Jersey statutes
and the rules promulgated pursuant thereto.



§ 22-14. Preservation of records.



   All statements, complaints, requests or other written materials filed
pursuant to this chapter and any rulings, opinions, judgments, transcripts or
other official papers prepared pursuant to this chapter shall be preserved
for a period of five years from the date of filing or preparation, as the
case may be.



CHAPTER 25.
FIRE DEPARTMENT



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton as
indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]



ARTICLE I.
Control and Operating Provisions



   § 25-1.   Composition of Fire Department.



   § 25-2.   Applicability of state laws.



   § 25-3.   Powers and duties of Chief and Assistant Chief.



   § 25-4.   Minimum and maximum age of members.



   § 25-5.   Discipline and efficiency of Fire Department.



   § 25-6.   Suspension of members.



ARTICLE II.
Maintenance of Operation



   § 25-7.   Compensation of active fire fighters.



   § 25-8.   Submission of list of members to Town Clerk/Administrator.



   § 25-9.   Number of members limited.



   § 25-10.   Attendance at drills required.



ARTICLE III.
Junior Firefighters Program



   § 25-11.   Purpose.



   § 25-12.   Qualifications.



   § 25-13.   Junior Firefighters' Auxiliary.



   § 25-14.   Insurance.



ARTICLE IV.
Cost Reimbursement



   § 25-15.   Definitions.



   § 25-16.   Authorization to recover costs and expenses.



   § 25-17.   Schedule of fees and costs.



   § 25-18.   Collection of costs.



   § 25-19.   Interest and administrative fees.



   § 25-20.   Disposition of funds received.



   § 25-21.   Collection action.



   § 25-22.   Waiver of subrogation rights.



   Exhibit A



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Bureau of Fire Prevention — See Ch. 28.



   Fire prevention — See Ch. 144.



Article I.
Control and Operating Provisions



[Adopted 9-13-1971 by Ord. No. 10-1971 as Art. I of Ch. 23 of the 1971 Code]



§ 25-1. Composition of Fire Department.



   All fire companies existing or which may hereafter exist in the Town of
Hammonton and operating under the control of the town shall hereafter be
known as the "Fire Department of the Town of Hammonton," and the present
existing volunteer fire companies known as the "Hammonton Volunteer Fire
Company" and the "Independent Volunteer Fire Company" are recognized as
members of the said Department. Any volunteer fire company which may
hereafter be organized may be admitted to this Department by and with the
consent of Council.



§ 25-2. Applicability of state laws.



   The several fire companies composing said Fire Department shall be
subject to all the laws of the state pertaining to fire departments in towns
and may receive any benefits resulting there from.



§ 25-3. Powers and duties of Chief and Assistant Chief.



   There shall be elected in the month of October in each year or whenever
a vacancy occurs a Fire Chief and an Assistant Fire Chief, who shall have
command and control of said Fire Department, including engines, hose or other
apparatus or appliances necessarily used in fire departments and may require
the fire companies to keep the same in good condition at all times. They
shall also have full charge and command the Fire Department and fire
apparatus during all occasions of fire or emergency. They shall also have
control of all public cisterns, public pumps or other supplies of water on
occasions of emergency from fire or otherwise, and may require one or more of
said companies to empty any cistern or cisterns requiring cleaning or
repairing, and shall also have charge of and distribute any material required
for the use of firemen, engines, hose carts, ladders, trucks etc., provided
by Council. The Assistant Fire Chief shall always be subordinate to the Fire
Chief, and in the absence or inability of the Fire Chief to perform the
duties of said office, the Assistant Fire Chief shall have the same power and
perform the same duties as the Fire Chief.



§ 25-4. Minimum and maximum age of members.



[Added 2-24-1975 by Ord. No. 7-1975]



   No person shall be appointed and approved for membership in any
volunteer fire company of the Town of Hammonton who has not reached the age
of 18 years as of the date of appointment nor shall anyone be so appointed
and become a member of a volunteer fire company of the Town of Hammonton
after said individual has reached his or her 46th birthday. Editor's Note:
Former § 23-4, Drill requirements; § 23-5, Power to appoint deputy police;
and § 23-6, Interfering and obstructing firemen; penalty, which immediately
followed this section, were deleted 7-23-2001 by Ord. No. 26-2001.



§ 25-5. Discipline and efficiency of Fire Department.



   The various fire companies composing the Fire Department of the Town of
Hammonton may impose suitable fines or other penalties on the members in
order to promote discipline and maintain efficiency of the Fire Department.
The Fire Chief shall have power to compel each or all of the companies to
observe the provisions of this section as well as any rules that may be
adopted by the several companies included in this article.



§ 25-6. Suspension of members.



   For any cause deemed sufficient, Council may reprimand, suspend or
remove from office the Chief or any officer or officers of any of the
companies composing the Fire Department.



Article II.
Maintenance of Operation



[Adopted 9-13-1971 by Ord. No. 10-1971 as Art. II of Ch. 23 of the 1971 Code]



§ 25-7. Compensation of active fire fighters.



   The annual sum of money or compensation to be paid active volunteer
fire fighters shall be as set by the Mayor and Common Council in the yearly
Salary Ordinance. Editor's Note: The Salary Ordinance is on file in the
office of the Town Clerk/Administrator.



§ 25-8. Submission of list of members to Town Clerk/Administrator.



   The Secretaries of each volunteer fire company shall, on or before the
first day of June each year, file with the Town Clerk/Administrator of the
Town of Hammonton a correct list of all its members as of May 20.



§ 25-9. Number of members limited.



   The membership of Company No. 1 shall not exceed 40 members, and of
Company No. 2 shall not exceed 40 members.



§ 25-10. Attendance at drills required.



[Amended 7-23-2001 by Ord. No. 26-2001]



   The volunteer fire companies shall compel the attendance of all its
members at all drills ordered by the Fire Chief. Editor's Note: Former §
23-14, Attendance at fires, penalty; § 23-15, Members may be excused from
fines for nonattendance; and § 23-16, Payment of fines, which immediately
followed this section, were deleted 7-23-2001 by Ord. No. 26-2001.



Article III.
Junior Firefighters Program



[Adopted 10-23-1995 by Ord. No. 27-1995]



§ 25-11. Purpose.



   The Town of Hammonton is fortunate that it has within its boundaries
two fine volunteer Fire Departments. In an effort to continue that tradition
so that each Department may have talented and dedicated individuals to draw
upon and to promote fire safety and prevention, it is the purpose of this
article to permit each Fire Department to establish a junior firefighters
program.



§ 25-12. Qualifications.



   In order for a minor to become a member of the junior firefighters
program, he or she must meet the following requirements:



   A.   Be at least 14 years old but not more than 18 years old.



   B.   Provide a certificate of examination by a physician licensed to
practice in the State of New Jersey indicating that the proposed member is
physically fit and suffering from no illness or disability that would prevent
him/her from being a junior firefighter.



   C.   Be a resident of the Town of Hammonton.



   D.   Be approved by the Mayor and Council upon recommendation of the
Fire Chief.



§ 25-13. Junior Firefighters' Auxiliary.



[Amended 7-25-2011 by Ord. No. 16-2011]



   A.   Class I Junior Firefighters' Auxiliary: Individuals aged 16 and
17 shall be permitted to participate as a member of the Junior Fire fighters'
Auxiliary, conditioned upon compliance with the following rules:



      (1)   That the regular Fire Department provides adequate
training to Class I members.



      (2)   While the Class I members of the Junior Firefighters'
Auxiliary shall be permitted to be present at the fire scene, they shall be
limited to their duties in providing support for the others fighting the fire
and in providing services of a nonhazardous nature.



      (3)   At the scene of any fire, the Class I junior firefighter
shall be properly supervised by a full-fledged Department member.



      (4)   No Class I junior firefighter may oil, wipe or clean
machinery in motion.



      (5)   Prior to commencement of any Class I junior
firefighter's activities, a written authorization, on a form to be prepared
by the Clerk's office, shall clearly indicate that the parent and/or guardian
consents to his or her child's participation in the activities in question.



      (6)   The Town of Hammonton shall provide insurance coverage
to the Junior Firefighters' Auxiliary in the same method and manner as it
provides insurance coverage to full-fledged members.



   B.   Class II Junior Fire fighters' Auxiliary: Individuals aged 14
and 15 shall be permitted to participate as a member of the Junior Fire
fighters' Auxiliary, conditioned upon compliance with the following rules:



      (1)   They shall be permitted to attend meetings.



      (2)   They shall be permitted to receive instruction.



      (3)   They shall be permitted to participate in training that
does not involve fire, smoke, toxic or noxious gas or hazardous materials or
substances.



      (4)   No Class II junior firefighter may oil, wipe or clean
machinery in motion.



      (5)   While they are performing their observational
activities, Class II junior firefighters shall remain under the supervision
of a full-fledged member.



      (6)   Prior to commencement of any Class II junior
firefighter's activities, a written authorization, on a form to be prepared
by the Clerk's office, shall clearly indicate that the parent and/or guardian
consents to his or her child's participation in the activities in question.



   C.   The respective Fire Departments of the Town of Hammonton are
hereby authorized to add such additional requirements, subject to Mayor and
Council approval, as each deems necessary for the protection, training and
retention of its Junior Firefighters' Auxiliary members.



§ 25-14. Insurance.



   Junior firefighters may be included for coverage through the town's
participation in the Atlantic County Municipal Joint Insurance Fund or
similar coverage. If, however, the local volunteer organizations desire to
pursue the formation of a junior program, then they must submit a draft copy
of their proposed bylaws for review by the Atlantic County Municipal Joint
Insurance Fund or other carrier designated by the town. This requirement is
to ensure that there will be no problems with insurance coverage.



Article IV.
Cost Reimbursement



[Adopted 3-17-2008 by Ord. No. 5-2008]



§ 25-15. Definitions.



   As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:



   FIRE DEPARTMENT



   The Town of Hammonton Fire Department.



   PERSON



   A natural person or persons, partnership, corporation, association, or
firm or other legal entity.



§ 25-16. Authorization to recover costs and expenses.



   The governing body of the Town of Hammonton hereby authorizes the
Hammonton Fire Department to recover certain costs associated with its
emergency responses within the Town of Hammonton, including but not limited
to the following: fire apparatus, firefighters and other personnel costs,
materials, equipment, and all other material, labor and equipment
expenditures necessary to resolve an emergency situation.



§ 25-17. Schedule of fees and costs.



   Attached hereto, incorporated herein and made a part hereof as Exhibit
A is a schedule of fees and costs which have been authorized by the governing
body of the Town of Hammonton to be charged by the Hammonton Fire Department.
These fees and costs may be charged or invoiced to any person, entity (or
their respective insurance carrier) to whom emergency services were rendered.
It shall be the stated policy of the Town of Hammonton to refrain from
seeking reimbursement from individuals in the event that their insurance
carriers fail to provide reimbursement. In that case, the debt will be deemed
uncollectible. It shall be permissible to increase the costs of the line
items set forth in Exhibit A by application of the annual Philadelphia-based
Consumer Price Index. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included at the end of this
chapter.



§ 25-18. Collection of costs.



   Costs and fees as outlined above and in Exhibit A will be recovered by
the Town of Hammonton Fire Department Administrator or his/her designee.
Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included at the end of this chapter.



§ 25-19. Interest and administrative fees.



   In addition to the aforementioned fees and costs, the Hammonton Fire
Department will assess interest at a rate of 7.00% per annum, together with
reasonable administrative fees for the cost of collection of any debt
outstanding for more than 60 days.



§ 25-20. Disposition of funds received.



   Funds received by the Hammonton Fire Department will be deposited in
the "Hammonton Fire Department Equipment Trust Fund." This fund will be held
in trust by the Town of Hammonton and funds will be expended through use of
purchase orders through the Town of Hammonton. Under no circumstances shall
these funds be utilized for operating expenses. It is the intention of this
article to designate these funds for capital expenditures only. The trust
fund in question shall be for the exclusive use of Hammonton Fire Company No.
1 and No. 2 and shall not be utilized by any other Town department or outside
entity.



§ 25-21. Collection action.



   The Fire Department shall have the discretion to forward any unpaid
bill (outstanding for more than 60 days) to the Town Solicitor for
appropriate collection action, including, if necessary, judicial enforcement
in a court of competent jurisdiction within the State of New Jersey. The
Hammonton Fire Department reserves the right to collect costs incurred
through collection enforcement.



§ 25-22. Waiver of subrogation rights.



[Added 6-28-2010 by Ord. No. 12-2010]



   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Town and the Fire Department shall
waive their subrogation rights, if any, to the extent it receives payment for
any claim hereunder from the Joint Insurance Fund and specifically assigns to
the Joint Insurance Fund and/or its agents, servants and employees the right
to pursue such subrogation claims on behalf of the Town and Fire Department.



EXHIBIT A



Fee Schedule



The fee schedule for Hammonton Fire Department response is shown below. The
Hammonton Fire Department will make all determinations on type of response.
The Hammonton Fire Department also reserves the right to waive any and all
charges at its discretion for any reason. After the first hour of billed
response, additional time will be billed in 1/2 hour increments. All charges
are for first hour of response. Additional hours will be billed at regular
cost. Incidents lasting more  than three hours will be billed the Command
Post surcharge of $500.



Motor vehicle fire. Defined as a fire or reported fire in, on or around any
motor vehicle or other means of transportation. "Motor vehicle" for purposes
of the Hammonton Fire Department is any mode of transportation that requires
registration with the New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles or its
corresponding agency in another state. The cost for response shall be $350
per fire apparatus per hour.



Motor vehicle accident. Defined as an actual or reported motor vehicle
accident. "Motor vehicle accident," for the purposes of the Hammonton Fire
Department, shall be an incident involving one or more motor vehicles
striking another object. Cost for this response will be $250 per apparatus
per hour.



Motor vehicle accident with fire. Defined as an actual or reported motor
vehicle accident where a fire or suspected fire ensues. This will include
fires resulting from mechanical malfunction as well as a motor vehicle
accident. For the purposes of the Hammonton Fire Department, a fire consists
of a reported or actual burning in, on or around the motor vehicle. "Motor
vehicle accident," for the purposes of the Hammonton Fire Department, shall
be an incident involving one or more motor vehicles striking another object.
Cost will be $450 per apparatus per hour.



Helicopter landing assignment. Defined as any and all emergencies where the
Hammonton Fire Department is required to land one or more helicopters. Each
landing will be billed at $250 per zone. Helicopter landings that are
cancelled by EMS or the helicopter pilot shall be billed at $125 if a landing
zone is established prior to the cancellation.



Traffic control assignments. Defined as any and all requested traffic control
assignments. These can result from any type of incident occurring in the Town
of Hammonton. The cost for this response will be $400 per hour. This charge
is all inclusive and billed hourly.



Structure fires. The Hammonton Fire Department will respond to any and all
reported or actual structure fires in the Town of Hammonton. For purposes of
the Hammonton Fire Department, a "structure fire" will be a reported or
actual fire in any residential, commercial or industrial structure in the
Town of Hammonton. The cost for this response will be $500 per hour. This
charge is all inclusive and billed hourly.



Alarm malfunctions. Defined as all reported fire or other alarm activations
in the Town of Hammonton where the Fire Department is dispatched to respond.
In the event that this response is determined to be a malfunctioning alarm or
an accidental activation, fines will be levied via the following schedule.
First offense- written warning; second offense - $25 fine; third offense -
$50 fine; fourth offense - $50 fine. "Billable alann malfunctions" are
defined as repeat activations of an alarm based on failure of the alarm
system or the acts of individuals which cause said alarm system to activate
incorrectly. These above offenses must occur within a twelve-month period.



Mulch, grass, bush, tree or agricultural products. The Hammonton Fire
Department will respond to all dispatched calls for the above type of fire or
suspected fire. In the event that the Hammonton Fire Department responds
twice or more to the same location or general location for a same or similar
incident within a calendar year, a fee of $250 will be imposed for additional
offenses. This fee is applicable to tenants, management companies and/or
building owners. The Hammonton Fire Department reserves the right to
determine who is the billable entity.



Turn-out-gear. In the event that Hammonton Fire Department h1m-out-gear is
damaged or destroyed as a result of responding to any incident, its
replacement costs will be billed as follows:



   Helmet: $200.



   Nomex hood: $50



   Nomex jacket: $700



   Nomex pants: $700



   Suspenders: $75



   Gloves: $50



   Boots: $125



CHAPTER 35.
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton as
indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]



ARTICLE I.
Radio Operators



   § 35-1.   Positions created.



   § 35-2.   Control and supervision.



   § 35-3.   Hours of employment.



ARTICLE II.
Chief Financial Officer



   § 35-4.   Purpose and legislative authority.



   § 35-5.   Term; manner of appointment.



   § 35-6.   Duties and responsibilities.



ARTICLE III.
Tax Assessor Hours



   § 35-7.   Minimum hours.



   § 35-8.   Opening of office.



ARTICLE IV.
Municipal Clerk



   § 35-9.   Legislative findings.



   § 35-10.   Duties.



   § 35-11.   Qualifications.



   § 35-12.   Term.



ARTICLE V.
Town Solicitor



   § 35-13.   Purpose.



   § 35-14.   Term.



   § 35-15.   Appointment.



   § 35-16.   Contract; compensation.



ARTICLE VI.
Assistant Superintendent of Highways



   § 35-17.   Purpose.



   § 35-18.   Position created.



   § 35-19.   Succession of authority.



   § 35-20.   Length of appointment.



ARTICLE VII.
Technical Assistant, Office of the Construction Official



   § 35-21.   Purpose.



   § 35-22.   Supervisory authority; duties.



   § 35-23.   Qualifications.



   § 35-24.   Salary.



   § 35-25.   Compliance with laws and regulations.



ARTICLE VIII.
Municipal Tax Assessor



   § 35-26.   Purpose.



   § 35-27.   Board of Assessors abolished.



   § 35-28.   Establishment of position.



   § 35-29.   Term of office; vacancies.



   § 35-30.   Qualifications.



   § 35-31.   Duties.



   § 35-32.   Effect on present employees.



ARTICLE IX.
Accountant in Treasurer's Office



   § 35-33.   Purpose.



   § 35-34.   Specifications.



   § 35-35.   Salary.



ARTICLE X.
Deputy Clerk



   § 35-36.   Position created.



   § 35-37.   Appointment.



   § 35-38.   Under direction of Town Clerk; duties.



   § 35-39.   Absence of Town Clerk/Administrator.



ARTICLE XI.
Municipal Housing Liaison



   § 35-40.   Purpose.



   § 35-41.   Definitions.



   § 35-42.   Establishment of position; compensation; powers and
duties.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Boards, committees and commissions — See Ch. 6.



   Code of Ethics — See Ch. 22.



   Personnel policies — See Ch. 48.



Article I.
Radio Operators



[Adopted 9-13-1971 by Ord. No. 10-1971 as Art. I of Ch. 11 of the 1971 Code]



§ 35-1. Positions created.



   There are hereby created the following positions in the Town of
Hammonton:



   A.   Chief Radio Operator.



   B.   Three radio operators.



   C.   Such substitute radio operators on a part-time basis as needed.



§ 35-2. Control and supervision.



[Amended 4-28-1980 by Ord. No. 12-1980]



   The Chief Radio Operator and the radio operators shall be responsible
to and under the direct control and supervision of the Chief of Police of the
Town of Hammonton and to the Law and Order Committee of the governing body of
the Town of Hammonton.



§ 35-3. Hours of employment.



[Added 12-22-1958 by Ord. No. 17-1958]



   A.   Hours of employment limited. The normal workweek of employment
for the Chief Radio Operator and the radio operators of the Town of Hammonton
shall be 40 hours.



   B.   Emergencies. In case of an emergency the Mayor, the Chairperson
of the Law and Order Committee of the Common Council or the Chief of Police
shall have full authority to summon and keep on duty any and all such radio
operators during the period of emergency. The determination of the Mayor or
the Chairperson of the Law and Order Committee as to the existence of an
emergency shall be conclusive.



Article II.
Chief Financial Officer



[Adopted 1-23-1989 by Ord. No. 1-1989]



§ 35-4. Purpose and legislative authority.



   The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has by and through Chapter
110 of the Laws of 1988 (N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1 et seq.) that every
municipality must have as its Chief Financial Officer by January 1, 1991, an
official who is certified as a municipal finance officer under New Jersey
Statutes therein made and provided and has mandated that the position of
Chief Financial Officer be created by ordinance on or before February 18,
1989. Editor's Note: Former § 22-2, Position defined; eligibility, which
immediately followed this section, was deleted 7-23-2001 by Ord. No. 26-2001.



§ 35-5. Term; manner of appointment.



   The Chief Financial Officer shall first be appointed for a term to
expire December 31, 1990, and shall be appointed every two years thereafter
for a two-year term. Said appointment shall be by vote of the Mayor and Town
Council.



§ 35-6. Duties and responsibilities.



   The Chief Financial Officer of the Town of Hammonton shall carry out
all of the responsibilities as set forth in Chapter 151 of the Public Laws of
1947 (N.J.S.A. 52:27BB-1 et seq.) and all rules and regulations promulgated
there under.



Article III.
Tax Assessor Hours



[Adopted 2-26-1990 by Ord. No. 4-1990]



§ 35-7. Minimum hours.



   The Municipal Tax Assessor of the Town of Hammonton shall maintain and
be required to maintain as a condition of employment certain minimum hours of
employment as follows: Monday through Friday of each week, except legal
holidays, sick days and vacation days, the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.



§ 35-8. Opening of office.



   It shall be the responsibility of the Municipal Tax Assessor of the
Town of Hammonton to keep open the office of the Tax Assessor during said
minimum hours for the benefit of the general public and citizens of the Town
of Hammonton.



Article IV
Municipal Clerk



[Adopted 12-9-1991 by Ord. No. 25-1991]



§ 35-9. Legislative findings.



[Amended 3-26-2012 by Ord. No. 4B-2012]



   N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133 requires every municipality to appoint a Municipal
Clerk for a term of three years commencing January 1.



§ 35-10. Duties.



[Amended 3-26-2012 by Ord. No. 4B-2012]



   The Municipal Clerk shall perform all duties of the Clerk of the Town
of Hammonton, as may be prescribed by the statutes of the State of New Jersey
and particularly N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133.



§ 35-11. Qualifications.



[Amended 3-26-2012 by Ord. No. 4B-2012]



   The Mayor and Council shall appoint a Municipal Clerk to a three year
term effective January 1st and expiring December 31st.  However, no person
shall be re-appointed unless they hold the required Registered Municipal
Clerk Certificate issued pursuant to Section 3 or Section 4 of P.L. 1985,
c.174.



§ 35-12. Term. 



[Amended 3-26-2012 by Ord. No. 4B-2012]



   The term of office for a municipal clerk shall be three years and upon
re-appointment the Municipal Clerk shall become tenured upon completion of
his/her fifth year in office.



Article V
Town Solicitor



[Adopted 3-14-1994 by Ord. No. 7-1994]



§ 35-13. Purpose.



   The New Jersey Legislature has enacted N.J.S.A. 40A:9-139. This statute
gives every municipality the right to create, by ordinance, the position of
Municipal Attorney. The individual appointed to this position shall handle
the legal affairs for the municipality. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 38,
Outside Counsel Fee Schedule. The position created shall be entitled "Town
Solicitor."



§ 35-14. Term.



   The office of Town Solicitor shall be for a term of one year, which
term shall commence on January 1 of each given year and terminate at 11:59
a.m. on December 31 of each given year, with the understanding that the
holder of said office is appointed. It is understood that the Town of
Hammonton has, by tradition, made this appointment at the Mayor and Council
reorganization meeting, which is held at 12:00 noon on January 1 of each year.



§ 35-15. Appointment.



   The Town Solicitor shall be appointed by the Mayor and Common Council
of the Town of Hammonton.



§ 35-16. Contract; compensation.



   The Town Solicitor shall be required to enter into a contract with the
governing body, which shall set forth the terms and conditions of employment
and the compensation to be paid.



Article VI.
Assistant Superintendent of Highways



[Adopted 3-28-1994 by Ord. No. 8-1994]



§ 35-17. Purpose.



   The Town of Hammonton acknowledges the need to establish a chain of
command for supervision of the Town Highway Department. The purpose of this
article is to establish a chain of command so that there can be an orderly
and smooth operation, addressing all of the Highway Department duties, when
the Superintendent of Highways is absent for any reason.



§ 35-18. Position created.



   The Town hereby creates the position of Assistant Superintendent, which
position shall be filled by the Mayor and Council and be compensated
according to the Salary Ordinance adopted by the Mayor and Council. Editor's
Note: Said Salary Ordinance is on file at the office of the Town
Clerk/Municipal Administrator. The Assistant Superintendent shall not be
considered a person in a management position but shall be responsible for
carrying out the instructions of the Superintendent and also be responsible
for the operation of the Department in the absence of the Superintendent.



§ 35-19. Succession of authority.



   The Superintendent of Highways is responsible for the day-to-day
operation of the Town Highway Department. The Superintendent shall use
his/her best efforts to run the Department to adequately meet the needs of
the Town of Hammonton and carry out the policies of the Mayor and Council. In
the Superintendent's absence, the Assistant Superintendent shall be
responsible for the operation of the Highway Department. If the
Superintendent and Assistant Superintendent are absent, the Chairperson of
the Highway Department shall be responsible for the operation of the
Department.



§ 35-20. Length of appointment.



   The individual selected as Assistant Superintendent by the Mayor and
Council shall continue in that capacity so long as he/she is performing the
duties of the position satisfactory to the Mayor and Council.



Article VII.
Technical Assistant, Office of the Construction Official



[Adopted 6-20-1994 by Ord. No. 15-1994]



§ 35-21. Purpose.



   There is hereby created in the Town of Hammonton the position of
Technical Assistant, Office of the Construction Official. It is the express
purpose of this article to properly title the duties presently being
performed by the clerk typist in that same department and to comply with the
titling regulations of the New Jersey Department of Civil Service, Division
of Local Government Services.



§ 35-22. Supervisory authority; duties.



   The person hired for this position shall work under the direction of
the Building Inspector. The person shall provide technical assistance in the
issuance of permits for building construction, ensure compliance with the
provisions of the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119
et seq.) and do all related work associated with the aforementioned. The
duties include but are not limited to the following:



   A.   Review applications for construction permits to ensure they are
complete.



   B.   Issue permits after authorization by the department head or
appropriate Subcode official.



   C.   Assist the general public in completing applications for
permits.



   D.   Calculate fees for permits.



   E.   Conduct research and gather information.



   F.   Maintain necessary records and files.



   G.   Prepare reports, narratives and correspondence.



   H.   Handle the typing and recordkeeping requirements of the office.



§ 35-23. Qualifications.



   The minimum requirements for the position include:



   A.   Two years of experience in work involving the processing,
reviewing and issuing of building construction permits.



   B.   Thorough knowledge of the provisions of the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code.



   C.   A resident of the Town of Hammonton.



   D.   A high school diploma or a general equivalency diploma (GED).



   E.   The ability to read, write, speak, understand or communicate in
English. Communication may include American Sign Language and/or Braille.



   F.   The ability to type and handle clerical duties.



§ 35-24. Salary.



   The salary for the position shall be subject to negotiation by the
Mayor and Council and the person so hired or their respective representatives.



§ 35-25. Compliance with laws and regulations.



   The hiring process shall follow the applicable Civil Service Rules and
Regulations and any other State of New Jersey law that is applicable.



Article VIII.
Municipal Tax Assessor



[Adopted 5-22-1995 by Ord. No. 10-1995]



§ 35-26. Purpose.



   The purpose of this article is to comply with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-146.1 et seq. A review of the Code of the Town of Hammonton
reveals that the municipal ordinances are in conflict with the aforementioned
state statute which abolished a Municipal Board of Assessors.



§ 35-27. Board of Assessors abolished.



   N.J.S.A. 40A:9-146.1, adopted and effective January 6, 1982, states in
pertinent part hereto that "Board of Assessors created prior to the effective
date of this act are hereby abolished." The Town of Hammonton, by Ordinance
No. 15-1972, previously created a Board of Assessors and, by virtue of this
article, that ordinance, codified as Chapter 58 of the Code of the Town of
Hammonton, is hereby repealed in its entirety.



§ 35-28. Establishment of position.



   Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-146 et seq., there is hereby established in
the Town of Hammonton, County of Atlantic, State of New Jersey, a position to
be known and designated as "Municipal Tax Assessor." Said position shall be
established as a full-time position, and any appointee to said position shall
work on the duties thereof during normal business hours on each weekday or at
such other times as can be agreed upon by the governing body.



§ 35-29. Term of office; vacancies.



   The term of office shall be for four years from the first day of July
next following his/her appointment. Vacancies other than those due to
expiration of the term shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term.



§ 35-30. Qualifications.



   A Municipal Tax Assessor must hold a Tax Assessor certificate provided
for by law and also hold a valid New Jersey driver's license.



§ 35-31. Duties.



   The Municipal Tax Assessor shall list and compile the yearly tax books;
assist in the preparation of records for appeals to the county and state tax
boards; answer inquiries and give information pertaining to tax assessments;
note dispositions of tax search records and review tax records; check the
location of property; verify and keep up-to-date names and addresses of
owners of property; and do such other work of a specialized clerical nature
as is delegated to him or her by the County Board of Tax Assessors and the
Mayor and Council of the Town of Hammonton.



§ 35-32. Effect on present employees.



   Nothing contained in this article shall adversely affect the salary or
tenure rights acquired during previous employment of the person discharging
the duties of Municipal Tax Assessor.



Article IX.
Accountant in Treasurer's Office



[Adopted 6-26-2000 by Ord. No. 15-2000]



§ 35-33. Purpose.



   The purpose of this article is to establish the position which shall be
known as "accountant" within the office of the Treasurer and Tax Collector.



§ 35-34. Specifications.



   The position of accountant shall be defined in accordance with
specifications as published by the New Jersey Department of Personnel which
shall include and not be limited to the performing of routine accounting work
involved in preparing financial statements and in maintaining an accounting
system and related work under the direction of the Treasurer, Tax Collector
and Chief Financial Officer (CFO). Responsibilities shall also include and
not be limited to the examples of work as published by the Department of
Personnel, Job Specification 00004, which is incorporated herein by reference
and supplemented by the governing body of the Town of Hammonton from time to
time.



§ 35-35. Salary.



   The amount to be paid to the person filling the position of accountant
shall be in accordance with Salary Ordinance adopted by the governing body.
Editor's Note: The Salary Ordinance is on file in the office of the Town
Clerk/Administrator.



Article X.
Deputy Clerk



[Adopted 9-13-1971 by Ord. No. 10-1971 as Ch. 15 of the 1971 Code]



§ 35-36. Position created.



   There is hereby created in the Town of Hammonton the position of Deputy
Town Clerk.



§ 35-37. Appointment.



[Amended 10-22-2001 by Ord. No. 31-2001; 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 33-2008]



   A.   The Deputy Town Clerk shall be appointed by the Mayor and
Council of the Town of Hammonton, per the recommendation of the Town Clerk,
for a term of one year and shall commence on January 1 of the year of
appointment and terminate 12 months thereafter on December 31 at midnight.



   B.   Should a Deputy Town Clerk be appointed mid year, then the term
of appointment shall still expire December 31 at midnight of the same year of
appointment.



§ 35-38. Under direction of Town Clerk; duties.



[Amended 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 33-2008]



   The Deputy Town Clerk shall be subordinate to and under the direction
of the Town Clerk/Administrator and shall take charge of and perform all
duties assigned to him/her pertaining to the office of the Town
Clerk/Administrator as directed by the Town Clerk/Administrator.



§ 35-39. Absence of Town Clerk/Administrator.



   The Deputy Town Clerk shall have all the powers and perform all the
duties of the Town Clerk/Administrator during such times and for such
specific periods as the Town Clerk/Administrator shall be absent.



Article XI.
Municipal Housing Liaison



[Adopted 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 35-2008]



§ 35-40. Purpose.



   The purpose of this article is to create the administrative mechanisms
needed for the execution of the Town of Hammonton's responsibility to assist
in the provision of affordable housing pursuant to the Fair Housing Act of
1985.



§ 35-41. Definitions.



   As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:



   ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT



   The entity responsible for administering the affordability controls of
some or all units in the affordable housing program for the Town of Hammonton
to ensure that the restricted units under administration are affirmatively
marketed and sold or rented, as applicable, only to low- and moderate-income
households.



   MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON



   The employee charged by the governing body with the responsibility for
oversight and administration of the affordable housing program for the Town
of Hammonton is Frank Zuber.



§ 35-42. Establishment of position; compensation; powers and duties.



   A.   Establishment of position of Municipal Housing Liaison. There
is hereby established the position of Municipal housing Liaison for the Town
of Hammonton.



   B.   Subject to the approval of the Council on Affordable Housing
(COAH), the Municipal Housing Liaison shall be appointed by the governing
body and may be a full- or part-time municipal employee.



   C.   The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for
oversight and administration of the affordable housing program for the Town
of Hammonton, including the following responsibilities which may not be
contracted out, exclusive of Subsection C(6), which may be contracted out:



      (1)   Serving as the Town of Hammonton's primary point of
contact for all inquiries from the state, affordable housing providers,
administrative agents, and interested households;



      (2)   Monitoring the status of all restricted units in the
Town of Hammonton's Fair Share Plan;



      (3)   Compiling, verifying, and submitting annual reports as
required by COAH;



      (4)   Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers
and administrative agents, as applicable;



      (5)   Attending continuing education opportunities on
affordability controls, compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by COAH;



      (6)   If applicable, serving as the administrative agent for
some or all of the restricted units in the Town of Hammonton as described in
Subsection F below.



   D.   Subject to approval by COAH, the Town of Hammonton may contract
with or authorize a consultant, authority, government or any agency charged
by the governing body, which entity shall have the responsibility of
administering the affordable housing program of the Town of Hammonton, except
for those responsibilities which may not be contracted out pursuant to
Subsection C above. If the Town of Hammonton contracts with another entity to
administer all or any part of the affordable housing program, including the
affordability controls and affirmative marketing plan, the Municipal Housing
Liaison shall supervise the contracting administrative agent.



   E.   Compensation. Compensation shall be fixed by the governing body
at the time of the appointment of the Municipal Housing Liaison.



   F.   Administrative powers and duties assigned to the Municipal
Housing Liaison.



      (1)   Affirmative marketing:



         (a)   Conducting an outreach process to insure
affirmative marketing of affordable housing units in accordance with the
affirmative marketing plan of Hammonton and the provisions of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.15; and



         (b)   Providing counseling or contracting to provide
counseling services to low- and moderate-income applicants on subjects such
as budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental lease
requirements, and landlord/tenant law.



      (2)   Household certification:



         (a)   Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following
up on interviews with interested households;



         (b)   Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient
documentation of gross income and assets upon which to base a determination
of income eligibility for a low- or moderate-income unit;



         (c)   Providing written notification to each applicant
as to the determination of eligibility or noneligibility;



         (d)   Requiring that all certified applicants for
restricted units execute a certificate substantially in the form, as
applicable, of either the ownership or rental certificates set forth in
Appendices J and K of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;



         (e)   Creating and maintaining a referral list of
eligible applicant households living in the housing region and eligible
applicant households with members working in the housing region where the
units are located; and



         (f)   Employing the random selection process as provided
in the affirmative marketing plan of Hammonton when referring households for
certification to affordable units.



      (3)   Affordability controls:



         (a)   Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of
deed restrictions and mortgages for recording at the time of conveyance of
title of each restricted unit;



         (b)   Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted
unit for its control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions,
recorded mortgage and note as appropriate;



         (c)   Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions
and cancellation of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly filed with
the appropriate county's register of deeds or county clerk's office after the
termination of the affordability controls for each restricted unit;



         (d)   Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures;
and



         (e)   Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates
of occupancy or certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.



      (4)   Resale and rental;



         (a)   Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information between owners and the administrative agent
regarding the availability of restricted units for resale or rental; and



         (b)   Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information to low- and moderate-income households regarding
the availability of restricted units for resale or rerental.



      (5)   Processing requests from unit owners:



         (a)   Reviewing and approving requests from owners of
restricted units who wish to take out home equity loans or refinance during
the term of their ownership;



         (b)   Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales
prices from owners of restricted units who wish to make capital improvements
to the units that would affect the selling price, such authorizations to be
limited to those improvements resulting in additional bedrooms or bathrooms
and the cost of central air-conditioning systems; and



         (c)   Processing requests and making determinations on
requests by owners of restricted units for hardship waivers.



      (6)   Enforcement:



         (a)   Securing annually lists of all affordable housing
units for which tax bills are mailed to absentee owners and notifying all
such owners that they must either move back to their unit or sell it;



         (b)   Securing from all developers and sponsors of
restricted units, at the earliest point of contact in the processing of the
project or development, written acknowledgement of the requirement that no
restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way committed, to any person,
other than a household duly certified to the unit by the administrative agent.



         (c)   The posting annually in all rental properties,
including two-family homes, of a notice as to the maximum permitted rent
together with the telephone number of the administrative agent where
complaints of excess rent can be made;



         (d)   Sending annual mailings to all owners of
affordable dwelling units, reminding them of the notices and requirements
outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;



         (e)   Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent
payments to the municipality's affordable housing trust fund or other
appropriate municipal fund approved by the DCA;



         (f)   Creating and publishing a written operating
manual, as approved by COAH, setting forth procedures for administering such
affordability controls; and



         (g)   Providing annual reports to COAH as required.



      (7)   The administrative agent shall have authority to take
all actions necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities
hereunder.



CHAPTER 38.
OUTSIDE COUNSEL FEE SCHEDULE



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton
3-24-1997 by Ord. No. 3-1997. Amendments noted where applicable.]



   § 38-1.   Purpose.



   § 38-2.   Costs and expenses.



   § 38-3.   Periodic reports.



   § 38-4.   Conflict of interest.



   § 38-5.   Legal fees.



   § 38-6.   Unique projects.



   § 38-7.   Lead counsel.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Town Solicitor — See Ch. 35, Art. V.



§ 38-1. Purpose.



   A.   The Town of Hammonton has from time to time found it necessary
to retain counsel on a case-to-case basis in certain civil matters in order
to best protect its employees. It is not the purpose of this chapter to
either amplify upon or reduce the Town's responsibility. It is, however, an
acknowledgment of a statutory and/or contractual obligation to provide a
civil defense in certain situations not specifically covered in the Town's
present defense format.



   B.   It is not the intention of this chapter to abrogate or in any
way disturb the present defense procedures in place and provided through the
Town of Hammonton or any of its existing defense modalities.



§ 38-2. Costs and expenses.



   The Town of Hammonton will not be responsible for the counsel fees,
costs, expenses, etc., including the indemnification for any associated
damages obtained against said employee, unless the counsel retained has been
first approved and authorized to represent said employee by the Town of
Hammonton. Said approval must be obtained through the Mayor and Council and
more formally adopted in the form of a resolution.



§ 38-3. Periodic reports.



   Where appropriate, all counsel authorized pursuant to this chapter must
provide the Town of Hammonton through its Municipal Solicitor with periodic
reports, which reportage shall be determined between the Solicitor and said
counsel as to the frequency and the contents to be contained in said
reportage.



§ 38-4. Conflict of interest.



   All counsel to be authorized pursuant to this chapter shall abide by
the Conflict of Interest Policy, which policy is attached hereto and
incorporated by reference herein. Editor's Note: Conflict of Interest Policy
is on file in the office of the Clerk/Administrator.



§ 38-5. Legal fees.



   Statements for legal services must comply with the approved fee
schedule:



   A.   Hourly rate.



      (1)   Approved hourly rates are:



         (a)   Attorneys: $95 per hour.



         (b)   Paralegals: $60 per hour.



      (2)   Duplication of effort. There are times when more than
one attorney will be working on a case, but those times should be rare.
Generally, conferences of attorneys within an office should be billed only by
the attorney primarily handling the case.



      (3)   The following are considered to be paralegal functions
and should be billed at the paralegal rate:



         (a)   Preparation of form interrogatories.



         (b)   Preparation of discovery motions.



         (c)   Summarizing answers to interrogatories.



         (d)   Preparation of nonstandard record subpoenas.



         (e)   Preparation of authorization to secure records
(medical, tax, union).



         (f)   Summarizing employment and medical records.



         (g)   Preparation of witness and exhibit list.



      (4)   Secretarial functions are part of office overhead and
should not appear on billings. The following functions are considered to be
secretarial:



         (a)   Scheduling and arrangements of meetings and
appointments.



         (b)   Scheduling of arrangements for examinations.



         (c)   Preparation of subpoena for employment and medical
records.



         (d)   Preparation of subpoenas and notices for taking
depositions.



         (e)   Calendar management.



         (f)   Conflict checks.



         (g)   Organizing and reorganizing files.



         (h)   Indexing and tabbing file materials.



         (i)   Pick up and delivery of documents and records.



         (j)   Telephone calls and/or correspondence to copy
service providers.



         (k)   Arrangements for deposition transcripts.



         (l)   Creating and organizing binders and notebooks and
file folders.



         (m)   Copy, collating and binding.



         (n)   Preparation of medical or employment
authorizations.



         (o)   Preparation of document inventory.



   B.   Out-of-pocket costs. Out-of-pocket expenses are reimbursable
where those costs are necessary to the defense of a claim and where those
costs are not considered to be "overhead" items for the defense attorney.



   C.   Deposition costs; expert witnesses and independent medical
examinations. The authorization for independent medical examinations should
be obtained, in advance, from the Town of Hammonton. The retention of expert
witnesses, other than for medical examinations, should be reviewed with the
Municipal Solicitor and Town of Hammonton before proceeding.



   D.   Filing fees are fully reimbursable.



   E.   Investigators. Investigations should be coordinated with the
Town of Hammonton. Any decision to retain an outside investigator must be
approved by the Town of Hammonton.



   F.   Messenger and overnight delivery. These items will be
reimbursed only where the use of messenger services and overnight delivery
services are necessary for the proper defense of a case. The use of messenger
and overnight delivery services must be monitored and will not be reimbursed
where they are used as a matter of convenience and not of necessity.



   G.   Mileage. No mileage reimbursement is applicable for travel
within or to the county in which the municipality is located or in which the
defendant attorney is located. Mileage reimbursement will be made for
necessary travel beyond those limits at the rate established by the Internal
Revenue Service for mileage expenses.



   H.   Photocopying. Where photocopying is necessary for the filing
and service of multiple copies of pleadings, motions, briefs and similar
documents, the photocopying charges will be reimbursed at a rate not to
exceed $0.25 per page. Photocopying done as a matter of convenience for
correspondence (including copies sent to other counsel or to the Town of
Hammonton or to the Municipal Solicitors) are not reimbursable and are
considered to be overhead expenses.



   I.   Overhead items.



      (1)   These are items which some law firms might treat as
out-of-pocket costs which the Town of Hammonton believes are properly
classified as overhead costs and which are not reimbursable.



      (2)   Examples of items which constitute overhead expenses and
which should not appear on billings are: postage (except for extraordinary
expenses such as certified mail and return receipt charges), library expenses
(including computerized on-line research), local mileage, clerical expenses,
photocopying for routine purposes, telephone charges, telefax charges.



   J.   Billing procedure.



      (1)   Statements for services must be submitted on a quarterly
basis to the Town of Hammonton with a copy to the Municipal Solicitor. All
statements must be itemized with the time calculated in 1/10 of an hour
increments. The date, description of the service rendered, and identity of
the person providing the service must be provided for each entry. Appropriate
documentation must be provided for each entry. Appropriate documentation must
be provided for out-of-pocket costs and disbursements. Each interim and final
statement will reflect current period outstanding fees plus cumulative paid
fees and expenses from the inception of the legal activities of the file. The
Town of Hammonton will review all statements for services rendered and make
inquiries on any questionable items to the defense attorney and Municipal
Solicitor.



      (2)   Once the billing has been reviewed by the Town of
Hammonton and the Municipal Solicitor, payment shall normally be processed as
soon as is practicable.



§ 38-6. Unique projects.



   The within fee shall include all incidental costs and expenses,
including but not limited to telephone, copying, etc. Any and all unique
services not covered herein regarding expenditures must first be approved by
the Town of Hammonton.



§ 38-7. Lead counsel.



   A.   Wherever counsel is retained pursuant to this chapter, and said
services pertain to the defense of punitive damage claims only; the attorney
defending the same individual(s) as to the compensatory damage claim, if any,
shall be designated as the lead counsel.



   B.   It is also agreed that all attorneys involved should, where
appropriate, confer and plan defense strategy in order to obviate
overlapping, duplication and other redundant services.



CHAPTER 41.
PARKS AND RECREATION, DEPARTMENT OF



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton
12-13-1999 by Ord. No. 31-1999. Amendments noted where applicable.]



   § 41-1.   Purpose.



   § 41-2.   Department created.



   § 41-3.   Position of Recreation Leader created; requirements and
salary.



   § 41-4.   Terms of employment.



   § 41-5.   Salary of Recreation Leader.



   § 41-6.   Position of Recreation Aide.



   § 41-7.   [Reserved.]



   § 41-8.   Support staff.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Board of Park Commissioners — See Ch. 6, Art. II.



   Hammonton Lake Park — See Ch. 82, Art. III.



   Curfew at Hammonton Lake Park — See Ch. 119.



   Littering — See Ch. 184.



   Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 200.



§ 41-1. Purpose.



[Amended 7-22-2013 by Ord. No. 013-2013]



   A.   It is the purpose of this chapter to create and establish a
Department of Parks and Recreation and provide for a Recreation Leader and
other support staff who under the direction of the Mayor and Council shall be
responsible for matters concerning Parks and Recreation.



   B.   It has been determined by the Town of Hammonton that a
Department of Parks and Recreation and a Recreation Leader is necessary for
the promotion of the public health, safety, welfare and quality of life of
the citizens of the Town of Hammonton.



§ 41-2. Department created.



[Amended 7-22-2013 by Ord. No. 013-2013]



   There is hereby created a Department of Parks and Recreation which
Department shall be staffed with a Recreation Leader and other pertinent
staff as deemed necessary.  All positions shall be under the direction of
the Mayor and Council of the Town of Hammonton.



§ 41-3. Position of Recreation Leader created; requirements and salary.



[Amended 7-22-2013 by Ord. No. 013-2013]



   A.   There is hereby created and established the position of
Recreation Leader, which position shall be a part time or full time position,
who shall be responsible for the Department of Parks and Recreation.  The
Recreation Leaders, under direction of the Mayor and Council is responsible
for the planning, promotion, development and supervision of a comprehensive
recreation program to meet the needs of the Town of Hammonton and for
training and supervision of support staff for recreation activities; seasonal
employees and others which may be from time to time hired.  The Recreation
Leader shall be responsible for the formulating and supervising of recreation
programs at playgrounds, parks and recreation centers and for the preparation
and promotion of exhibits, shows, special events and displays and other
related work as required.



   B.   The Recreation Leader shall be required to possess an
associates or bachelor’s degree from an accredited college or university
with a major course of study plus one year of experience in professional
recreation work involving the planning, promoting, development and
supervision of a general recreation program or a recreation program in the
specialty field indicated or alternatively possess a bachelor's degree from
an accredited college or university plus two years of experience in
recreation work involving the planning, promoting, development and
supervision of a general recreation program or a recreation program in the
specialty field required.



   C.   The Recreation Leader may be required to possess a valid
certificate as a Recreation Administrator issued by the New Jersey Board of
Recreation Examiners or possess considerable knowledge of the methods and
problems involved in planning, promoting, developing and supervising a
general recreation program or a recreation program in this specialty field.



§ 41-4. Terms of employment.



[Amended 7-22-2013 by Ord. No. 013-2013]



   The Recreation Leader shall be required to work a minimum of 16 part
time hours or 40 full time hours per week and shall be required to attend all
meetings of the Park Commission and other meetings that may be required from
time to time at the discretion of the Mayor and Council.



§ 41-5. Salary of Recreation Leader. 1



[Amended 7-22-2013 by Ord. No. 013-2013]



   The Recreation Leader for the Town of Hammonton shall receive an hourly
rate of pay commensurate with knowledge and experience and be set by local
ordinance and resolution as required by law.



§ 41-6. Position of Recreation Aide.



[Amended 7-22-2013 by Ord. No. 013-2013]



   There shall be and is hereby created the position of Recreation Aide,
which position shall be a seasonal position appointed by the Mayor and Common
Council of the Town of Hammonton, which appointment shall be for a maximum of
six months or less annually.  Said seasonal position shall be under the
direct supervision of the Recreation Leader.



§ 41-7. [Reserved.]



[Repealed 7-22-2013 by Ord. No. 013-2013]



§ 41-8. Support staff.



   The Mayor and Common Council shall hire or appoint such additional
support staff for purposes of security, maintenance and other
responsibilities as may be required and recommended by the Recreation
Supervisor.



 


Notes

1 
   Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).



CHAPTER 48.
PERSONNEL POLICIES



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton as
indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]



ARTICLE I.
Holidays, Sick Leave and Vacations



   § 48-1.   Holidays.



   § 48-2.   Vacation time.



   § 48-3.   Sick leave.



   § 48-4.   Compensation for work related injuries/illness.



   § 48-5.   Police Department sick leave.



   § 48-6.   Death or serious illness in immediate family.



   § 48-7.   Personal days.



   § 48-8.   Application of civil service rules.



   § 48-9.   Accumulated sick leave upon retirement.



   § 48-10.   (Reserved)



ARTICLE II.
Termination Benefits



   § 48-11.   Resignation/retirement paperwork.



   § 48-12.   (Reserved)



   § 48-13.   Provisions to be retroactive.



ARTICLE III.
Health Benefits for Full-Time Employees



   § 48-14.   Purpose.



   § 48-15.   Employees to be covered.



   § 48-16.   (Reserved)



ARTICLE IV.
Review Process for Town Employees



   § 48-17.   Form and process adopted.



   § 48-18.   through § 48-20. (Reserved)



ARTICLE V.
Sexual Harassment



   § 48-21.   Purpose.



   § 48-22.   Sexual harassment defined.



   § 48-23.   Grievance procedure; repercussions.



   § 48-24.   Procedure for substantiated charge.



ARTICLE VI.
Defined Contribution Retirement Program



   § 48-25.   Eligible positions.



   § 48-26.   Exempt positions.



   § 48-27.   Applicability of other provisions.



   § 48-28.   Filing of article.



ARTICLE VII
Compensation



   § 48-29.   Direct deposit of pay checks.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Officers and employees — See Ch. 35.



   Police Department — See Ch. 51.



Article I.
Holidays, Sick Leave and Vacations



[Adopted 9-13-1971 by Ord. No. 10-1971 as Art. I of Ch. 30 of the 1971 Code]



§ 48-1. Holidays.



[Amended 3-28-1977 by Ord. No. 2-1977; 2-10-1986 by Ord. No. 1-1986;
7-25-1994 by Ord. No. 22-1994]



   A.   All full-time officers and employees of the Town of Hammonton,
County of Atlantic and State of New Jersey shall be entitled to 14 holidays
with pay in each year. In addition to the 14 holidays listed below, each
employee will receive his/her birthday as an additional holiday. The 14
holidays shall be as follows:



      (1)   New Year's Day.



      (2)   Martin Luther King Jr. Day.



      (3)   President's Day.



      (4)   Good Friday.



      (5)   Easter Monday.



      (6)   Memorial Day.



      (7)   Independence Day.



      (8)   Labor Day.



      (9)   Columbus Day.



      (10)   General Election Day.



      (11)   Veterans Day.



      (12)   Thanksgiving Day.



      (13)   Day after Thanksgiving Day.



      (14)   Christmas Day.



   B.   All holidays are listed in Subsection A and in employees'
contracts. The holidays may be accumulated and used at one time if permission
is granted by the department head. A holiday may not be used until earned
unless an employee signs, under oath, an agreement that he/she will pay back
any holiday used but not earned if the employee leaves the Town employment or
does not earn the accumulated time due to sickness or for any reason ceases
to remain in the Town's employ.



[Added 9-14-1992 by Ord. No. 31-1992]



§ 48-2. Vacation time.



[Amended 9-14-1992 by Ord. No. 31-1992; 7-25-1994 by Ord. No. 22-1994]



   A.   All full-time officers and employees of the Town of Hammonton,
County of Atlantic, State of New Jersey, under nonclassified service under
Title 11A of the New Jersey Revised Statutes, shall be entitled to the same
vacation time as is allowed to full-time officers and employees in the
classified service under Title 11A of the New Jersey Revised Statutes. If,
however, the contracts of the Town of Hammonton permit a vacation schedule
that allows employees to have more than the minimum as outlined in Title 11A
of the New Jersey Revised Statutes, then each full-time officer and employee
of the Town of Hammonton shall be entitled to at least the minimum amount of
vacation time outlined in the contract.



   B.   [Reserved]



[Repealed 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 25-2011]



   C.   An employee shall be entitled to take those vacation days which
have been granted in the beginning of the year of employment. Written request
must be received by the department head or, in the case of a department head,
the Town Clerk/Administrator of the employee's desire to use the vacation
days. The request must be received at least two weeks prior to the first
requested day off. The department head and/or Town Clerk/Administrator shall
not deny the request without good cause. Unused vacation days may be carried
for one year, but, if not used by the end of that year, the vacation days are
lost.



   D.   Vacation time shall be designated by individual, bargaining
unit or union employment contract.



[Amended 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 25-2011]



§ 48-3. Sick leave.



   A.   Unless designated by individual, bargaining unit or union
employment contract, all full-time officers or employees of the Town of
Hammonton, whether classified or unclassified under Title 11, shall be
entitled to sick leave and pay of not less than one working day for each
month of service during the remainder of the first calendar year of service
following appointment and 15 working days in each calendar year thereafter. 
Such sick leave shall be accumulative.



[Amended 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 25-2011]



   B.   Sick days may be used pursuant to § 48-3A et seq., subject to
the following requirements:



[Added 9-14-1992 by Ord. No. 31-1992]



      (1)   A sick certificate must be obtained at the employee's
own expense from a licensed practicing physician and given to the Town
Clerk/Administrator if five sick days in a row are used or if 10 sick days
are used in any given year. If any employee uses more than 10 sick days, a
certificate must be obtained for each day taken.



      (2)   Sick days may be used by an employee for an immediate
family member, as defined in § 48-6. The same requirements outlined in the
aforementioned section are applicable. The employee must obtain the approval
of the Mayor and Council on recommendation of his/her department head.



§ 48-4. Compensation for work related injuries/illness.



[Added 7-28-1975 by Ord. No. 16-1975; amended 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 25-2011]



   To the extent not covered by State law, workers compensation benefits
shall be governed by individual, bargaining unit or union employment contract.



§ 48-5. Police Department sick leave.



[Amended 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 25-2011] 1



   Police Department sick leave shall be designated by respective police
contracts.



1.   Editor's Note: See Ch. 51, Police Department.



§ 48-6. Death or serious illness in immediate family.



[Added 4-24-1989 by Ord. No. 11-1989]



   A.   "Immediate family" shall be determined by individual,
bargaining unit or union contract. 



[Amended 8-28-1989 by Ord. No. 24-1989; 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 25-2011]



   B.   Any employee who has a death in the immediate family, as
defined by their employment contract, shall receive paid funeral leave as
prescribed by individual, bargaining unit or union contract.



[Amended 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 25-2011]



   C.   Time off for serious illness leave for an employee's immediate
family member, as prescribed by employment contract, shall be determined by
individual, bargaining unit or union contract and shall require a doctor's
note attesting to the illness of the employee's immediate family member being
life threatening.



[Amended 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 25-2011]



§ 48-7. Personal days.



[Added 4-24-1989 by Ord. No. 11-1989; amended 7-25-1994 by Ord. No. 22-1994;
12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 25-2011]



   Employees of the Town of Hammonton shall be designated personal days as
designed by individual, bargaining unit or union contract.



§ 48-8. Application of civil service rules.



   All the rules, regulations and requirements of civil service, including
Title 11 of the New Jersey Revised Statutes, shall apply in the
administration and interpretation of this article.



§ 48-9. Accumulated sick leave upon retirement.



[Added 5-12-1975 by Ord. No. 13-1975; amended 2-25-1980 by Ord. No. 2-1980;
2-13-1984 by Ord. No. 1-1984; 4-23-2007 by Ord. No. 6-2007 2]



   All full-time officers and employees of the Town of Hammonton, whether
or not such officers or employees are within the classified service under
Title 11 of the New Jersey Revised Statutes, including but not limited to
members of the Police Department of the Town of Hammonton, who have worked
for the Town of Hammonton for 25 years or more are hereby given the right to
payment of 75% of the unused accumulated sick leave due said officer or
employee upon his or her date of retirement computed at the last salary of
said full-time officer or employee at the time of retirement. Said full-time
employee or officer shall apply for said accumulated and unused sick leave on
his or her day of retirement, to be paid in a lump sum on the first regular
meeting date of the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton after
the effective date of his or her retirement. However, in no case shall any
officer or employee of the Town of Hammonton receive upon retirement any
accumulated and unused sick leave payment in excess of a maximum total
payment of $12,000. This right shall not be retroactive and shall only apply
to all retirement subsequent to the effective date of this article.



2.   Editor's Note: This ordinance also stated that it shall take effect
retroactive to 1-1-2007.



§ 48-10. (Reserved) 3



3.   Editor's Note: Former § 48-10, Donated Leave Program, added
8-24-1998 by Ord. No. 26-1998, was repealed 4-28-2008 by Ord. No. 9-2008.



Article II.
Termination Benefits



[Adopted 9-26-1977 by Ord. No. 10-1977]



§ 48-11. Resignation/retirement paperwork.



[Added 4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 6-2012] 4



   Any employee wishing to resign/retire/terminate their employment with
the Town of Hammonton must first submit their intention to the Municipal
Clerk with a signed letter that includes their intended date of termination
of their employment.  The Municipal Clerk shall bring the letter to the
governing body at their next scheduled meeting.  The Municipal Clerk shall
complete all necessary paperwork including but not limited to the
certification of service and final salary after the Clerk has received the
signed letter and the governing body has accepted same.  Any unused time off
balances to which the employee is due shall be paid with their final
paycheck.  Time off balances to which the employee is due shall be
determined by town code, employee handbook and individual/bargaining unit or
union employment contracts.



4.   Editor's Note: Former § 48-11, Legislative Intent, was replaced
4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 6-2012.



§ 48-12. (Reserved) 5



5.   Editor's Note: Former § 48-12, Grant of benefit, was repealed
3-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2-2012.



§ 48-13. Provisions to be retroactive.



   This article shall be retroactive to January 1, 1977, and shall cover
all employees and officers terminating their employment or retiring after
said date.



Article III
Health Benefits for Full-Time Employees



[Adopted 9-23-1996 by Ord. No. 13-1996]



§ 48-14. Purpose.



   The cost of providing health care benefits has increased dramatically
over the years. Taxpayers in the Town of Hammonton have witnessed this
increase in cost, as many of them have seen a decrease or elimination of
their own health care benefits. It is the purpose of this article not to
penalize any part-time employee, but to reduce the cost of health care
coverage that the taxpayers of the Town of Hammonton are paying for.



§ 48-15. Employees to be covered.



[Amended 2-25-2002 by Ord. No. 5-2002; 4-28-2008 by Ord. No. 10-2008]6



   The Town of Hammonton shall provide coverage to those employees that
are considered full time only, excluding elected officials. All terms and
conditions of coverage shall be specified in the appropriate employee
contract. Employees that obtain full-time status shall be provided coverage
as soon as practicable, taking into consideration the requirements of the
medical insurance provider. If an employee is already covered by virtue of an
insurance plan offered by an employer other than the Town of Hammonton, or by
the employee's spouse's employer, or otherwise, the employee may elect to
waive the Town's insurance benefit plan and may elect compensation in lieu of
benefits as permitted by the New Jersey Health Insurance Plan. Elected
officials are also excluded from the election of compensation in lieu of
benefits.



6.   Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that the disqualification
of elected officials from electing compensation in lieu of benefits shall be
effective 1-1-2008, and the disqualification of elected officials from health
insurance coverage shall be effective 1-1-2009.



§ 48-16. (Reserved) 7



7.   Editor's Note: Former § 48-16, Continuation of coverage, was
repealed 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 25-2011.



Article IV
Review Process for Town Employees



[Adopted 7-24-1995 by Ord. No. 11-1995; amended in its entirety 1-24-2011 by
Ord. No. 1-2011]



§ 48-17. Form and process adopted.



[Amended 6-25-2012 by Ord. No. 14-2012]



   A.   A separate evaluation form has been created and will now be
used for police as well as department heads;



   B.   All employees will be evaluated on their anniversary;



   C.   All evaluations are subject to review and approval of the
Business Administrator;



   D.   The Business Administrator will be responsible for evaluation
of department heads;



   E.   The evaluations will now be reviewed by Mayor and Council prior
to employee/department head promotions;



   F.   The evaluations will be used for other circumstances such as
hiring part time to full time status, review of performance after
probationary period or reprimand, or any other reason as deemed necessary by
the Business Administrator;



   G.   The evaluation now requires supporting documentation for
negative review;



   H.   The Town Clerk will complete the attendance portion of the
evaluation in comparison to the employee’s time card.



§ 48-18. through § 48-20. (Reserved)



Article V
Sexual Harassment



[Adopted 8-28-1995 by Ord. No. 20-1995]



§ 48-21. Purpose.



   The Town of Hammonton is committed to maintaining a work and public
service environment that is free from sexual harassment. This policy
prohibiting such conduct shall not only be applicable to employee-employer
relations, but also applicable to employee-public relations.



§ 48-22. Sexual harassment defined.



   " Sexual harassment" shall be defined as follows:



   A.   Any verbal harassment or abuse of a sexual nature.



   B.   Pressure for sexual activity, whether it be of a heterosexual
or homosexual nature.



   C.   Any repeated remark to a person with sexual or demeaning
implication.



   D.   Any unwelcome or unsolicited touching.



   E.   Suggesting or demanding sexual involvement accompanied by
implied or explicit threats or promises concerning one's job, promotion,
employment or compensation.



§ 48-23. Grievance procedure; repercussions.



   A.   Any person who alleges harassment by a Town employee may file a
grievance with his or her immediate supervisor or, in the event that the
alleged perpetrator is the supervisor, with the Town Clerk/Administrator or
the supervising Council Committee Chairperson. All grievances must be made in
writing and set forth specifically the alleged conduct complained of. An
investigation shall be conducted by the Mayor and Council or its designated
representative within 30 days of all grievances brought pursuant to this
article. A written report of the investigation shall be provided within seven
days of its completion to the alleged perpetrator who may accept the findings
of the investigation or request a hearing before the Mayor and Council prior
to the report being accepted and becoming part of the employee's personnel
file.



   B.   Filing a grievance or otherwise reporting sexual harassment
will not reflect upon the individual's status nor will it affect future
employment.



§ 48-24. Procedure for substantiated charge.



   A substantiated charge against any employee shall subject this employee
to disciplinary action. Depending on the gravity of the conduct, the Mayor
and Council may:



   A.   Suspend the employee for a specific period of time, without pay.



   B.   Require the employee, as a condition of continued employment,
to attend counseling sessions or take a course of study concerning sexual
harassment.



   C.   Terminate the employee.



   D.   Submit the matter to law enforcement authorities.



Article VI.
Defined Contribution Retirement Program



[Adopted 8-25-2008 by Ord. No. 24-2008; amended in its entirety 6-28-2010 by
Ord. No. 14-2010]



§ 48-25. Eligible positions.



   Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and shall participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program:



   A.   Business Administrator.



   B.   Water Superintendent.



   C.   Sewer Superintendent.



   D.   Recreation Director.



   E.   Road Superintendent.



   F.   Municipal Court Judge.



   G.   Mayor and Council.



§ 48-26. Exempt positions.



   Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from Defined
Contribution Retirement Program membership (and are to be considered PERS
members), pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2:



   A.   Tax Collector.



   B.   Chief Financial Officer (PSA membership only if hired as a
full-time employee).



   C.   Construction Code Official.



   D.   Tax Assessor.



   E.   Registered Municipal Clerk.



   F.   Electrical Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode Official, Fire
Subcode Official, Building Subcode Official.



   G.   Public Works Manager.



   H.   Municipal Court Administrator.



   I.   Registrar of Vital Statistics.



§ 48-27. Applicability of other provisions.



   This article shall be implemented, construed and subject to the
aforesaid Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et seq.) as
amended from time to time, and any regulations or guidance documents from the
Local Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.



§ 48-28. Filing of article.



   A copy of this article shall be filed with the Director of the Division
of Pensions and Benefits of the New Jersey Department of the Treasury.



§ 48-29.  Direct deposit of pay checks.



A.   The Town of Hammonton shall require mandatory direct deposit for all
employees’ net pay.



B.   The Finance Department is authorized to allow enrollment into direct
deposit by Town employees no later than and in time for the December 4, 2015
pay checks.



CHAPTER 51
POLICE DEPARTMENT



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton as
indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]



ARTICLE I.
Organization and Regulation



   § 51-1.   Composition.



   § 51-2.   Qualifications and procedures for appointment to
Department.



   § 51-3.   Powers and duties of police officers.



   § 51-4.   (Reserved)



   § 51-5.   Additional rules and regulations authorized.



   § 51-6.   Special appointments.



   § 51-7.   Salaries and compensation.



   § 51-8.   Grounds for dismissal from Department.



   § 51-9.   Compensation during suspensions.



   § 51-10.   Disciplinary measures in lieu of dismissal.



   § 51-11.   Continuation of present officers.



ARTICLE II.
K-9 Corps



   § 51-12.   Legislative findings.



   § 51-13.   Purpose.



   § 51-14.   Injury or killing of dogs.



   § 51-15.   Dogs under custody or control of Department member.



   § 51-16.   Violations and penalties.



ARTICLE III.
Special Services Section



   § 51-17.   Purpose.



   § 51-18.   Composition.



   § 51-19.   Functions and duties.



   § 51-20.   Compensation.



   § 51-21.   Term of appointment.



ARTICLE IV.
Mutual Aid



   § 51-22.   Statutory authority; reciprocal nature of agreement.



   § 51-23.   Authority of Chief of Police Department.



   § 51-24.   Requests for assistance; rights and powers of police.



   § 51-25.   Costs.



   § 51-26.   Benefits in case of injury or death.



ARTICLE V.
Arson Investigator



   § 51-27.   Legislative findings.



   § 51-28.   Duties.



   § 51-29.   Qualifications.



ARTICLE VI.
Special Law Enforcement Officers



   § 51-30.   Definitions.



   § 51-31.   Position established.



   § 51-32.   Determination of eligibility.



   § 51-33.   Appointment.



   § 51-34.   Qualifications.



   § 51-35.   Training course and certification requirements.



   § 51-36.   Classifications of officers.



   § 51-37.   Uniforms.



   § 51-38.   Return of equipment and uniform upon termination.



   § 51-39.   Firearms.



   § 51-40.   Conduct of officers.



   § 51-41.   Performance of duties.



   § 51-42.   Hours of employment.



   § 51-43.   Limitation of use of officers.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Police Department sick leave — See Ch. 48, Art. I.



Article I.
Organization and Regulation



[Adopted 9-13-1971 by Ord. No. 10-1971 as Art. I of Ch. 49 of the 1971 Code]



§ 51-1. Composition.



[Amended 6-13-1988 by Ord. No. 12-1988; 5-8-1989 by Ord. No. 15-1989;
2-12-1990 by Ord. No. 2-1990; 4-26-1993 by Ord. No. 7-1993; 9-28-1995 by Ord.
No. 25-1995; 12-9-1996 by Ord. No. 17-1996; 9-24-2001 by Ord. No. 29-2001]



   The Police Department shall be organized as follows:



   A.   A Chief, who shall be known as the "Chief of Police." The Chief
of Police shall be the executive officer of the Department and shall be
subject to such rules, regulations and orders as may be prescribed by the
Mayor and Council.



   B.   One Captain, who shall have such duties attributable to that
position by the Chief of Police, and shall also be required to perform all
duties as shall be prescribed by the ordinances of the Town of Hammonton and
by the statutes of the State of New Jersey.



   C.   Two Lieutenants, who shall have the duties as prescribed by the
Chief of Police, the ordinances of the Town of Hammonton and by the statutes
of the State of New Jersey.



[Amended 4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 5-2012; 1-26-2015 by Ord. No. 001-2015]



   D.   Five Sergeants, who shall have the duties as prescribed by the
Chief of Police, the ordinances of the Town of Hammonton and by the statutes
of the State of New Jersey.



[Amended 4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 5-2012; 1-26-2015 by Ord. No. 001-2015]



   E.   Such number of regular patrolmen as may be deemed necessary
from time to time by the Mayor and Council of the Town of Hammonton, who
shall perform such duties as police officers as shall be prescribed by the
Chief of Police, the ordinances of the Town of Hammonton and by the statutes
of the State of New Jersey.



§ 51-2. Qualifications and procedures for appointment to Department.



[Amended 2-28-2000 by Ord. No. 4-2000]



   A.   Qualifications for appointment.



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided by law or elsewhere in this
article, any person appointed as a police officer or a special officer shall:



         (a)   Be a citizen of the United States and a resident
of the State of New Jersey.



         (b)   Be of sound body and of good health sufficient to
satisfy the Board of Trustees of the Police and Firemen's Retirement System
of New Jersey as to eligibility for the membership in the retirement system.



         (c)   Be able to read, write and speak the English
language well and intelligently.



         (d)   Not have been convicted of any violations of laws
of the State of New Jersey or the United States, except minor traffic
offenses, nor shall have been convicted of any crime or offense involving
moral turpitude.



         (e)   Provide proof of a high school diploma or an
approved high school equivalency certificate.



         (f)   Exhibit a valid New Jersey driver's license.



         (g)   Not have made false statements of a material fact
or practiced or attempted to practice any deception or fraud in the
application, in tests or in securing any appointment herein.



      (2)   No person shall be appointed as a member of the Police
Division unless he/she shall have:



         (a)   Filed a written application, on the form
prescribed by the Town of Hammonton and Hammonton Police Department, with
supporting documents as requested.



         (b)   Satisfactorily pass both a written and physical
examination as prescribed by the Town of Hammonton and Hammonton Police
Department.



         (c)   Satisfactorily pass a medical examination and
psychological examination conducted by a medical doctor and a psychologist
approved by the Town.



         (d)   Submitted to a complete background investigation
with results satisfactory to the Chief of Police.



      (3)   Every member of the Police Division, prior to entering
upon the performance of duties in the office or position of the Chief of
Police, Captain, Lieutenant, Sergeant, police officer or special officer,
shall take and subscribe to an oath of affirmation to truly, faithfully and
impartially execute his/her duties to the best of his/her skill and
understanding. Such oath or affirmation shall be filed with the
Clerk/Administrator of the Town of Hammonton within 10 days after such
appointment. Further, all proper employment forms must be completed and filed
prior to entering upon such duties.



   B.   Appointment procedure. The procedure which shall be followed
for every appointment to the Department is as follows:



      (1)   Every candidate must successfully pass a civil service
examination conducted by the State of New Jersey.



      (2)   Every candidate seeking appointment to the Department
must appear upon the eligibility list provided by the New Jersey Department
of Civil Service when requested by the Town of Hammonton.



      (3)   Upon eligibility determination, each candidate seeking
appointment shall be required to appear for an initial oral interview
conducted by the Chief of Police or his/her designee.



      (4)   Upon completion of the initial interview, each candidate
shall complete a comprehensive application and cooperate with the assigned
detective of the Hammonton Police Department as to all aspects of the
application including background investigations.



      (5)   Once an application has been deemed complete by the
detective completing the background investigation and all information
required has been received, each applicant shall submit to a panel interview
comprised of the following persons: Mayor, Town Administrator, Council
Committee for Law and Order, Chief of Police, Deputy Chief of Police and the
Detective assigned to the subject applicant who conducted the background
investigations.



      (6)   The Interview Committee shall render a recommendation to
the Chief of Police who shall then tender a formal recommendation to Mayor
and Council for appointment consideration.



   C.   Police academy: responsibility for payment. Except as otherwise
provided by law or elsewhere in this chapter, any persons appointed as a
police office or a special officer is required to attend an authorized policy
academy selected by the Town of Hammonton. The cost of policy academy shall
be shared equally by the candidate seeking appointment as a police officer
and the Town of Hammonton.



[Added 2-25-2002 by Ord. No. 4-2002]



§ 51-3. Powers and duties of police officers.



   Members of the Police Department, in addition to the power conferred
upon them in criminal matters by the general laws of the state, shall have
power and it shall be their duty to arrest without warrant any person by them
found violating any of the penal ordinances of the Town or laws of the state
and to take such persons before the proper Town Judge, to be dealt with in
the same manner as if such person had been arrested upon a warrant thereto
duly issued by such Judge. It shall be their duty to report violations of law
and ordinances coming to their knowledge in any way to the Mayor and Common
Council, under the regulations governing the Department. All process to
enforce any penalty for the violation of any ordinance of the Town and any
subpoena or bench warrant issued in connection therewith may be served by
them.



§ 51-4. (Reserved)



Editor's Note: Former § 51-4, Deputy Police Chief; duties and
responsibilities, as amended, was repealed 9-24-2001 by Ord. No. 29-2001.



§ 51-5. Additional rules and regulations authorized.



Editor's Note: The Town of Hammonton Police Department Rules and Regulations,
adopted 8-27-2007 by Ord. No. 26-2007, and any amendments thereto, are on
file in the Town offices. The Mayor and Common Council shall make rules and
regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this article, the laws of
the state or ordinances of the Town of Hammonton for the government,
direction, management and discipline of the police force.



§ 51-6. Special appointments.



   Any special officer appointed to perform police duty at any special
building or premises and whose services are not paid for by the Town shall
have no authority to perform police duty nor appear as a police officer in
any other place or part of the Town than that for which he/she was specially
appointed, and the appointment of such officer shall be revocable at the will
of the Mayor and Common Council.



§ 51-7. Salaries and compensation.



   The salaries of the Chief of Police, regular patrolmen and such
additional regular patrolmen as the Mayor and Common Council shall deem it
advisable to appoint shall be paid in equal semimonthly installments. The
hours during which said members of the Police Department shall be on duty and
the compensation to them for work rendered by members of the Police
Department for overtime shall be regulated by the Mayor and Common Council
under the rules and regulations of said Department.



§ 51-8. Grounds for dismissal from Department.



   Any member of the Police Department may be expelled, by a majority vote
of the Mayor and Common Council, against whom any of the following charges
are substantiated:



   A.   Intoxication or under the influence of any drug or other
compound while on duty.



   B.   Willful disobedience of orders.



   C.   Indecent, profane or harsh language.



   D.   Unnecessary violence to a prisoner.



   E.   Absence without leave, sleeping on duty, absence from post of
duty without excuse or not properly patrolling his/her beat.



   F.   Immorality, indecency or lewdness.



   G.   Incapacity, either mental or physical, lack of energy or gross
ignorance of the laws and regulations of the Department.



   H.   Visiting, except on police business, any gambling house,
poolroom or house of ill fame or visiting, while in uniform or on duty,
except on police business, any saloon or liquor store.



   I.   Violation of any criminal law.



   J.   Making known any proposed action or movement of the force, or
contents of any order, other than to persons immediately concerned with their
execution.



   K.   Conduct unbecoming an officer.



[Amended 7-23-2001 by Ord. No. 26-2001]



   L.   Conduct subversive of good order and the discipline of the
force.



   M.   Failure to report a known violation of law or of the ordinances
of the Town or accepting a bribe or favor as a consideration either for the
performance or nonperformance of his/her duty.



   N.   Visiting any place of amusement while in uniform, except on
police business.



   O.   Swearing falsely in application for appointment to the force or
to such other papers as required of him/her an affidavit, as provided for in
§ 51-2 of this article.



   P.   Soliciting anyone to intercede with the Chief of Police or the
Mayor and Common Council in relation to changing of any beats, disposition of
pending charges or any findings of a trial before the Mayor and Common
Council or for refusing to do duty or evading duty of any kind whenever
necessity requires, whether on patrol or elsewhere and whether in uniform or
not.



§ 51-9. Compensation during suspensions.



   When any member of the Police Department is suspended from office and
afterwards reinstated, he/she shall not receive any pay for the period of
such suspension, unless otherwise ordered by the Mayor and Common Council.



§ 51-10. Disciplinary measures in lieu of dismissal.



[Amended 3-25-1991 by Ord. No. 8-1991]



   A.   All charges against members of the Police Department shall be
thoroughly examined by the Mayor and Council, except in the case where the
recommended disciplinary action is a suspension of less than five days,
hereinafter known as "minor discipline," and upon any member of said
Department being convicted by the Mayor and Council of any violation of any
rules, regulations or orders of the Department, said Mayor and Council may,
in lieu of dismissal from the Department, impose such penalty as in the
judgment of the Mayor and Council is warranted by the character of the
offense.



   B.   In the case of minor discipline, as defined in Subsection A,
wherein a member is charged with the violation of any of the rules,
regulations or orders of the Department and the recommended disciplinary
action is a suspension of less than five days, then such member shall, as his
or her sole remedy, subject to any union contract grievance procedure, be
entitled to a departmental hearing, which hearing shall be consistent with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-147.



   C.   A departmental hearing as referred to in Subsection B of this
section shall be consistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-147 and
shall be convened within the time provided by New Jersey statutes made and
provided.



   D.   The departmental hearing officers shall be comprised of the
Chief of Police, who shall chair the hearing, the Captain, the designated
Lieutenant and Sergeant named pursuant to § 51-1, and the Councilperson who
is named as the Chairperson of Law and Order.



   E.   The departmental hearing officers shall be empowered to
establish such rules of procedure as may be necessary to ensure a fair
hearing. All findings and conclusions of the departmental hearing officers
shall be by majority vote. The decision of the departmental hearing officers
shall be reported to the member charged, in written form, which decision
shall be final and with no right to appeal to Mayor and Council.



§ 51-11. Continuation of present officers.



   All members of the existing Police Department permanently employed when
this article takes effect shall remain and continue as members of the Police
Department hereby created until their positions become vacant by death,
resignation or removal, under the procedure herein set forth.



Article II.
K-9 Corps



[Adopted 12-12-1977 by Ord. No. 14-1977]



§ 51-12. Legislative findings.



   The Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton takes notice that
it is in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare for the Police
Department of the Town of Hammonton to maintain a K-9 Corps for the
protection of the person and property of the people of the Town of Hammonton.



§ 51-13. Purpose.



   The enactment of this article is necessary to provide protection to the
dogs which are secured for K-9 Corps purposes in order that the work of said
Corps can be carried on expeditiously and at a minimum expense to the Town.



§ 51-14. Injury or killing of dogs.



   Any individual who knowingly tortures, torments, beats, kicks, strikes,
mutilates, injures, disables or kills any dog or interferes with any dog that
is being used by the Hammonton Police Department for the performance of
police duties is guilty of a violation of this article.



§ 51-15. Dogs under custody or control of Department member.



   For the purpose of this article, a dog is presumed to be performing its
duties for the Hammonton Police Department when it is in the custody or
subject to the control of any member of the Hammonton Police Department.



§ 51-16. Violations and penalties.



   Any person adjudged guilty of a violation of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to one or more of the
following: a fine of not more than $1,000, imprisonment for a period not to
exceed 90 days or a period of community service not to exceed 90 days, at the
discretion of the Municipal Judge of the Town of Hammonton.



Article III.
Special Services Section



[Adopted 2-13-1989 by Ord. No. 3-1989]



§ 51-17. Purpose.



   It is determined to be in the public interest to create a Special
Services Section of the Police Department of the Town of Hammonton in the
case of all emergencies existing pursuant to the statutes and laws of the
State of New Jersey.



§ 51-18. Composition.



   The Special Services Section of the Hammonton Police Department shall
consist of three officials:



   A.   The Emergency Management Coordinator.



   B.   The Deputy Emergency Management Coordinator.



   C.   The Fire Marshal.



§ 51-19. Functions and duties.



   A.   The Emergency Management Coordinator shall be responsible for
organizing all forces of the Town of Hammonton and any forces supplied by
volunteer groups or neighboring communities in the case of any emergency
occurring within the corporate boundaries of the Town of Hammonton.



   B.   The Deputy Emergency Management Coordinator shall have all of
the functions of the Emergency Management Coordinator in his/her absence as
well as assisting the Emergency Management Coordinator in preparing an
Emergency Management Plan to be submitted to the New Jersey State Police and
all other appropriate agencies, which plan shall detail the organization and
procedures in place in case of all emergencies.



   C.   The Fire Marshal shall be that individual entrusted with
inspecting, reporting and otherwise dealing with all emergencies relating to
fires or potential fires within the Town of Hammonton.



   D.   The Special Services Station shall manage all emergencies but
shall be within the Police Department and subject to the direction and
control of the Police Chief of the Town of Hammonton.



§ 51-20. Compensation.



   The wages of all members of the Special Services Section as defined in
§ 51-18 hereof shall be as set forth in the Salary Ordinance of the Town of
Hammonton. Editor's Note: The current Salary Ordinance is on file in the
office of the Clerk/Administrator.



§ 51-21. Term of appointment.



   The first appointments to the within offices shall expire on December
31, 1993. All subsequent appointments shall be for five-year terms.



Article IV.
Mutual Aid



[Adopted 10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 16-1990]



§ 51-22. Statutory authority; reciprocal nature of agreement.



   Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156.1, there is hereby established a mutual
aid agreement with all other municipalities in Atlantic County, New Jersey,
which adopt a reciprocal ordinance to provide mutual police aid in case of
emergency. This agreement shall apply whenever the Town of Hammonton may have
an emergency within its boundaries requiring additional police assistance to
protect lives and property or to assist in suppressing a riot or disorder and
whenever another municipality in this county which has enacted a reciprocal
ordinance may experience a similar emergency requiring additional police
assistance.



§ 51-23. Authority of Chief of Police Department.



   The Chief or head of the Police Department of the Town of Hammonton is
authorized to request assistance from the Chief or other head of the Police
Department of another municipality within Atlantic County to provide aid
during and after said emergency.



§ 51-24. Requests for assistance; rights and powers of police.



   The Chief or head of the Police Department of the Town of Hammonton
shall provide assistance to another municipality or municipalities in
Atlantic County making a valid request to supply such personnel and equipment
as required to the extent possible without endangering person or property
within the Town of Hammonton. The members of the Police Department supplying
aid shall have the same powers, authority, rights and immunities of the
members of the police force of the municipality to which assistance is
rendered.



§ 51-25. Costs.



   The Town of Hammonton shall, upon providing assistance to another
municipality which has enacted a reciprocal mutual aid ordinance, assume the
cost and expense of providing its personnel and equipment to the requesting
municipality, except in such instances when the requesting municipality
receives state or federal aid by way of reimbursement. In such circumstances,
the cost incurred shall be submitted to the community requesting assistance.



§ 51-26. Benefits in case of injury or death.



   Members of the police force of the Town of Hammonton suffering injury,
or their legal representative, if death results, while rendering assistance
in another municipality shall be entitled to all such benefits they would
have realized if injury or death had occurred in the performance of normal
duties in the Town of Hammonton.



Article V.
Arson Investigator



[Adopted 5-20-1991 by Ord. No. 12-1991]



§ 51-27. Legislative findings.



   The Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton has determined
that, in the interests of an efficient Police Department and in the interests
of public health, safety and welfare, there shall be established a position
of Arson Investigator.



§ 51-28. Duties.



   Upon direction, the Arson Investigator performs the work involved in
investigating fires which are caused by arson or of such suspicious origin as
to necessitate investigation and performs any other work required or related
to fire investigation and causation.



§ 51-29. Qualifications.



   Any person maintaining this position must meet the requirements set
forth by the New Jersey Department of Civil Service Division of Local
Government Services. Provisional appointments to this position shall be
permitted to allow for the completion of any training or courses which may be
required.



Article VI.
Special Law Enforcement Officers



[Adopted 5-23-2005 by Ord. No. 8-2005]



§ 51-30. Definitions.



   All words and phrases used in this article shall be defined as stated
in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.9, which shall be deemed to apply to such words and
phrases used herein.



§ 51-31. Position established.



   There is hereby established the position of Special Law Enforcement
Officer in and for the Town of Hammonton.



§ 51-32. Determination of eligibility.



   Before any special law enforcement officer is appointed, the Chief of
Police or, in the absence of the Chief, other chief law enforcement official
of the Town, shall ascertain the eligibility and qualification of the
applicant and report these determinations, in writing, to the Mayor and
Council, as established by N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.10 et seq.



§ 51-33. Appointment.



   Special law enforcement officers may be appointed for terms not to
exceed one year, and the appointments may be revoked by the Mayor and Council
for cause, after adequate hearing, unless the appointment is for four months
or less, in which event, the appointment may be revoked without cause or
hearing. Nothing herein shall be construed to require reappointment upon the
expiration of the term. The special law enforcement officers so appointed
shall not be members of the police force of the Town, and their powers and
duties shall cease at the expiration of the term for which appointed.



§ 51-34. Qualifications.



   A.   No person may be appointed as a special law enforcement officer
unless the person:



      (1)   Is a resident of this state during the term of
appointment.



      (2)   Is able to read, write and speak the English language
and has a high school diploma or equivalent.



      (3)   Is sound in body and in good health.



      (4)   Is of good moral character.



      (5)   Has not been convicted of any offense involving
dishonesty or which would make him unfit to perform the duties of his office.



      (6)   Has successfully undergone the same psychological
testing that is required of all full-time police officers in the Town or,
with regard to a special law enforcement officer hired for a seasonal period
which required psychological testing of its full-time police officers, has
successfully undergone a program of psychological testing approved by the
Police Training Commission established in the Department of Law and Public
Safety, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:17B-70.



   B.   Every applicant for the position of special law enforcement
officer shall have fingerprints taken, which fingerprints shall be filed with
the Division of State Police and the Federal Bureau of Investigation.



   C.   No person shall be appointed to serve as a special law
enforcement officer if that person serves as a special law enforcement
officer in another municipality, nor shall any permanent, regularly
appointed, full-time police officer of any other municipality in this state
be appointed as a special law enforcement officer. No public official with
responsibility for setting law enforcement policy or exercising authority
over the budget of any municipality in this state or supervision of the
Police Department of a municipality in this state shall be appointed as a
special law enforcement officer.



   D.   Any person who, at any time prior to his appointment, is a duly
qualified, fully trained, full-time officer in any municipality in this state
and who is separated from that prior service in good standing shall be
eligible to serve as a special law enforcement officer consistent with the
guidelines promulgated by the Police Training Commission. If the Police
Training Commission waives the training requirements which are required by
statute, the Mayor and Council, if they choose, may appoint such person as a
special law enforcement officer.



§ 51-35. Training course and certification requirements.



   No person may commence his duties as a special law enforcement officer
unless he has successfully completed the training course and the Police
Training Commission has waived certification requirements.



§ 51-36. Classifications of officers.



   There are hereby established two classifications of special law
enforcement officers:



   A.   Class One. Officers of this class shall be authorized to
perform routine traffic detail, spectator control and similar duties. Class
One officers shall have the power to issue summonses for disorderly persons
and petty disorderly persons offenses, violations of municipal ordinances and
violations of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes. The use of a firearm by an
officer of this class shall be strictly prohibited, and no Class One officer
shall be assigned any duties which may require the carrying or use of a
firearm.



   B.   Class Two. Officers of this class shall be authorized to
exercise full powers and duties similar to those of a permanent, regularly
appointed, full-time police officer. The use of a firearm by an officer of
this class may be authorized only after the officer has been fully certified
as prescribed by the Police Training Commission.



§ 51-37. Uniforms.



   Every special law enforcement officer, prior to the commencement of his
duties, shall be furnished with a uniform, which shall identify the officer's
function. The uniform shall include but not be limited to, a hat and
appropriate badges which shall bear an identification number or name tag and
the name of the Town of Hammonton. The uniform shall also include an insignia
issued by the Police Training Commission which clearly indicates the
officer's status as a special law enforcement officer and the type of
certification issued by the Commission. All special law enforcement officers,
prior to the commencement of duties, shall be in uniform properly displaying
the appropriate insignia.



§ 51-38. Return of equipment and uniform upon termination.



   Whenever a special law enforcement officer's appointment is revoked or
a special law enforcement officer is not reappointed upon the expiration of
term, the special law enforcement officer shall return to the officer in
charge of the station house all of the Town of Hammonton's issued uniforms,
badges and equipment within 15 days of the revocation or expiration of term.



§ 51-39. Firearms.



   The special law enforcement officers shall carry and return firearms
pursuant to the guidelines established in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.14e.



§ 51-40. Conduct of officers.



   Special law enforcement officers shall comply with the rules and
regulations applicable to the conduct and decorum of the permanent, regularly
appointed police officers of the Town, as well as any rules and regulations
applicable to the conduct and decorum of special law enforcement officers.



§ 51-41. Performance of duties.



   A.   A special law enforcement officer shall be under the
supervision and direction of the Chief of Police or, in the absence of the
Chief, other chief law enforcement officer of the Town and shall perform his
duties only in the Town unless in fresh pursuit of any person pursuant to
Chapter 156 of Title 2A of the New Jersey Statutes.



   B.   The Chief Police or, in the absence of the Chief, other chief
law enforcement officer of the Town may authorize special law enforcement
officers, when on duty, to exercise the same powers and authority as
permanent, regularly appointed police officers of the Town, including but not
limited to the carrying of firearms and the power to arrest, subject to rules
and regulations. Any such authorization shall not be inconsistent with the
certification requirements of § 51-35 herein.



§ 51-42. Hours of employment.



   The provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.15 regarding the maximum hours of
employment of special law enforcement officers is hereby incorporated as if
stated in full herein.



§ 51-43. Limitation of use of officers.



   Special law enforcement officers may be employed only to assist the
Town's law enforcement unit but may not be employed to replace or substitute
for full-time regular police officers or in any way diminish the number of
full-time officers employed by the Town.



CHAPTER 53.
PUBLIC UTILITIES DEPARTMENT; PUBLIC WORKS SUPERINTENDENT



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton
1-24-2011 by Ord. No. 3-2011. Amendments noted where applicable.]



   § 53-1.   Purpose.



   § 53-2.   Department of Public Utilities.



   § 53-3.   Public Works Superintendent.



   § 53-4.   Subordinate positions created for department.



   § 53-5.   Effective date; approval required.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Water and Sewer Subcommittee — See Ch. 6, Art. VI.



   Sewers — See Ch. 226.



   Water — See Ch. 275.



§ 53-1. Purpose.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to combine the Town of Hammonton's
existing water and wastewater treatment plant operations into one operational
department and in doing so to merge employees from each department into one
single department with one department head to oversee the newly established
Public Utilities Department.



§ 53-2. Department of Public Utilities.



   There is hereby created a Department of Public Utilities, which
Department shall be staffed with full-time and part-time positions under the
direction of the Mayor and Council of the Town of Hammonton. The creation of
the Department of Public Utilities will inactivate the previous Departments
of Water and Sewer.



§ 53-3. Public Works Superintendent.



   A.   There is hereby created and established the position of Public
Works Superintendent, which position shall be a full-time position. The
Public Works Superintendent shall be a department head and responsible for
the Department of Public Utilities. The Public Works Superintendent, under
the direction of the Mayor and Council, is responsible for the day-to-day
operations of the Public Utilities Department and its employees.



   B.   The Public Works Superintendent must possess the current NJ DEP
licenses required for both wastewater and water treatment in the Town of
Hammonton. Upon initial merger, the Public Works Superintendent must achieve
the required NJ DEP licenses required to operate the water utility within
three years.



   C.   Terms of employment. The Public Works Superintendent shall be
required to work a minimum of 40 hours per week and shall be required to
attend all meetings pertaining to his/her respective Department.



§ 53-4. Subordinate positions created for department.



[Amended 2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 002-2015]



   There shall be created positions for existing employees as well as
future employees in the Department of Public Utilities per New Jersey Civil
Service Commission rules and regulations and NJ DEP Succession Plan.



   Title Code 07187   Sewer Repairer 2/Water Repairer 2/Sr Water
Treatment Plant Operator



   Title Code 07123   Sewer Repairer 1/Water Repairer 1/Water Treatment
Plant Operator



   Title Code 10053   Water Treatment Plant Operator Apprentice



   Title Code 02248   Laborer 1



§ 53-5. Effective date; approval required.



   This chapter shall take effect after final passage and publication, as
provided by law, together with approval of the Civil Service Commission of
the State of New Jersey; effective date January 26, 2011.



CHAPTER 54.
PUBLIC WORKS MANAGER/BUSINESS ADMINISTRATOR



   § 54-1.   Establishment.



   § 54-2.   Term; absence; removal; compensation.



   § 54-3.   Compensation.



   § 54-4.   Duties and responsibilities.



   § 54-5.   Authority of the Mayor and Council.



   § 54-6.   Classification of position.



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton
3-26-2012 by Ord. No. 4C-2012. Amendments noted where applicable.]



GENERAL REFERENCES



Water and Sewer Subcommittee - See Ch. 6, Art. VI.



Sewers - See Ch. 226.



Water - See Ch. 275.



§ 54-1. Establishment.



[Added 3-26-2012 by Ord. No. 4C-2012]



   There shall be an office of the Public Works Manager/Business
Administrator. The Public Works Manager/Business Administrator shall be a
person qualified by education, training and experience to perform the duties
of his or her office. He or she shall devote his or her entire time to the
duties of the office and shall hold no other office nor engage in any other
employment, except with the permission of the Mayor and Council. He or she
shall be under the direct supervision of the Mayor and Council.



§ 54-2. Term; absence; removal; compensation.



[Added 3-26-2012 by Ord. No. 4C-2012]



   A.   Term. The term of office of the Public Works Manager/Business
Administrator shall be at the pleasure of the Mayor and Council. The first
six months of any such appointment to the position of Public Works
Manager/Business Administrator shall be for a probationary period. Prior to
the completion of the six-month probationary period, the appointee to the
position of Public Works Manager/Business Administrator may be removed from
office by a vote of a majority of the full membership of the Mayor and
Council.



   B.   Removal from office. After the probationary period, the Public
Works Manager/Business Administrator may be removed by a two-thirds vote of
the Mayor and Council. The resolution of removal shall become effective three
months after its adoption by the Mayor and Council. The Mayor and Council may
provide that the resolution shall have immediate effect; provided, however,
that the Mayor and Council shall cause to be paid to the Public Works
Manager/Business Administrator forthwith any unpaid balance of his or her
salary and his or her salary for the next three calendar months following the
adoption of the resolution. The Public Works Manager/Business Administrator
shall not obtain or be granted any rights of tenure.



   C.   Absence or disability of the Public Works Manager/Business
Administrator. During the absence or disability of the Public Works
Manager/Business Administrator, the Mayor and the Council may, by resolution,
appoint an appointed official or employee of the Town to perform the duties
of Public Works Manager/Business Administrator during such absence or
disability. In the event the Public Works Manager/Business Administrator is
unexpectedly absent prior to a regularly scheduled Council meeting, the Mayor
may appoint an appointed official or employee of the Town to serve until the
next regularly scheduled Council meeting. The absence or disability of the
Public Works Manager/Business Administrator shall be limited to three
continuous months, after which time the absence or disability may be deemed a
vacancy by the Mayor and Council. Unless otherwise provided herein, no acting
Public Works Manager/Business Administrator shall be paid more than his or
her regular salary while serving in that capacity, but he or she shall be
reimbursed for all necessary expenses incurred in the performance of that
office.



§ 54-3. Compensation.



[Added 3-26-2012 by Ord. No. 4C-2012]



   The compensation of the Public Works Manager/Business Administrator
shall be as fixed in the Salary Ordinance of the Town.



§ 54-4. Duties and responsibilities.



[Added 3-26-2012 by Ord. No. 4C-2012]



   The Public Works Manager/Business Administrator shall be responsible to
the Mayor and Council for the proper and efficient administration of the
business affairs of the Town. The Public Works Manager/Business
Administrator's duties and responsibilities shall relate to the management of
all the Town's business, except those duties and responsibilities conferred
upon other Town officials by state statute, other applicable laws, rules and
regulations promulgated by state, county or Town ordinances or such duties as
the Mayor and Council shall reserve or delegate onto itself or to others. The
Public Works Manager/Business Administrator shall see that all ordinances,
resolutions and policies of the Mayor and Council and all state and federal
laws requiring municipal action are faithfully carried out by those persons
responsible for doing so. For the purpose of carrying out the
responsibilities of his or her office, the Public Works Manager/Business
Administrator shall develop and promulgate for adoption by the Mayor and
Council sound administrative, personnel and purchasing practices and
procedures for all departments, offices, boards, commissions and agencies of
the municipality, all for the purpose of increasing the effectiveness and
efficiency of Town government. The Public Works Manager/Business
Administrator shall perform all of the duties hereinafter enumerated and such
other duties as may be assigned by the Mayor and Council. In addition, the
Public Works Manager/Business Administrator shall be responsible for the
following enumerated duties:



   A.   Daily operation. Implement all policies of the Town necessary
to carry out daily operations and activities of the Town by correspondence,
review of minutes and personal contact.



   B.   Information and complaints. Inform the Mayor and Council and
the residents of the municipality on all matters relating to the activities
and operations of municipal government; receive and follow up on complaints
on all matters and apprise the Mayor and Council thereof.



   C.   Public information. Edit and compile public information for
distribution to the Mayor and Council.



   D.   Recommendations. Continuously study all activities and
operations of municipal government and recommend changes for the purpose of
increasing efficiency, economy and effectiveness; recommend such rules and
regulations as shall be deemed necessary, with the approval of the Mayor and
Council, for the conduct of administrative procedures.



   E.   Advice. Advise the Mayor and Council with respect to all
pertinent information necessary to assist it with the establishment of
policies and decisions.



   F.   Reports. Prepare and present to the Mayor and Council reports
required from time to time on municipal affairs and prepare an annual report
of the Public Works Manager/Business Administrator's work for the benefit of
the Mayor and Council and the public.



   G.   Attendance. Attend all regular meetings of the Mayor and
Council with the right to speak, but not to vote, on all agenda items and
attend other meetings as directed by the Mayor and Council or as necessary to
carry out the duties of Public Works Manager/Business Administrator. The
Public Works Manager/Business Administrator shall receive notice of all
special meetings of the Mayor and Council and all advisory committees,
boards, commissions and other agencies of the Town.  Attend all meetings of
the Administration Committee.



   H.   Liaison. Serve as liaison to all departments, advisory
committees, boards, commissions and other agencies of the Town.



   I.   Labor Relations/Human Resources.  Oversee and assist in the
administration and resolution of labor relations and human resources issues
involving the employees of the Town of Hammonton.



   J.   Town Engineer. Consult with and act as a liaison between the
Mayor and Council and the Town Engineer regarding all operations and policy
matters. 



   K.   Financial Management.  Be responsible for providing oversight
of the Town's daily financial operations, including, but not limited to,
providing supervision of the Town accountant.



   L.   Budgets. Be responsible for the preparation of the operating
and capital improvement budgets for presentation to the Mayor and Council and
for administration of the budget approval process by the governing body. In
preparing the proposed budget, the Public Works Manager/Business
Administrator shall direct department heads to submit their portion thereon
and shall request all supporting data he or she deems necessary. The Public
Works Manager/Business Administrator shall assist members of the governing
body and department heads in preparing their input to the municipal budget.
The Public Works Manager/Business Administrator shall thoroughly review all
budget requests and submit recommendations with respect thereto to the Mayor
and Council in a timely fashion.



   M.   Purchasing. Be in charge of reviewing all requisitions from all
departments for materials, equipment and supplies and certifying the receipt
of the same. He or she shall require the various departments to furnish an
adequate inventory of all materials, equipment and supplies in stock and to
recommend the sale of any surplus, obsolete or unused equipment when
authorized by the Mayor and Council.



   N.   Examine and inquire. Have the power to investigate, examine or
inquire into the affairs or operations of any department, commission, office,
board or agency of the municipal government, unless prohibited by law. 



   O.   Public information. Implement and enforce the policies of the
Mayor and Council with respect to the compiling and release of public
information.



   P.   Coordination of information. Integrate and coordinate the
functions of all departments, commissions, boards, agencies, offices and
officials and maintain liaison with the local school systems. The Public
Works Manager/Business Administrator shall be responsible for continuously
improving communications among the various Town personnel, departments,
commissions, agencies, boards and governing bodies.



   Q.   Recommendation of experts and consultants. Recommend the
employment of experts and consultants to perform work and render advice in
connection with Town projects.



   R.   Supervision of personnel. Subject to law, supervise all
personnel of the Town through the respective department heads and direct the
business activities of all Town departments, recommending to the Mayor and
Council or its designated committees the employment and replacement of
personnel as may be required in said departments within the limits prescribed
by the budget. The Public Works Manager/Business Administrator shall have no
authority over the operations of the Police Department delegated by law to
the Chief of Police.



   S.   Enforcement of law and contracts. Determine that all terms and
conditions imposed in favor of the municipality or its inhabitants in any
statute, public utility franchise or other contract regulation or ordinance
are faithfully kept and performed and, upon learning of any violation
thereof, apprise the Mayor and Council.



   T.   Public improvements. Recommend the need for, the nature of and
the location of all public improvements and coordinate and expedite the
execution of those public improvements authorized by the Mayor and Council.



   U.   Public Works Manager. Take charge of and be responsible for the
construction, operation and maintenance of all public buildings, grounds,
streets, roads and other facilities, including general administrative
responsibilities for the Town sewer and water systems, the cutting of brush,
mowing of grass and removal of snow, the cleaning of ditches, the maintenance
of parks and the care of other public works in the Town, subject to the
orders and directions of the Council. In addition, he or she shall:



      (1)   Continue/complete current development projects and
initiatives.



      (2)   Analyze construction and infrastructure redevelopment
needs and provide recommendations and reports to Mayor and Council.



      (3)   Interact with the residents and taxpayers of the Town of
Hammonton and be available to supervise employees during emergencies in
consultation and cooperation with the Emergency Management Coordinator.



      (4)   Set up and maintain adequate inventory and control
thereof of all materials and supplies needed for the maintenance and repair
of all public works under his or her supervision.



      (5)   Submit to the Mayor and Council a monthly report of all
work performed, services furnished and inspections made during the previous
month.



      (6)   Submit to the Mayor and Council and the Town Engineer
his or her recommendations for budget appropriations for the ensuing year.



      (7)   Recommend for approval the expenditure of all funds by
voucher chargeable against the Public Works Manager budget.



      (8)   Inspect or be responsible for the inspection and
maintenance of all storm sewer lines in the Town individually or in
conjunction with other designated officials.



      (9)   Receive and investigate all complaints from residents
and taxpayers of the Town relating to the operations under his or her
jurisdiction, take appropriate action and report results to the Mayor and
Council.



      (10)   Attend all Public Works Manager Committee meetings,
including, those pertaining to road, sewer, water and parks and playgrounds.



      (11)   Supervise the operation, maintenance and repair of
municipally owned equipment used in the performance of the work assigned to
him or her.



      (12)   Set up, keep and maintain all the necessary books,
records, field notes, maps, surveys and similar records necessary to perform
the duties of his or her office and turn over all such reports to his or her
successor or the Town Council upon the termination of his or her employment
by the Town.



      (13)   Recommend to the appropriate committee chairperson the
need for repairs and replacements to municipally owned equipment, structures,
buildings and grounds.



      (14)   Supervise the performance of the work of personnel
assigned to his or her jurisdiction.



   V.   Safety responsibilities. Develop and implement all necessary
safety instructions and training for employees, Town personnel and Town
officials.



   W.   Recycling. Serve as recycling coordinator for the Town and
oversee all actions necessary to fill the Town's recycling requirements.



   X.   Grants. Investigate the availability of and report to the Mayor
and Council the feasibility of obtaining grants from federal, state and
private sources and apply for and administer such grants as are authorized by
the Mayor and Council.



   Y.   Other duties. The Public Works Manager/Business Administrator
shall perform such additional administrative duties and functions as may be
from time to time assigned by the Mayor and Council.



§ 54-5. Authority of the Mayor and Council.



[Added 3-26-2012 by Ord. No. 4C-2012]



   Nothing herein shall derogate or reduce the powers and duties of the
Mayor and Council or authorize the Public Works Manager/Business
Administrator to exercise the power and duties thereof except as authorized.



§ 54-6. Classification of position. 



[Added 3-26-2012 by Ord. No. 4C-2012]



   It is the intention of Mayor and Council in creating this position to
deem same as "unclassified" for civil service purposes.  The person selected
shall utilize the local title "Municipal Department Head."



CHAPTER 55.
PURCHASING



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton
3-23-1992 by Ord. No. 7-1992; amended in its entirety 3-24-1997 by Ord. No.
1-1997; 9-24-2007 by Ord. No. 30-2007; 7-28-2008 by Ord. No. 23-2008;
1-24-2011 by Ord. No. 2-2011. Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.]



   § 55-1.   Purpose.



   § 55-2.   Applicability.



   § 55-3.   Procedures.



   § 55-4.   Compliance with state law.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Warrants — See Ch. 65.



§ 55-1. Purpose.



   In order to provide for control and accountability over all
expenditures by the Town of Hammonton, and in recognition of the essential
need to maintain viable procedures so that the business operations of local
government may proceed in an efficient and timely manner, this chapter shall
be adopted, which shall set forth the procedures to be followed in order to
make purchases by any department head (or in his/her absence, the next in
charge in the Department) of the Town of Hammonton.



§ 55-2. Applicability.



   The regulations and requirements outlined herein shall be applicable
for all purchases by all department heads of the Town of Hammonton.



§ 55-3. Procedures.



   It is determined that each Town department shall be allocated funds for
the annual operation of said department. The head of that department is
responsible for purchases on behalf of the department and shall:



   A.   First obtain a verbal or written quote/cost for the proposed or
requested purchase.



   B.   Accurately complete and sign a requisition and submit same to
the Purchasing Agent of the Town of Hammonton.



   C.   Wait until the Purchasing Agent has issued a purchase order
(which authorizes the purchase to be made) describing the item to be
purchased and cost of same, before actually making the purchase. The head of
the department shall issue the purchase order to the vendor in person or by
fax, and this authorizes the vendor to remit the product or service and
guarantees that payment of same will be made by the Town of Hammonton so long
as the product or service is remitted to the satisfaction of the Town of
Hammonton.



   D.   If a product or service must be ordered, then it is the
department head's responsibility to review the monthly list of bills to be
paid and sign off on same that all bills listed are accurate and have been
received to the satisfaction of the Town of Hammonton. Products or service on
order and not received by the Town should not be paid for ahead of time. The
purchase order is the legal document authorizing the order or purchase and
guaranteeing payment of same.



   E.   The department head is responsible for working within his/her
annual budget. This means the department head should anticipate all possible
expenditures for the budget year and pre-encumber those funds so that he/she
may work with the remaining department budget balance.



   F.   The department head may not exceed his/her allocated budget in
any given year.



   G.   The department head must review his/her department's budget
balances which appear on the monthly Council meeting agendas e-mailed to the
department head under the Town Clerk report.



   H.   For purchases/requisitions exceeding $100 the Council Committee
must also sign a requisition before it is submitted to the Purchasing Agent
for review and approval and issuance of a purchase order.



   I.   For purchases for products or services exceeding $5,400 or the
percentage of the bid threshhold as determined by the State of New Jersey for
any particular year, the department head must attempt to receive two or more
quotes and attach same to his/her requisition prior to Council Committee
Chair signature.



   J.   For purchases exceeding $17,500, or the amount set by the State
of New Jersey (Pay to Play Law) in any given budget year, the department head
must contact the Purchasing Agent to ascertain how the purchase may be made.



   K.   For purchases exceeding $36,000 or the amount set by State of
New Jersey bidding laws in any given year, the department head must contact
the Purchasing Agent so that they may formally bid that product or service.



   L.   Multiple purchases of the same product or service in any given
budget year must be calculated in total to determine how the purchase can
legally be made.



   M.   Should an emergency arise, the department head must contact the
Purchasing Agent for direction prior to making any purchase for product or
service.



   N.   Should the department head receive a letter during any given
budget year from the Purchasing Agent mandating "no further spending" in
his/her department due to previous overexpenditures and/or lack of sufficient
funding in that department, the department head must comply. Should the
department head continue to make purchases at any point after receiving this
letter, he/she may automatically be suspended.



   O.   Should a department head turn in an incomplete requisition to
the Purchasing Agent it will be returned with a letter stating the reason for
same, and if the purchase predates the requisition and purchase order, it
will be taken to the Mayor and Council for review and the department head
will be subject to disciplinary action for the unauthorized purchase.



   P.   All purchases (except annual department appropriations
following the above procedures) charged to bond ordinances, trusts, grants,
etc., must also be approved by the Mayor and Council before the purchase is
made.



   Q.   No final payment shall be made to a vendor until an invoice is
attached to the purchase order being paid, as well as the packing slip. If no
packaging slip is attached, then the department head receiving the product or
service must sign off on a receipt of services/product form.



§ 55-4. Compliance with state law.



   Any purchase made by the Town of Hammonton is still governed by the
State of New Jersey laws.



CHAPTER 65.
WARRANTS



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton
Code as indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]



ARTICLE I.
General Warrants



   § 65-1.   Signatures.



   § 65-2.   Indebtedness.



ARTICLE II.
Payroll Account



   § 65-3.   Approval of account; deposits.



   § 65-4.   Approval of warrants.



   § 65-5.   Signing of warrants.



   § 65-6.   Certifications.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Officers and employees — See Ch. 35.



   Purchasing — See Ch. 55.



Article I.
General Warrants



[Adopted 9-13-1971 by Ord. No. 10-1971 as Ch. 155 of the 1971]



§ 65-1. Signatures.



   All warrants drawn on the Treasurer of the Town of Hammonton shall,
after being signed by the President of Council and countersigned by the Town
Clerk/Administrator, be presented to the Town Treasurer and be by him/her
countersigned and dated; and no warrant shall be payable or negotiable until
it shall have been so countersigned by the Town Treasurer.



§ 65-2. Indebtedness.



   If any warrant shall have been drawn in favor of any individual, firm
or corporation who may be in debt-to-the Town of Hammonton at the time said
warrant is presented to the Treasurer, then it shall be the duty of the
Treasurer to deduct the amount of such indebtedness from the face of the
warrant and to pay the balance if any remains, provided that there is a
sufficient amount of money in the Town Treasury for that purpose. But if
there should not be a sufficient amount of money available for that purpose,
then the amount so deducted shall be specified on the back of the warrant,
and the warrant countersigned and dated by the Treasurer. All warrants will
be negotiable and draw legal interest from the date of the Treasurer's
signature.



Article II.
Payroll Account



[Adopted 9-13-1971 by Ord. No. 10-1971 as Ch. 46 of the 1971 Code]



§ 65-3. Approval of account; deposits.



   Immediately upon the adoption of this article and thereafter at the
first meeting of the Mayor and Common Council in January of each year, there
shall be approved an account to be designated as the Town of Hammonton
Payroll Account, and from time to time the Town Treasurer, upon receipt of a
warrant for an amount due such payroll account, shall deposit the same to the
credit of the payroll account, charging the appropriate budgetary accounts
therewith.



§ 65-4. Approval of warrants.



   At each regular meeting of the Mayor and Common Council, the Town
Clerk/Administrator, acting as Payroll Officer, shall present to said Mayor
and Common Council for approval, warrants drawn to the order of the Town of
Hammonton Payroll Account as follows:



   A.   In advance for all officers and employees whose salaries are on
an annual basis, when such salaries are due and payable prior to the next
regular meeting of said Mayor and Common Council.



   B.   In advance for all officers and employees whose compensation is
on an hourly basis, when the compensation has been approved by some
responsible designated officials and the Chairperson of the appropriate
committee and has been certified to by the Town Clerk/Administrator.



   C.   The Town Clerk/Administrator shall thereafter draw checks on
said payroll account to the officers and employees entitled to payment there
from.



   D.   At each regular meeting of the Mayor and Common Council, the
Town Clerk/Administrator shall submit for the approval or ratification, as
the case may be, the necessary payrolls for the amount due the several
officers and employees for compensation. The payroll shall be considered by
the Mayor and Common Council in due course and approved if found to be
correct.



   E.   In case of error or adjustment in said payroll, the Town
Clerk/Administrator shall, and it shall be his/her duty to, see that such
error or adjustment is property corrected and appropriate record made thereof.



§ 65-5. Signing of warrants.



   All warrants drawn to the order of the payroll account shall be signed
by the Mayor and the Town Clerk/Administrator and countersigned by the Town
Treasurer, and all checks drawn against said payroll account shall be signed
by the Town Treasurer only.



§ 65-6. Certifications.



   It shall be the duty of all department heads and such other officials
as may be designated by the Mayor and Common Council, to certify to the Town
Clerk/Administrator as to the correctness of all compensation due to the
officers and employees under their supervision and control. Such
certification shall be made on an approved form and shall accompany the
payroll of each department prior to each regular meeting. The Town
Clerk/Administrator shall, in turn, certify to the correctness of the
complete payroll as presented for approval or ratification.



CHAPTER 72.
AIRPORT, MUNICIPAL



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton
9-13-1971 by Ord. No. 10-1971 as Ch. 62 of the 1971 Code. Amendments noted
where applicable.]



   § 72-1.   Municipal airport established.



   § 72-2.   Standards of operation.



   § 72-3.   Town to contract for operations.



   § 72-4.   Capital improvements; costs as prepaid rent.



   § 72-5.   Proof of financial responsibility; insurance requirements.



   § 72-6.   Proof of successful managerial experience required.



   § 72-7.   Lease required between town and operators.



   § 72-8.   Definitions.



   § 72-9.   Standards of operation.



   § 72-10.   Administration.



   § 72-11.   Use of airport by individuals other than commercial
operators.



   § 72-12.   Violations and penalties.



   § 72-13.   Fees; penalties for noncompliance.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Airport facilities — See Ch. 175, § 175-149.



§ 72-1. Municipal airport established.



   The Town of Hammonton by action of its Mayor and Common Council has
established upon town-owned lands a facility known as the Hammonton Municipal
Airport, and has constructed thereon a suitable runway, taxiway facilities,
landscaping and required slope areas, through the use of a federal grant and
local tax revenues.



§ 72-2. Standards of operation.



Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 18-1990, adopted 10-22-1990, adopted a code
establishing minimum standards for the control of airport and aeronautical
hazards, and standards for land use adjacent to airports is hereby adopted
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 16:62 et seq., as amended May 15, 1989. These standards
shall become part of the Master Plan of development of the Town of Hammonton.
A copy of said code is on file in the office of the Town Clerk/Administrator.
The Mayor and Common Council hereby determine that the interests of the town
and its citizens can be served by the existence of appropriate aeronautical
facilities for the operation of the Hammonton Municipal Airport, and that the
interests of the town and its citizens can best be protected and furthered by
the establishment of standards of operation at the Hammonton Municipal
Airport commensurate with the highest standards of the aviation industry.



§ 72-3. Town to contract for operations.



   The town shall, for the purposes aforementioned, enter into contracts
with responsible operators permitting upon suitable terms commercial aviation
operations at the Hammonton Municipal Airport, and the public thereof subject
to the condition that all proposed commercial aviation operations and
individual operators shall meet the following minimum standards.



§ 72-4. Capital improvements; costs as prepaid rent.



[Amended 10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 17-1990]



   As to all fixed-base operators as defined in § 72-8 of this chapter,
such operators shall contract to construct permanent improvements, directly
related to aviation services, upon the Hammonton Municipal Airport, which
construction shall be of a cost, type, size and construction which is first
approved by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton; the costs
related to said construction and actually expended may be applied as prepaid
rent, however, in conformance with N.J.S.A. 40A:12-14. The term of a lease
and minimum rents shall be directly related to the actual cost of the capital
improvements by said fixed-base operator.



§ 72-5. Proof of financial responsibility; insurance requirements.



   A.   All commercial operators, as defined in § 72-8 of this
chapter, shall provide proof of financial responsibility of the operator and
its sureties sufficient to show clearly and convincingly the operator's
competency to operate successfully.



   B.   Each such commercial operator shall provide at least the
following insurance in amounts specified and underwritten by insurance
companies approved by the Department of Banking and Insurance of the State of
New Jersey, which shall include as an additional insured the Town of
Hammonton as lesser and owner of the Hammonton Municipal Airport, and provide
to lesser certificates of insurance in the following amounts and type which
shall first be approved by the Town Insurance Risk Manager:



      (1)   Airport premises, products and completed operations
liability:



         (a)   Bodily injury and property damage: $1,000,000 each
occurrence, $2,000,000 aggregate.



         (b)   Fire damage liability: based upon individual
exposure as determined by the Town Insurance Risk Manager.



         (c)   Medical expense coverage: $5,000 each person.



      (2)   One million dollars storage tank liability each
occurrence with an annual aggregate of $1,000,000 listing the Town of
Hammonton as additional insured for cleanup and removal activities arising
from operating a fuel facility at the Hammonton Municipal Airport.



      (3)   Hangar keeper's legal liability: an amount equal to the
single highest valued aircraft in the insurer's care, custody and control,
with an aggregate limit equal to twice the foregoing limit.



      (4)   Worker's compensation. Worker's compensation insurance
shall be provided in accordance with the Worker's Compensation Laws of the
State of New Jersey.



      (5)   Aircraft liability:



         (a)   Bodily injury and property damage: $1,000,000 CSL.



         (b)   Bodily injury liability: $100,000 each passenger.



   C.   Said operator shall include as an additional insured the Town
of Hammonton as lesser and owner of the Hammonton Municipal Airport, and
provide to the lesser certificates of insurance in the following amounts and
type which shall first be approved by the town's insurance broker of record:



      (1)   Products liability:



         (a)   $500,000 each accident.



         (b)   $1,000,000 aggregate.



      (2)   Aircraft liability (owned and non-owned):



         (a)   Bodily injury (excluding passengers):



            [1]   $500,000 each person.



            [2]   $1,000,000 each occurrence.



         (b)   Property damage, passenger: $100,000 each accident.



         (c)   Bodily injury liability: $100,000 each passenger
seat.



      (3)   Hangar keeper's legal liability: An amount equal to the
single highest valued aircraft in the insured's care, custody and control,
with an aggregate limit equal to twice the foregoing limit.



      (4)   Worker's compensation: Worker's compensation insurance
shall be provided in accordance with the Workers' Compensation Laws of the
State of New Jersey.



   D.   The town reserves the right to require the operator to produce
proof of assets or sufficient sureties to cover the entire rental for the
term of the lease and to deny any request for a lease where such proof is not
furnished.



§ 72-6. Proof of successful managerial experience required.



   A.   All commercial operators, as defined in § 72-8 of this
chapter, shall bring forward proof of successful managerial experience in
general aviation enterprises of the persons who shall be the actual operating
managerial personnel involved in and responsible for the operations involved
in the operation of Hammonton Municipal Airport, which managerial personnel
shall have a minimum of five years' commercial aviation experience in a
managerial capacity.



   B.   All such commercial operators shall bring forward proof of
compliance with all state and federal licensing laws pertinent to the
proposed operation.



§ 72-7. Lease required between town and operators.



[Amended 10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 17-1990]



   No person shall engage for profit in the operations, services or
functions enumerated in these standards unless and until such person shall be
a bona fide lessee of the town or sub lessee of a bona fide lessee operating
under a lease from the town permitting such sublease. All such leases binding
any fixed-base operator, as defined in § 72-8 of this chapter, shall be in
conformance with N.J.S.A. 40A:12-14.



§ 72-8. Definitions.



   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:



   COMMERCIAL OPERATOR AND COMMERCIAL OPERATION



   Any individual operator or operation who or which is entitled to or
obliged to engage in any commercial aeronautical activity upon the Hammonton
Municipal Airport which is defined and set forth in § 72-9 of this chapter
or any subsection thereof. This definition shall include within its purview
"fixed-base operator" as defined in § 72-8 as well as other commercial
operators as herein defined.



   FIXED-BASE OPERATOR



   Any operator who is entitled to or obliged to engage in at least those
activities defined in § 72-9B and F of this chapter, plus either of the
activities defined in § 72-9C or D of this chapter. Any operator who falls
within this definition of a "fixed-base operator" shall be required to meet
all standards set forth in § 72-9J of this chapter.



§ 72-9. Standards of operation.



   The following provisions shall apply to all commercial operations, as
defined in § 72-8 of this chapter, conducting any of the specific operations
hereinafter set forth, which specific operations shall be managed and
authorized only in the following manner:



   A.   Aircraft sales. Any lessee desiring to engage in the sale of
new or used aircraft must provide as a minimum the following:



      (1)   Buildings. Lease an existing facility or construct a
building prior to commencing operations with properly lighted and heated
space for office and public lounge and public use telephone. Said building
shall contain indoor rest room facilities and drinking fountains. Any
building used for the within activity shall be of a cost, type, size and
construction which is first approved by the Mayor and Common Council of the
Town of Hammonton; the costs related to said construction and actually
expended may be applied as prepaid rent, however, in conformance with
N.J.S.A. 40A:12-14. The term of a lease and minimum rent shall be directly
related to the actual cost of the capital improvement.



[Amended 10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 17-1990]



      (2)   Personnel. One person having a current commercial pilot
certificate with ratings appropriate for the types of aircraft to be
demonstrated, and at least one person having an instructor's rating
authorizing instructions in each aircraft sold or displayed. Provide for
office to be attended during the operating hours.



      (3)   Aircraft. A dealer of new aircraft shall have available
or on call one current model demonstrator for each of at least two models of
each franchise line sold.



      (4)   Services. A dealer shall provide an adequate supply to
or direct access to a sufficient supply of parts for each type of new
aircraft sold. A dealer shall provide for the repair and servicing of
aircraft during its warranty period by the dealers own facilities or through
written agreement with a repair shop specializing in the make of aircraft
sold.



      (5)   Hours of operation. Minimum operating hours shall be
from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. a minimum of five days a week.



   B.   Airframe and/or power plant repair. Any lessee desiring to
engage in airframe and/or power plant repair services must provide as a
minimum the following:



      (1)   Buildings. Lease an existing facility or construct a
building prior to commencing operations with properly lighted and heated
space for office and public lounge and public use telephone. Said building
shall contain indoor rest room facilities and drinking fountains and shall
meet all federal, state, county and municipal code requirements. Any building
used for the within activity shall be a cost, type, size and construction
which is first approved by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of
Hammonton; the costs related to said construction and actually expended may
be applied as prepaid rent, however, in conformance with N.J.S.A. 40A:12-14.
The term of a lease and minimum rent shall be directly related to the actual
cost of the capital improvement.



[Amended 10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 17-1990]



      (2)   Personnel. Have on field or on call factory trained
personnel capable of servicing, maintaining and repairing all aircraft,
piston and turbine, under 12,500 pounds with at least one aircraft inspector
available on call.



      (3)   Hours of operation. The normal operating hours shall be
a minimum of from 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. five days a week with service
available on weekends on an on-call emergency basis.



      (4)   Equipment. Provide sufficient equipment, supplies and
availability of parts to perform maintenance in accordance with
manufacturers' recommendations or equivalent.



   C.   Aircraft rental. Any lessee desiring to engage in the rental of
aircraft to the public must provide as a minimum the following:



      (1)   Buildings. Lease an existing facility or construct a
building prior to commencing operations with properly lighted and heated
space for office and public lounge and public use telephone. Said building
shall contain indoor rest room facilities and drinking fountains and shall
meet all federal, state, county and municipal code requirements. Any building
used for the within activity shall be of a cost, type, size and construction
which is first approved by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of
Hammonton; the costs related to said construction and actually expended may
be applied as prepaid rent, however, in conformance with N.J.S.A. 40A:12-14.
The term of a lease and minimum rent shall be directly related to the actual
cost of the capital improvement.



[Amended 10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 17-1990]



      (2)   Personnel. One person having a current commercial
pilot's certificate with appropriate ratings.



      (3)   Aircraft. Three airworthy aircraft owned or leased in
writing to the lessee.



      (4)   Hours of operation. Minimum operating hours of from 8:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m. seven days a week.



   D.   Flight training. Any lessee desiring to engage in pilot flight
instruction shall provide as a minimum the following:



      (1)   Buildings. Lease an existing facility or construct a
building prior to commencing operations with properly lighted and heated
spaces sufficient for office, classroom, pilot briefing and public lounge and
public use telephone. Said building shall contain indoor rest room facilities
and drinking fountains and shall meet all federal, state, county and
municipal code requirements. Any building used for the within activity shall
be of a cost, type, size and construction which is first approved by the
Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton; the costs related to said
construction and actually expended may be applied as prepaid rent, however,
in conformance with N.J.S.A. 40A:12-14. The term of a lease and minimum rent
shall be directly related to the actual cost of the capital improvement.



[Amended 10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 17-1990]



      (2)   Personnel. One person properly certificated by FAA as
flight instructor to cover the type of training offered.



      (3)   Aircraft. The lessee shall own or have leased to him/her
in writing three properly certificated aircraft equipped for flight
instruction.



      (4)   Hours of operation. The minimum hours of operation shall
be eight hours a day, seven days a week from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.



   E.   Air taxi service. Lessees desiring to engage in air taxi
service must hold an FAA air taxi-commercial operator's certificate and all
required CAB certifications appropriate for the type and weight of all
aircraft to be so used, with authorization for VFR and IFR, day and night,
and single- and multi-engine operations, and shall provide the additional
facilities and services as follows:



      (1)   Buildings. Lease an existing facility or construct a
building prior to commencing operations with properly lighted and heated
spaces sufficient for office and public lounge and public use telephone. Said
building shall contain indoor rest room facilities and drinking fountains and
shall met all federal, state, county and municipal code requirements. Any
building used for the within activity shall be of a cost, type, size and
construction which is first approved by the Mayor and Common Council of the
Town of Hammonton; the costs related to said construction and actually
expended may be applied as prepaid rent, however, in conformance with
N.J.S.A. 40A:12-14. The term of a lease and minimum rent shall be directly
related to the actual cost of the capital improvement.



[Amended 10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 17-1990]



      (2)   Personnel. One FAA certified commercial pilot who is
appropriately rated to conduct air taxi service offered, VFR, IFR, single-
and multi-engine, day and night.



      (3)   Aircraft. Two four-place single-engine aircraft, at
least one of which is IFR equipped, and at least one IFR equipped
multi-engine aircraft. All such aircraft shall be owned or leased by
agreement in writing and meet all the relevant requirements of Part 135 of
the FAA Regulations.



      (4)   Hours of operation. The minimum hours of operation shall
be from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. six days a week, but such operator shall
provide on-call service during nonoperating hours.



   F.   Aircraft fuels and oil dispensing and/or aircraft storage
service: Lessees desiring to dispense aviation fuels and oil and/or provide
other related services, such as tie down and storage of aircraft, shall
provide as a minimum the following services and facilities:



      (1)   Buildings. Lease an existing facility or construct a
building prior to commencing operations capable of accommodating a minimum of
six single-engine aircraft and with properly lighted and heated spaces
sufficient for office and public lounge and public use telephone. Said
building shall contain indoor rest room facilities and drinking fountains and
shall meet all federal, state, county and municipal code requirements. Any
building used for the within activity shall be a cost, type, size and
construction which is first approved by the Mayor and Common Council of the
Town of Hammonton; the costs related to said construction and actually
expended may be applied as prepaid rent, however, in conformance with
N.J.S.A. 40A:12-14. The term of a lease and minimum rent shall be directly
related to the actual cost of the capital improvement.



[Amended 10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 17-1990]



      (2)   Personnel. Provide sufficient staff to provide
constantly attended daylight service from 8:00 a.m. until dusk and emergency
twenty-four-hour service on demand where such can be reasonably provided.



      (3)   Aircraft service equipment. Provide emergency starting
equipment, adequate fire extinguishers.



      (4)   Services. Fuel, park, tie down and store aircraft, wash
and wax aircraft, inflate tires, change aircraft engine oil, provide minor
repairs and services not requiring mechanic's certificate ratings.



      (5)   Fueling facilities. Provide two metered fixed
filter-equipped dispensers for dispensing two grades (80-87 and 100-115
octane) of gasoline from storage tanks having a minimum capacity of 10,000
gallons each. Exhibit evidence of agreement with fuel suppliers to supply jet
A-1 fuel when required. Provide separate dispensing pumps and meters for each
grade of fuel as required.



      (6)   Hours of operation. Fueling service shall be provided
from a minimum of 8:00 a.m. until dusk seven days a week.



   G.   Radio, instrument or propeller repair service. Lessees desiring
to provide a radio, instrument or propeller repair service must hold a FAA
repair station certificate and ratings for same and provide as a minimum the
following:



      (1)   Buildings. Lease an existing facility or construct a
building prior to commencing operations with properly lighted and heated
spaces sufficient for office and public lounge and public use telephone. Said
building shall contain indoor rest room facilities, drinking fountains and
hangar space as may be required by the FAA and shall meet all federal, state,
county and municipal code requirements. Any building used for the within
activity shall be of a cost, type, size and construction which is first
approved by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton; the costs
related to said construction and actually expended may be applied as prepaid
rent, however, in conformance with N.J.S.A. 40A:12-14. The term of a lease
and minimum rent shall be directly related to the actual cost of the capital
improvement.



[Amended 10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 17-1990]



      (2)   Personnel. One FAA certified repair person qualified in
accordance with the terms of the repair station certificate.



      (3)   Hours of operation. The minimum hours of operation shall
be from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., five days a week.



   H.   Aerial applicators. Lessees desiring to engage in aerial
application operations must hold an agricultural aircraft certificate issued
by the FAA under Part 137; comply with requirements of the state and
political subdivisions thereof; and provide as a minimum the following:



      (1)   Buildings. Lease an existing facility or construct a
building prior to commencing operations with space for office or storage,
hangar space as may be required by FAA and shall meet all federal, state,
county and municipal code requirements relating to the activity shall be of a
cost, type, size and construction which is first approved by the Mayor and
Common Council of the Town of Hammonton; the costs related to said
construction and actually expended may be applied as prepaid rent, however,
in conformance with N.J.S.A. 40A:12-14. The term of a lease and minimum rent
shall be directly related to the actual cost of the capital improvement.



[Amended 10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 17-1990]



      (2)   Personnel. One person holding current FAA commercial
certificate properly rated for the aircraft to be used and meeting the
requirements of Part 137 of the FAA regulations and applicable regulations of
the state.



      (3)   Aircraft. One aircraft which will be airworthy, meeting
all the requirements of Part 137 of FAA regulations and applicable
regulations of the state. This aircraft shall be owned or leased by agreement
in writing and based on the lessee's leasehold.



      (4)   Facilities. A segregated chemical storage area protected
from public access, and shall be erected and maintained in such a manner as
to protect against the escape of noxious fumes or substances.



      (5)   Hours of operation. Personnel must be available on call
24 hours during the normal aerial application season.



   I.   Specialized commercial flight services. Lessees desiring to
engage in the specialized commercial air activities including but not limited
to banner towing and aerial advertising, aerial photography or survey, fire
fighting or fire patrol, power-line or pipeline patrol, and any other
operations specifically excluded from Part 135 of the Federal Aviation
Regulations, shall provide the following:



      (1)   Buildings. Lease an existing facility or construct a
building prior to commencing operations with properly lighted and heated
spaces sufficient for office and public lounge and public use telephone. Said
building shall contain indoor rest room facilities and drinking fountains and
shall meet all federal, state, county and municipal code requirements. Any
building used for the within activity shall be of a cost, type, size and
construction which is first approved by the Mayor and Common Council of the
Town of Hammonton; the costs related to said construction and actually
expended may be applied as prepaid rent, however, in conformance with
N.J.S.A. 40A:12-14. The term of a lease and minimum rent shall be directly
related to the actual cost of the capital improvement.



[Amended 10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 17-1990]



      (2)   Personnel. One person having a current commercial
pilot's certificate with appropriate ratings for the aircraft to be flown.



      (3)   Aircraft. One properly certificated aircraft owned or
leased in writing to the lessee.



      (4)   Hours of operation. The minimum operating hours will be
from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., five days a week.



   J.   Fixed-base operator. Lessees desiring to engage in the
activities of a fixed-base operator, as hereinabove defined, must provide as
a minimum the following:



      (1)   Buildings. Lease an existing facility or construct a
building prior to commencing operations with properly lighted and heated
spaces sufficient for office, public lounge and public use telephone. Said
building shall contain indoor rest room facilities, drinking fountains and
required facilities as provided in §§ 72-8 and 72-9 of this chapter and
shall meet all federal, state, county and municipal code requirements. Any
building used for the within activity shall be of a cost, type, size and
construction which is first approved by the Mayor and Common Council of the
Town of Hammonton; the costs related to said construction and actually
expended may be applied as prepaid rent, however, in conformance with
N.J.S.A. 40A:12-14. The term of a lease and minimum rent shall be directly
related to the actual cost of the capital improvement.



[Amended 10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 17-1990]



      (2)   Personnel. Multiple responsibilities may be assigned to
personnel to meet personnel requirements for all activities.



      (3)   Aircraft. Requirements for aircraft for the specific
activities to be engaged in must be provided; however, multiple uses can be
made of all aircraft, except aerial applicator aircraft, to meet these
requirements. In order to meet these requirements, however, a minimum of two
aircraft must be owned or under the direct control of the lessee and based on
the lessee's leasehold.



      (4)   Equipment. All equipment, specifically required for each
activity, must be provided. All fixed-base operators as herein defined shall
provide fueling facilities equal to, or greater than, those set forth in §
72-9F(5), and at a cost of not less than $15,000, in order to qualify as a
fixed-base operator, which fueling facilities shall be an additional
requirement over and above the buildings requirement and all other financial
requirements set forth above.



      (5)   Services. All services specifically required for each
activity must be provided during the hours of operations. Fixed-base
operators may provide all activities set forth within any of the categories
of the standards for airport operations contained within § 72-9 of this
chapter without meeting any additional requirements as to prepaid rent and
initial investment over and above those required of a fixed-base operator
within § 72-9J of this chapter.



      (6)   Hours of operation. The lessee will adhere to the
operating schedule as required for each activity.



   K.   Multiple service operations of nonfixed operators.



[Amended 10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 17-1990]



      (1)   Any operator, as defined in § 72-8 of this chapter, who
does not qualify as a fixed-base operator under § 72-8 may combine more than
one of the activities set forth in this section should he/she first secure a
lease from the Town of Hammonton authorizing him/her to engage in such
combined activities, and provided that said commercial operator meets the
individual standards set for each activity by this chapter for all operations
to be conducted by him/her. The requirements as to the providing of necessary
buildings shall be cumulative, and any commercial operator, as defined in §
72-8 of this chapter, who wishes to engage in more than one of the defined
activities shall supply buildings of a type, size and quality as are approved
by the Mayor and Common Council and at a cost equal to the sum total of each
individual building required for each separate operation for which said
operator acquires a lease up to the initial investment in buildings required
of a fixed-base operator, as defined in § 72-8. Should the sum total of
initial investments set forth in the various subsections of § 72-9 hereof
required of a commercial operator who does not qualify as a fixed-base
operator exceed those required of a fixed-base operator, said commercial
operator shall be required to invest an initial amount equal to that amount
required of fixed-base operators.



      (2)   A commercial operator under § 72-8 who does not qualify
as a fixed-base operator may combine more than one service, as provided by
the various subsections of § 72-9, in one or more buildings which are
approved as to size, quality and type of construction by the Mayor and Common
Council of the Town of Hammonton, and provided that the building or buildings
equal in cost either the cumulative total of all financial obligation imposed
for each operation engaged in under this section or those required of a
fixed-base operator, whichever is the lesser. Should any commercial operator
other than a fixed-base operator, as defined within § 72-8 of this chapter,
lease an existing facility, said operator shall pay to the Town of Hammonton
a prepaid rental equal to the sum total of the minimum cost requirements for
each separate operation which said commercial operator intends to engage in
where said commercial operator is required to construct buildings for each
said activity. Should any commercial operator, as defined in § 72-8 of this
chapter, sublease any portion of the premises leased by him/her to other
commercial operators conducting other activities set forth within § 72-9,
and the sum total of all such activities of the original lessee and the sub
lessee when joined together meet the definition of a fixed-base operator, as
contained within § 72-8, said combined services by the lessee and his/her
sub lessee(s) shall be considered the services of a fixed-base operator, and
the combined operators rendering such services shall be held to all standards
set forth in § 72-9J of this chapter for fixed-base operators. Nothing in
this section shall prevent the Town of Hammonton from raising the minimum
standards imposed by this chapter should economic factors and the status and
characteristics of the Hammonton Municipal Airport be such as justifies the
raising of the rental and/or of other standards imposed by this chapter,
provided that such new standards shall first be approved by the Federal
Aviation Administration before becoming effective.



   L.   General requirements.



      (1)   Building space requirements may be met by one building,
attached buildings or separate buildings constructed on leased premises.



      (2)   All lessee personnel required to hold appropriate FAA
certificates and ratings and shall maintain such certificates and ratings.



      (3)   All lessees offering any of the services or combinations
thereof shall do so under written lease or agreement with the town.



   M.   Flying clubs. The following requirements pertain to all flying
clubs desiring to base their aircraft on the airport and be exempt from the
minimum standards:



      (1)   Organizations. Each club must be a nonprofit corporation
or partnership. Each member must be a bona fide owner of the aircraft or a
stockholder in the corporation. The club may not derive greater revenue from
the use of its aircraft than the amount necessary for the actual use of
operation, maintenance and replacement of its aircraft. The club will file
and keep current with the town a complete list of the club's membership and
investment share held by each member.



      (2)   Aircraft. The club's aircraft will not be used by other
than bona fide members for rental and by no one for commercial operations.
Student instruction can be given in club aircraft to club members, provided
that such instruction is given by a lessee based on the airport who provides
flight training or by an instructor who shall not receive remuneration in any
manner for such service.



      (3)   Violations. In the event that the club fails to comply
with these conditions, the town will notify the club in writing of such
violations. If the club fails to correct the violations within 15 days, the
town may take any action provided in § 72-12 of this chapter.



§ 72-10. Administration.



[Amended 5-26-1980 by Ord. No. 15-1980]



   The Mayor and Common Council shall appoint on January 1 of each year an
individual for a one-year term to serve as Airport Administrator. Said
position shall no longer be nonsalaried and may be any present town official
or any other resident of the Town of Hammonton. Said Airport Administrator
shall have the responsibility of:



   A.   Determining whether all leases of the Municipal Airport are
meeting their obligations to the town, to the Federal Aviation Administration
and to the public;



   B.   Keeping informed of and complying with all state and federal
laws and regulations dealing with airport operations;



   C.   Serving as enforcement officer of this chapter and prosecuting
violations thereof; and



   D.   Making recommendations to the Mayor and Council of changes and
additions to the standards imposed by this chapter and the respective town
leases.



§ 72-11. Use of airport by individuals other than commercial operators.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be considered as granting an exclusive
right of use of Hammonton's airport facility which at all times shall be
operated as open for public use. However, in light of the need for such
public use being regulated so as to safeguard the airport facility and those
legitimately using said facility and to protect the public welfare of the
citizens and taxpayers of the town, the following standards are imposed on
individual use:



   A.   No aircraft owner shall park and tie down his/her aircraft in
any unauthorized area of the airport. Authorized parking areas shall be all
those areas within the area shown on the Airport Layout Plan filed with and
approved by the Federal Aviation Administration, including but not limited to
those areas within the responsibility and control of authorized commercial
operators, as defined in § 72-8 of this chapter, as are designated as
parking areas by the Airport Administrator. Areas for authorized public
parking shall also be designated by the Airport Administrator within the
town's right-of-way along Drivers Street in such portions of such
right-of-way as are designated as available for public parking by the Airport
Administrator.



   B.   No individual shall tie down on the airport unless said
individual shall pay the prevailing rate for tie-downs then in effect at said
airport.



   C.   No individual shall make any major repairs to an airplane at
the Hammonton Municipal Airport unless within a permanent structure properly
equipped to perform such repair services.



   D.   No person shall store or attempt to establish fuel facilities
without a lease from the town and without compliance with the provisions of
this chapter dealing with providing fueling services.



   E.   No person shall drive or park any automobile or other motor
vehicle, including trailers, other than an authorized service vehicle, on any
portion of the airport other than roadways and areas designated and marked as
available for such use.



   F.   No individual shall walk upon or traverse any area marked as
"restricted to authorized personnel only."



   G.   No person shall operate, store or maintain any airplane or
otherwise use the Hammonton Airport in an unsafe, hazardous or negligent
manner not in conformity with general aviation standards and all regulations
of the town relating to use of said airport.



§ 72-12. Violations and penalties.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject,
upon conviction by the Hammonton Municipal Court, to:



   A.   Expulsion from said airport and the use of any of its
facilities; and



   B.   One or more of the following: a fine of not more than $1,000,
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days or a period of community
service not to exceed 90 days.



§ 72-13. Fees; penalties for noncompliance.



[Added 10-22-2001 by Ord. No. 32-2001]



   A.   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish certain
fees to be collected at the Hammonton Municipal Airport by tenants and fixed
base operators, which, when turned over to the Town, shall be utilized for
airport purposes.



   B.   Establishment of fees. Every fixed based operator or tenant at
the Hammonton Municipal Airport shall collect and turn over to the Town of
Hammonton on a monthly basis the following fees if such services are rendered
by the fixed base operator or tenant to a third party:



      (1)   Fuel flow fee: $0.03 per gallon.



      (2)   Hangared aircraft (inside storage): $10 per month.



      (3)   Outside tie down: $5 per month.



   C.   Remittance of fees collected. Every fixed based operator or
tenant who shall collect fees as set forth herein shall, within 15 days of
the month following the month in which the fees are collected, turn over to
the Treasurer of the Town of Hammonton a fee collection report, together with
the actual amount collected. The fee report shall include the number of
gallons of fuel dispensed during the prior month, together with the number of
hangared aircraft and outside tie downs. Additionally, every fixed base
operator and tenant shall provide to the Town of Hammonton the name, address
and tail number for each and every aircraft hangared and tied down within
their leased space.



   D.   Exemption from fees. Every fixed base operator or tenant is
exempt from the within fees for aircraft owned by the fixed base operator or
tenant.



   E.   Penalty for noncompliance. Any fixed base operator or tenant at
the Hammonton Municipal Airport who fails to remit a monthly report, together
with the fees collected, shall be considered in violation of this section and
shall, upon conviction, be subject one or more of the following:



      (1)   A fine of not more than $1,000.



      (2)   Imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days; or a
period of community service not to exceed 90 days in the discretion of the
Judge of the Municipal Court.



      (3)   Each failure to comply with any such provision as
contained herein shall constitute a separate violation.



CHAPTER 74.
ALARM SYSTEMS



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton as
indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]



ARTICLE I.
False Alarms



   § 74-1.   Purpose.



   § 74-2.   Designation of false alarm.



   § 74-3.   Constitution of violation.



   § 74-3A.   Exemptions for churches, schools and non-profit
organizations.



   § 74-4.   Violations and penalties.



   § 74-5.   Terms defined.



   § 74-6.   Notification requirements.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Police Department — See Ch. 51.



   Fire prevention — See Ch. 144.



Article I.
False Alarms



[Adopted 5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 24-2001]



§ 74-1. Purpose.



   An ever increasing number of homeowners and business owners are
installing alarm systems in an effort to prevent crime. The installation of
these systems should certainly be encouraged, because they tend to make the
community safe. A result, however, of having so many properties with alarm
systems is that the local Police Department is called upon to respond to
false alarms. It is the purpose of this article to curtail the number of
false alarms received by the Police Department.



§ 74-2. Designation of false alarm.



   If the Police Department receives a call which requires an officer to
be dispatched to a residence or dispatched to a business or dispatched to any
location in the Town of Hammonton and, upon arrival, it can be determined
that no property or person was in threat of harm or injury and the call or
alarm to the Police Department was made by mistake, neglect or with the
purpose to annoy and there is no justifiable reason to initiate the dispatch,
the alarm shall be considered false.



§ 74-3. Constitution of violation.



   An individual shall be considered to have violated this article if he
or she initiated the false alarm or negligently allowed the false alarm to be
made. It shall be presumed that the owner of any property that has an alarm
system is the person who initiates or allows the alarm to be made. The
presumption may be rebutted.



§ 74-3A.  Exemptions for churches, schools and non-profit organizations. 



[Added 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 005-2017]



   Should a false alarm occur at the premise of a church, school (public
or private) or any non- profit organization, a false alarm warning and/or
fine shall not be issued.  If a false alarm warning and/or fine is issued in
error, it may be dismissed by the Chief of Police at his discretion.



§ 74-4. Violations and penalties.



[Amended 4-28-2008 by Ord. No. 12-2008; 12-21-2009 by Ord. No. 30-2009]



   Anyone who is convicted of violating this article in the Hammonton
Municipal Court is subject to the following penalties:



   A.   First offense: a warning with no fine or Court appearance
required.



   B.   Second and subsequent offenses: a fine of $50 and no Court
appearance required.



§ 74-5. Terms defined.



[Amended 4-28-2008 by Ord. No. 12-2008; 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 36-2008;
12-21-2009 by Ord. No. 30-2009]



   A "second offense, or subsequent offense" shall be defined as any false
alarm which occurs within a twelve-month period from January 1 through
December 31 annually.



§ 74-6. Notification requirements.



   A.   All security providers who maintain a panel within the
Hammonton Police Department for security systems for homeowners and
businesses are required to notify all such users annually as to the false
alarm ordinance by certified mail, return receipt requested, and provide a
copy of said letter and proof of service to the office of the Town
Clerk/Administrator and Chief of Police.



   B.   Any failure on the part of a provider to provide notice as
contained within this section shall not be considered a defense to the
violation of this article.



   C.   Any provider who fails to comply with the notification
requirements contained herein shall forfeit his/her right to maintain a
direct connection panel within the Hammonton Police Department.



CHAPTER 75.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton
9-13-1971 by Ord. No. 10-1971 as Ch. 63 of the 1971 Code. Amendments noted
where applicable.]



   § 75-1.   License required.



   § 75-2.   Issuing authority.



   § 75-3.   Compliance with state law required; investigation and
approval by town officials.



   § 75-4.   Classes of licenses; fees.



   § 75-5.   Number of licenses restricted.



   § 75-6.   Inurement of license in case of death.



   § 75-7.   Hotels and restaurants.



   § 75-8.   Hours of sale and consumption.



   § 75-9.   Official time.



   § 75-10.   Sale to minors.



   § 75-11.   Violations and penalties.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Alcoholic beverages in parks — See Ch. 200, § 200-4B(1).



   Alcoholic beverages in public places — See Ch. 202, § 202-3.



§ 75-1. License required.



   It shall not be lawful for any person or persons to operate, use or
maintain any store, dwelling or other building or premises of any kind in the
Town of Hammonton for the sale, offering for sale, exposure for sale or
dispensing of any beverage authorized by N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., and
amendments and supplements thereto, without a license pursuant to said act.



§ 75-2. Issuing authority.



   The Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton are hereby
constituted as a proper issuing authority to administer the issuance of all
licenses as herein provided, after investigation by proper authority.



§ 75-3. Compliance with state law required; investigation and approval by
town officials.



   All licenses issued and granted shall be issued in conformity with and
with the intention of complying with the terms and provisions of N.J.S.A.
33:1-1 et seq. and the amendments and supplements thereto, and shall only be
issued and granted after due investigation and approval by the proper
authorized town officials.



§ 75-4. Classes of licenses; fees.



   A.   The classes of licenses to be issued and the license fees shall
be as follows:



[Amended 2-13-2006 by Ord. No. 2-2006; 10-26-2009 by Ord. No. 21-2009]



      (1)   Plenary retail consumption license: $576.



      (2)   Plenary retail distribution license: $576.



      (3)   Club license: $144.



      (4)   Transfer fee person to person: $57.60.



      (5)   Transfer fee place to place: $57.60.



   B.   All license fees required hereunder shall be paid in cash or by
certified check, and the full amount thereof must accompany each application
for license when presented.



   C.   All licenses shall be issued for one year from July 1.



§ 75-5. Number of licenses restricted.



   Restrictions on the number of licenses to be issued shall be as follows:



   A.   Plenary retail consumption licenses shall be limited in number
to 23; provided, however, that after the limit of 23 has been reached, no
plenary retail consumption licenses shall be issued until, by relinquishment,
revocation or otherwise, the number of plenary retail consumption licenses
shall be reduced below the number of 23, and then new plenary retail
consumption licenses may only be issued until the limitation of 23 is reached.



   B.   Plenary retail distribution licenses shall be limited in number
to three; provided, however, that after the limit of three has been reached,
no plenary retail distribution licenses shall be issued until, by
relinquishment, revocation or otherwise, the number of plenary retail
distribution licenses shall be reduced below the number of three, and then
new plenary retail distribution licenses may only be issued until the
limitation of three is reached.



   C.   Limited retail distribution licenses shall be limited in number
to two; provided, however, that after the limit of two has been reached, no
limited retail distribution licenses shall be issued until, by
relinquishment, revocation or otherwise, the number of limited retail
distribution licenses shall be reduced below the number of two, and then new
limited retail distribution licenses may only be issued until the limitation
of two is reached.



   D.   Club licenses shall be limited in number to six; provided,
however, that after the limit of six has been reached, no club licenses shall
be issued until, by relinquishment, revocation or otherwise, the number of
club licenses shall be reduced below the number of six, and then new licenses
may only be issued until the limitation of six is reached.



§ 75-6. Inurement of license in case of death.



   In case of death of the licensee, the license may inure to the benefit
of the executor or administrator of such deceased licensee unless such
executor or administrator is individually disqualified from holding such a
license or is not a proper person to be licensed.



§ 75-7. Hotels and restaurants.



   Such licenses as are granted by the governing body shall be granted to
hotels and to restaurants having a seating capacity of 25 persons or more,
restaurants to be equipped to serve hot meals and lunches.



§ 75-8. Hours of sale and consumption.



[Amended 2-11-1974 by Ord. No. 4-1974; 5-9-1977 by Ord. No. 5-1977; 3-26-1990
by Ord. No. 9-1990]



   A.   No licensee shall sell, serve or deliver any alcoholic
beverages on any weekday between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. or on
any Sunday, except where New Year's Day falls on a Sunday, between the hours
of 2:30 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. or on any New Year's Day that falls on a Sunday
between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m., except where otherwise
provided by state law.



   B.   No licensee shall permit anyone to consume an alcoholic
beverage within the premises or on the premises after 3:00 a.m. on any day
other than a New Year's Day which falls on a Sunday, at which time this
limitation of consumption in or on a premises shall be at 6:00 a.m.



§ 75-9. Official time.



[Amended 7-23-2004 by Ord. No. 26-2001]



   The hours mentioned in § 75-8, as herein amended, shall be in
accordance with Eastern standard time or daylight saving time, whichever is
officially in effect in the Town of Hammonton.



§ 75-10. Sale to minors.



[Amended 7-23-2004 by Ord. No. 26-2001]



   No licensee shall sell, serve, deliver, allow, permit or suffer the
service or delivery of alcoholic beverages directly or indirectly to any
person under the legal age for purchasing alcoholic beverages or to an
intoxicated person, or allow, permit or suffer the consumption of alcoholic
beverages by any such person upon the licensed premises.



§ 75-11. Violations and penalties.



   Any person or persons, firm or corporation and officers thereof who
shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof
by a Judge, be subject to one or more of the following: a fine of not more
than $1,000, imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days or a period of
community service not to exceed 90 days or/and in addition thereto may
forthwith have his, her or its license revoked by the Common Council of the
Town of Hammonton for the violation of any section of this chapter.



CHAPTER 79.
AMUSEMENTS



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton as
indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]



ARTICLE I.
Automatic Amusement Games



   § 79-1.   License required; revocation for violation.



   § 79-2.   Definitions.



   § 79-3.   Issuance of license; fee; term.



   § 79-4.   Application for license.



   § 79-5.   Application filing date.



   § 79-6.   Affixing licenses to machines prior to use.



   § 79-7.   License transfers; fee.



   § 79-8.   License to remain on premises.



   § 79-9.   Permitting individuals under 16 to use device deemed a
violation.



   § 79-10.   Use of devices for gambling deemed violation.



   § 79-11.   Distance restriction.



   § 79-12.   Purpose.



   § 79-13.   Violations and penalties.



ARTICLE II.
Licensing of Carnival Grounds Games



   § 79-14.   Restrictions on licenses.



   § 79-15.   License required.



   § 79-16.   Filing of application.



   § 79-17.   Investigation of applicant.



   § 79-18.   Time limit on license; contents; display.



   § 79-19.   Hearing upon refusal; amendment of existing licenses.



   § 79-20.   Control and supervision of games.



   § 79-21.   Forfeiture of license.



   § 79-22.   Separate licenses per game and location; fee.



   § 79-23.   Dates of operation; minors.



   § 79-24.   Permissible games.



   § 79-25.   Time limit for filing application.



   § 79-26.   Certificate of insurance.



   § 79-27.   Violations and penalties.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Minors in places of amusement — See Ch. 119.



Article I.
Automatic Amusement Games



[Adopted 9-13-1971 by Ord. No. 10-1971 as Art. I of Ch. 64 of the 1971 Code]



§ 79-1. License required; revocation for violation.



[Amended 6-28-1982 by Ord. No. 12-1982]



   On and after the effective date of this article, all automatic
amusement games of the type commonly known and designated as "pinball" or
"bagatelle" amusement games, including video-type games or machines or
similar devices that use a display screen for points, lines and dots of light
that can be manipulated to simulate games or other types of entertainment,
and all musical entertainment machines of the type commonly known as "juke
boxes," maintained or used in any public or quasi-public place or in any
building, store or other place wherein the public is invited or wherein the
public may enter shall be licensed by the Mayor and Common Council of the
Town of Hammonton and shall not be operated, maintained or used within the
municipal limits of said Town of Hammonton without first having obtained a
license for that purpose; provided, however, that if a license has been
issued and the person to whom it has been issued shall thereafter be
convicted of a violation of this article, said license and every other
license held by the licensee, under and by virtue of this article, shall
immediately be revoked by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of
Hammonton.



§ 79-2. Definitions.



   As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:



   PERSON



   Any individual, firm, member of any firm, partnership, member of any
partnership, corporation or any officer, director or stockholder of said
corporation.



§ 79-3. Issuance of license; fee; term.



[Amended 6-28-1982 by Ord. No. 12-1982]



   The license for the operation, maintenance or use of such amusement
devices, machines or video-type devices mentioned aforesaid shall be issued
to and in the name of the proprietor of the premises wherein the machine is
to be operated, maintained or used and shall be issued for the calendar year
commencing September 1 and expiring August 31 at 12:00 midnight. The fee for
the issuance of a license shall be $75 for each game, machine or device for
the said calendar year or any part thereof, except that the fee for the
issuance of a license for the musical entertainment machines, commonly known
as "juke boxes," shall be $20 for the said calendar year or any part thereof.



§ 79-4. Application for license.



   A.   A separate application for each machine shall be filed, which
form of application shall show:



      (1)   The name of the applicant;



      (2)   The address of the premises wherein the machine is to be
operated, maintained or used;



      (3)   The name and address of the manufacturer, owner and
distributor of the machine;



      (4)   The manufacturer's serial number; and



      (5)   Whether or not the person making the application has
ever been convicted of a violation of this article, its amendments and
supplements, or of any previous ordinance of the town regulating the use of
such machines.



   B.   The fee for the license shall be payable with the filing of the
application, and if the application is rejected, the fee is to be returned to
the applicant.



§ 79-5. Application filing date.



[Added 6-28-1982 by Ord. No. 12-1982]



   All applications for the devices or machines specified in this article
shall be filed with the proper authority no later than the August 1
immediately prior to the term specified in § 79-3; provided, however, that
an application for any part of the calendar year specified in § 79-3 may be
filed at any time.



§ 79-6. Affixing licenses to machines prior to use.



   No device or machine as specified in this article shall be operated,
maintained or used until the license issued by the Mayor and Common Council
of the Town of Hammonton shall be affixed thereto in a conspicuous place on
the left-hand side of the machine so that the same may be easily and quickly
identified and inspected. Said license shall on its face disclose the name of
the manufacturer, owner and distributor, the manufacturer's serial number,
the name of the licensee and the address of the premises wherein the machine
is to be maintained, operated or used.



§ 79-7. License transfers; fee.



Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I). A license shall not be transferable from person to
person or usable at any place except the premises designated on the license.
A license may not be used on any other machine; provided, however, that a
transfer may be applied for by the licensee for the use on another machine by
the same proprietor and at the same premises. An application must first be
filed, which form of application shall contain the same information as set
forth in § 79-4, together with a complete statement of the reason for the
transfer. A transfer fee of $10 must accompany the said application. Upon the
granting of the transfer, the original license must be surrendered, and a
transfer license, so designated on the face of the license, shall be issued.
Such transfer license must at all times be kept and maintained by the
licensee in the same manner as provided herein for the original license.



§ 79-8. License to remain on premises.



   Except in the case of the surrender of a license to the Mayor and
Common Council of the Town of Hammonton, any license issued pursuant to this
article must at all times be kept and maintained on the licensee's premises
and subject to identification or inspection by the proper officers of the
municipality. In case a machine is taken out of the premises for repairs or
otherwise, the license must be taken off the machine and kept on the said
premises.



§ 79-9. Permitting individuals under 16 to use device deemed a violation.



[Amended 6-28-1982 by Ord. No. 12-1982]



   Any person who shall knowingly permit an individual under the age of 16
years to play or operate any of the machines or devices licensed by this
article shall be guilty of a violation of this article and punishable
therefor as herein provided; except, however, that this provision shall not
apply to those musical entertainment devices which are commonly known as
"juke boxes."



§ 79-10. Use of devices for gambling deemed violation.



   Any person who shall use or permit to be used any of the machines or
devices licensed hereunder for the purposes of gambling shall be deemed to be
guilty of a violation of this article and punishable therefor as herein
provided.



§ 79-11. Distance restriction.



   No machine or device mentioned in this article shall be used,
maintained or operated in any premises which has an entrance within 200 feet
of any entrance to a school or church.



§ 79-12. Purpose.



[Amended 6-28-1982 by Ord. No. 12-1982 Editor's Note: Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). ]



   This article is enacted for the purpose of regulation and control of
pinball, bagatelle, video-type or musical entertainment machines or devices.



§ 79-13. Violations and penalties.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction in the Municipal Court or any other court having jurisdiction, be
punished for each offense by one or more of the following: a fine of not more
than $1,000, imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days or a period of
community service not to exceed 90 days. The Judge of the Municipal Court or
the Judge of any other court having jurisdiction, before whom any person is
convicted of violating this article, shall have the power to impose any fine
or term of imprisonment or community service not exceeding the maximum fixed
in this article.



Article II.
Licensing of Carnival Grounds Games



[Adopted 4-12-1976 by Ord. No. 7-1976]



§ 79-14. Restrictions on licenses.



   All licenses issued under this article shall be issued for a specific
game as hereinafter defined, at a specific location within that area known as
the "Carnival Grounds," consisting of all lands owned by the Our Lady of
Mount Carmel Society situate between French Street and Pratt Street and
between North Third Street and Tilton Street in the Town of Hammonton, which
premises are hereby determined to be a recognized amusement and entertainment
area of the Town of Hammonton under Chapter 109 of the Public Laws of 1959
(N.J.S.A. 5:8-100 et seq.) the same having been used for festivals and
celebrations within the Town of Hammonton for over 40 years.



§ 79-15. License required.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to own or
operate within this municipality any amusement game or games as said
amusement game or games are defined by the aforesaid Amusement Games
Licensing Law (P.L. 1959, c. 109; N.J.S.A. 5:8-100 et seq.), whether said
amusement game or games are of skill or chance, or both, and whether said
amusement game or games are played and operated with or without numbers,
symbols or figures, without first having obtained a proper license from the
Town Clerk/Administrator of the Town of Hammonton. Said license shall be
issued subject to the provisions of the Amusement Games Licensing Law (P.L.
1959, c. 109; N.J.S.A. 5:8-100 et seq.), and the Revised Amusement Games
Regulations Editor's Note: See N.J.A.C. 13:3-1.1 et seq. (effective
4-11-1966) promulgated by the Office of Amusement Games Control, Department
of Law and Public Safety of the State of New Jersey.



§ 79-16. Filing of application.



   Each applicant for such a license shall file with the Town
Clerk/Administrator a written application therefor, in duplicate. The
application must be in the form prescribed by the Commissioner of Amusement
Games Control and must comply with all the requirements as specifically set
forth in Section 2 of Chapter 109 of the Public Laws of 1959 (N.J.S.A.
5:8-102) and any amendments and supplements thereto and any additional
requirements as may be promulgated from time to time by the Amusement Games
Control Commissioner of the State of New Jersey.



§ 79-17. Investigation of applicant.



   The Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton shall make an
investigation of the qualifications of each applicant and the merits of each
application as authorized and directed by the Amusement Games Licensing Law.
Each individual applicant, the officers, directors and stockholders
(including the officers, directors and stockholders of any corporation
holding 5% or more of the capital stock) of any corporate applicant, as well
as the partners or members, as the case may be, of any partnership,
association or organization applicant, shall be fingerprinted under the
supervision of the Municipal Chief of Police. The fingerprint records so
obtained shall be marked "Applicant" and shall be submitted to the Federal
Bureau of Investigation and the New Jersey State Police Bureau of
Identification; and, upon receipt of returns from such Bureaus, the Chief of
Police shall make a report thereof to the Mayor and Common Council of the
Town of Hammonton, together with a report of any other arrest or conviction
record which may be obtained from other sources. Failure or refusal of any of
the above-designated persons to submit to fingerprinting shall be deemed
cause for denial of the application. No license shall be issued to any
applicant if any of the above persons required to be fingerprinted in
connection with the application are not of good moral character or have ever
been convicted of a crime, unless the disqualification resulting from such
conviction has been removed by the Commissioner of Amusement Games Control
pursuant to Chapter 200 of the Public Laws of 1962 (N.J.S.A. 5:8-102, 5:8-103
and 5:8-105).



§ 79-18. Time limit on license; contents; display.



   A.   Upon proof of compliance with all applicable requirements, the
Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton shall authorize the Town
Clerk/Administrator to issue a license for a particular game at a specific
location within the Carnival Grounds for a period not to exceed a maximum of
10 days from the date of issuance. A certified copy of the license issued by
the Town Clerk/Administrator shall be transmitted, along with a copy of the
application for said license, to the Commissioner of Amusement Games Control.
Each license shall be issued in triplicate with the original delivered to the
applicant, one copy delivered to the Commissioner of Amusement Games Control
and with one copy retained by the Town Clerk/Administrator.



   B.   The license shall indicate thereon:



      (1)   The name of the licensee;



      (2)   The licensee's home address;



      (3)   The address of the licensed premises;



      (4)   An exact description of the kind of game licensed;



      (5)   The fact that the fee as hereinafter set forth has been
paid, with a delineation of the amount paid; and



      (6)   A statement of the dates between which and the hours
between which such game may be conducted.



   C.   Each license so issued by the Town of Hammonton shall be
conspicuously displayed at the place or the places where the game is to be
conducted at all times during the conduct thereof.



   D.   The securing of this license shall in no way supersede or
affect the obligation of the licensee to secure a state license from the
State Commissioner of Amusement Games Control pursuant to Regulation 2 of the
Revised Amusement Games Regulations of the State of New Jersey, Department of
Law and Public Safety, Office of Amusement Games Control, as effective April
11, 1966, and filed with the Secretary of State of the State of New Jersey on
April 11, 1966. Editor's Note: See N.J.A.C. 13:3-1.1 et seq.



§ 79-19. Hearing upon refusal; amendment of existing licenses.



   A.   No application for the issuance of a license shall be refused
by the Town Clerk/Administrator until after a hearing is held on due notice
to the applicant, at which time the applicant shall be entitled to be heard
upon the qualifications of the applicant and the merits of the application.



   B.   Any license issued under this article may be amended upon
application made to the Town Clerk/Administrator, if the subject matter of
the proposed amendment could lawfully and properly have been included in the
original license and upon payment of such additional license fee, if any, as
would have been payable if it had been so included.



§ 79-20. Control and supervision of games.



   The Chief of Police shall have and exercise control and supervision
over all amusement games held, operated or conducted under such license with
all the powers authorized or granted under said Amusement Games Licensing Law
and all amendments and supplements thereto.



§ 79-21. Forfeiture of license.



   An person, association or corporation who or which shall make any false
statement in any application for such license or shall fail to keep such
adequate and proper books and records as shall fully and truly record all
transactions connected with the holding, operating or conducting of amusement
games under such license or shall falsify or make any false entry in any
books or records insofar as they relate to any transaction connected with the
holding, operating and conducting of any amusement game under any such
license or shall violate any of the provisions of this article or the
Amusement Games Licensing Law (P.L. 1959, c. 109; N.J.S.A. 5:8-100 et seq.),
or of any of the terms of such license shall be a disorderly person and, if
convicted as such, shall, in addition to suffering any other penalties which
may be imposed, forfeit any license issued to it under this article.



§ 79-22. Separate licenses per game and location; fee.



[Amended 6-25-1984 by Ord. No. 8-1984]



   There shall be issued to an applicant who shall qualify for a license a
separate license for each specific game authorized to be held, operated and
conducted on the Carnival Grounds by the licensee, and a separate license
shall be issued for each location within the Carnival Grounds at which the
licensee is authorized to hold, operate and conduct such game; except,
however, that only one license will be required at each separate location on
the Carnival Grounds where no more than 50 of the arcade games, as described
in Certification No. 2 of N.J.A.C. 13:3-7.9, are collected within one
enclosure. Said license shall be for the specific term of the affair to be
conducted, but in no case shall it exceed a maximum of 10 days. The license
fee for such license for each game at each specific location shall be $50.
Said fee shall be paid without proration and shall accompany the application
for the license. The fee for the location where no more than 50 arcade games
are located, as described above, shall be $50 for the first 50 games and $25
per game for each game over the total of 50. Said fee shall be paid without
proration and shall accompany the application for the license.



§ 79-23. Dates of operation; minors.



   No application shall be made for any license to conduct any game on the
Carnival Grounds between October 1 and April 30 of each given year. It is
expressly understood that all amusement games of chance as permitted under
this article and the Amusement Games Control Regulations shall be for defined
periods between May 1 and September 30. All licenses shall give the licensee
the right to operate for the specific term set forth on the license between
the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 1:00 a.m. on each specific day within said term.
No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted to play any game
authorized under this article.



§ 79-24. Permissible games.



[Amended 6-25-1984 by Ord. No. 8-1984]



   All games permitted under the Amusement Games Licensing Law, otherwise
known as Chapter 109 of the Public Laws of 1959 (N.J.S.A. 5:8-100 et seq.)
and permitted within the Revised Amusement Games Regulations of the Office of
the Amusement Games Control of the Department of Law and Public Safety of the
State of New Jersey, as promulgated April 11, 1966 Editor's Note: See
N.J.A.C. 13:3-1.1 et seq. and as amended by Permissible Amusement Games
Certificate Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8, shall be permissible games for
which a license may issue under this article.



§ 79-25. Time limit for filing application.



   All applications for licenses under this article shall be filed with
the appropriate license fee with the Town Clerk/Administrator of the Town of
Hammonton at least 10 days prior to the proposed issuance date for said
license, in order that a proper investigation may be made of the applicant,
and each license issued under this article shall be valid only for the
specific time enumerated thereon.



§ 79-26. Certificate of insurance.



   All applicants for licenses under this article shall file with said
application a certificate of insurance, designating the Town of Hammonton as
an additional insured, insuring said game and the owner or operator thereof
for all personal injuries and property damage claims arising from the
operation of said game or the maintenance of same, which coverage shall be
with a licensed insurance carrier authorized to do business in the State of
New Jersey and shall be in the amount of at least $1,000,000 per individual
or accident.



§ 79-27. Violations and penalties.



   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
article shall be subject to one or more of the following: a fine of not more
than $1,000, imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days or a period of
community service not to exceed 90 days, and the same shall be in addition to
the powers of suspension or revocation of any such license as provided for
herein.



CHAPTER 82.
ANIMALS



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton as
indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]



ARTICLE I.
Licensing of Dogs



   § 82-1.   Definitions.



   § 82-2.   License required.



   § 82-3.   Licensing frequency; display.



   § 82-4.   Authorization of Animal Control Officer to issue
licenses; compensation.



   § 82-5.   License and registration fees; special purpose dogs.



   § 82-6.   Time limit for application for license.



   § 82-7.   Contents of application; recordkeeping.



   § 82-8.   Licensing of out-of-town licensed and unlicensed dogs.



   § 82-9.   Removal of registration tags.



   § 82-10.   (Reserved)



   § 82-11.   (Reserved)



   § 82-12.   Restraint of animals off animal facilities premises or
owner’s premises.



   § 82-13.   Disposition of fees collected.



   § 82-14.   List of licensed animal facilities forwarded to state.



   § 82-15.   Annual canvass of dogs; reports.



   § 82-16.   Animal Control Officer and animal catchers.



   § 82-17.   Impoundment; notice; disposal; redemption fee.



   § 82-18.   Seizure practices.



   § 82-19.   Interference with authorities.



   § 82-20.   Control of animals causing nuisances and disturbance.



   § 82-21.   Control of animals causing property damage or nuisance.



   § 82-22.   Violations and penalties.



   § 82-22A.   Limitation on number of domestic dogs or other animals.



ARTICLE II.
Vicious Dogs



   § 82-23.   Purpose.



   § 82-24.   Types of cases.



   § 82-25.   Potentially dangerous dog.



   § 82-26.   Vicious dogs.



   § 82-27.   Appeal.



ARTICLE III.
Waterfowl



   § 82-28.   Purpose.



   § 82-29.   Prohibited conduct.



   § 82-30.   Waterfowl defined.



   § 82-31.   Enforcement.



   § 82-32.   Notification.



   § 82-33.   Violations and penalties.



ARTICLE IV.
Control of Dogs



   § 82-34.   Control of dogs in public places.



   § 82-35.   Running at large.



   § 82-36.   Nuisances by dog; sanitary requirements.



   § 82-37.   Inclement weather.



   § 82-37A.   Domestic animals in vehicles.



   § 82-38.   Tethering of dogs.



ARTICLE V
Dog Parks



   § 82-39.   Hammonton Dog Park.



   § 82-40.   Use of dog park by Hammonton residents.



   § 82-41.   Use of dog park by non-Hammonton residents.



   § 82-42.   Hold Harmless/Dog Park Agreement.



   § 82-43.   Key fob or other entry device.



   § 82-44.   Lost, stolen or missing key fob or other entry device.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   K-9 Corps — See Ch. 51, Art. II.



   Litter from pets — See Ch. 184, Art. I.



   Animals in parks — See Ch. 200, § 200-4.



   Pets in trailer camps — See Ch. 264.



   Fastening animals to trees — See Ch. 267.



Article I.
Licensing of Dogs



[Adopted 4-28-1980 by Ord. No. 14-1980]



§ 82-1. Definitions.



   A.   The words hereinafter defined shall have the meanings herein
indicated for the purposes of this article as follows:



   ANIMAL(S)



   Any other domestic animal(s).



   DOG



   Any dog, bitch or spayed bitch.



   DOG OF LICENSING AGE



   Any dog which has attained the age of seven months or which possesses a
set of permanent teeth.



   KENNEL



   Any establishment wherein or whereon the business of boarding or
selling dogs or breeding dogs for sale is carried on, except a pet shop.



   LOCAL BOARD



   The Atlantic County Board of Health.



   OWNER



   When applied to the proprietorship of a dog or animal, includes every
person having a right of property in such a dog or animal and every person
who has such dog or animal in his/her keeping.



   PERSON



   An individual, firm, partnership, corporation or association of persons.



   PET SHOP



   Any place of business which is not part of a kennel, wherein animals,
including, but not limited to, dogs, cats, birds, fish, reptiles, rabbits,
hamsters or gerbils, are kept or displayed chiefly for the purpose of sale to
individuals for personal appreciation and companionship rather than for
business or research purposes.



[Amended 7-23-2001 by Ord. No. 26-2001]



   POUND



   An establishment for the confinement of dogs or animals seized either
under the provisions of this article or otherwise.



   SHELTER



   Any establishment where dogs or other animals are received, housed and
distributed.



[Amended 7-23-2001 by Ord. No. 26-2001]



   TOWN



   The Town of Hammonton in the County of Atlantic, State of New Jersey.



   B.   Word usage.



      (1)   The words "and" and "or" may be used interchangeably and
either of the two may be applicable, whichever is more conducive towards the
effectuating of this article.



      (2)   Personal pronouns shall mean either the singular or the
plural, whichever is applicable and conducive towards the effectuating of
this article.



      (3)   The masculine, feminine or the neuter gender shall be
implied, whichever is appropriate and conducive for the effectuating of this
article.



§ 82-2. License required.



   No person shall keep or harbor any dog within the Town of Hammonton, in
the County of Atlantic, without first obtaining a license therefor, to be
issued by the Town Clerk/Administrator upon application by the owner and
payment of the prescribed fee, and no person shall keep or harbor any dog or
animal in said town except in compliance with the provisions of this article.



§ 82-3. Licensing frequency; display.



[Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 10-2011]



   Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog of licensing age shall
be required to obtain a dog license from the Town Clerk's office upon renewal
of rabies vaccination or every three years, as appropriate, and shall be
required to display same upon the dog’s collar, harness or otherwise.



§ 82-4. Authorization of Animal Control Officer to issue licenses;
compensation.



[Added 7-22-1985 by Ord. No. 11-1985; amended 4-24-1989 by Ord. No. 10-1989;
7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 11-1997]



   A.   In addition to the Town Clerk/Administrator, as authorized by
§§ 82-2 and 82-3 of this article, the Animal Control Officer of the Town of
Hammonton shall be, and hereby is, authorized to issue dog licenses and
official metal registration tags.



   B.   The Animal Control Officer shall, during the annual canvass as
required by § 82-14 of this article, register all dogs subject to said
canvass and may, in accordance with this Code, issue a dog license and
registration tag for each such dog, provided that the appropriate fees, as
required by § 82-4A, as amended, are collected by said Animal Control
Officer at the time of issuance of the license and registration tag.



   C.   The Animal Control Officer shall account to the Town
Clerk/Administrator for all income received from the sale of licenses,
registration tags and/or late charges. The Animal Control Officer is entitled
to retain from the late charges only the sum of $2.50 per late charge as and
for his/her compensation.



§ 82-5. License and registration fees; special purpose dogs.



[Amended 12-14-1981 by Ord. No. 20-1981; 9-26-1983 by Ord. No. 9-1983]



   A.   Any person obtaining a (3 year) dog license in the Town of
Hammonton shall pay $26.40 (local fee), $3.60 (state registration tag fee),
and $9.00 (state nonspayed or nonneutered dog fee). Any person obtaining a (1
year) dog license in the Town of Hammonton shall pay $15.80 (local fee),
$1.20 (state registration tag fee), and $3.00 (state nonspayed or nonneutered
dog fee). 



[Amended 10-25-2004 by Ord. No. 24-2004; 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 10-2011;
9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 015-2015]



   B.   Dogs used as guides for blind persons and commonly known as
"seeing-eye" dogs, dogs used to assist handicapped persons and commonly known
as "service dogs," or dogs used to assist deaf persons and commonly known as
"hearing ear" dogs shall be licensed and registered as other dogs hereinabove
provided for, except that the owner or keeper of such dog shall not be
required to pay any fee therefor. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C,
regarding a late fee, added 4-24-1989 by Ord. No. 10-1989, which subsection
immediately followed, was repealed 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 10-2011.



[Amended 7-23-2001 by Ord. No. 26-2001]



§ 82-6. Time limit for application for license.



   The owner of any newly acquired dog of licensing age or of any dog
which attains licensing age shall make application for a license and
registration tag for such dog within 10 days after such acquisition or age
attainment.



§ 82-7. Contents of application; recordkeeping.



   The application shall state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of
the dog for which a license and registration are sought and also the name,
street and post office address of the owner and the person who shall keep or
harbor such dog. The information on said application and the registration
number issued for the dog shall be preserved for a period of three years by
the Town Clerk/Administrator. In addition, he or she shall forward similar
information to the Department of Health each month on forms furnished by said
Department. Registration numbers shall be issued in the order of the
applications.



§ 82-8. Licensing of out-of-town licensed and unlicensed dogs.



   A.   Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Town
of Hammonton any dog licensed in another state for the current year and
bearing a registration tag and shall keep the same or permit the same to be
kept within the town for a period of more than 90 days shall immediately
apply for a license and registration tag for each such dog, unless such dog
is licensed under § 82-10 of this article.



   B.   Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the town
any unlicensed dog and shall keep the same or permit the same to be kept
within the town for a period of more than 10 days shall immediately apply for
a license and registration tag for each such dog, unless such dog is licensed
under § 82-10 of this article.



§ 82-9. Removal of registration tags.



   No person, except an officer in the performance of duties, shall remove
a registration tag from the collar of any dog without the consent of the
owner, nor shall any person attach a registration tag to a dog for which it
is not issued.



§ 82-10. (Reserved)



Editor's Note: Former § 82-10, Licensing of animal facilities, as amended,
was repealed 6-26-2006 by Ord. No. 12-2006. See Ch. 109, Business
Registration.



§ 82-11. (Reserved)



Editor's Note: Former § 82-11, License fees for kennels and pet shops, was
repealed 6-26-2006 by Ord. No. 12-2006. See Ch. 109, Business Registration.



§ 82-12. Restraint of animals off animal facilities premises or owner’s
premises. 



[Amended 10-28-2013 by Ord. No. 024-2013]



   No dogs or other domestic animals, including, but not limited to, cats,
kept in a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall be permitted off such
premises or off of the premises of a private residential owner except on a
leash or in a crate or other safe form of control.



§ 82-13. Disposition of fees collected.



   A.   License fees and other money collected or received under the
provisions of this article, except registration tag fees, shall be forwarded
to the Treasurer of the town within 30 days after collection or receipt and
shall be placed in a special account separate from any of the other accounts
of the town and which shall be used for the following purposes only: for
collecting, keeping and disposing of dogs or animals liable to seizure under
this article; for local prevention and control of rabies; for providing
antirabic treatment under the direction of the Health Officer of the town for
any person known or suspected to have been exposed to rabies; and for all
other purposes prescribed by the statutes of New Jersey governing the subject
and for administering the provisions of this article. Any unexpended balance
remaining in such special account shall be retained therein until the end of
the third fiscal year following and may be used for any of the purposes set
forth in this section. At the end of said third fiscal year following and at
the end of each fiscal year thereafter, there shall be transferred from such
special account to the general funds of the town any amount then in such
account which is in excess of the total amount paid into said special account
during the last two fiscal years next preceding.



   B.   The registration tag fee of $0.50 for each dog shall be
forwarded within 30 days after collection by the Town Clerk/Administrator to
the State Department of Health.



§ 82-14. List of licensed animal facilities forwarded to state.



   The Town Clerk/Administrator shall forward to the State Department of
Health a list of all kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds licensed within
30 days after the licenses therefor are issued, which list shall include the
name and address of the licensee and the kind of license issued.



§ 82-15. Annual canvass of dogs; reports.



[Amended 4-14-1989 by Ord. No. 10-1989; 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 11-1997]



   The Animal Control Officer of the Town of Hammonton shall, either
individually or through the use of canvassers employed by the Mayor and
Council, cause a canvass to be made of all dogs owned, kept or harbored
within the limits of the Town of Hammonton and shall report on or before
September 1 of each year to the Town Clerk/Administrator, to the Dog
Registrar and to the Atlantic County Board of Health the result of said
canvass, setting forth in separate columns the names and addresses of persons
owning, keeping or harboring unlicensed dogs, the number of unlicensed dogs
owned, kept or harbored by each of said persons, together with a complete
description of each of said unlicensed dogs.



§ 82-16. Animal Control Officer and animal catchers.



[Amended 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 11-1997]



   The Mayor and Council shall have the power to appoint an Animal Control
Officer, whose duty it shall be to enforce the provisions of this article.
The Council shall also have the power to appoint one or more persons, to be
known as "animal catchers," who may impound unlicensed dogs and dogs or
animals running at large in violation of the provisions of this article.



§ 82-17. Impoundment; notice; disposal; redemption fee.



[Amended 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 11-1997]



   A.   The Animal Control Officer shall take into custody and impound
the dogs or animals at the town pound and thereafter destroy or dispose of
same, as provided in this section, any dogs or animals off the premises of
the owner or of the person keeping or harboring said dog or animal unless
accompanied by the owner or person harboring said dog or animal and
controlled by said owner or person harboring said dog or animal by the use of
a leash, crate or other safe control. No dog or animal so impounded shall be
kept on the premises of the Animal Control Officer.



   B.   If any dog or animal so seized wears a collar or harness having
inscribed thereon or attached thereto the name and address of any person or a
registration tag or if the owner or the person keeping or harboring said dog
or animal is known, the Animal Control Officer shall forthwith serve on the
person whose address is given on the inscribed collar or on the owner or the
person keeping or harboring said dog or animal, if shown, a notice, in
writing, stating that the dog or animal has been seized and will be liable to
be disposed of or destroyed if not claimed within seven days after the
service of the notice.



   C.   A notice under this section may be served either by delivering
it to the person on whom it is to be served or by forwarding it by post in a
prepaid letter addressed to that person at his/her usual or last known place
of abode or to the address given on the inscribed collar or harness.



   D.   When any dog or animal so seized has been detained for seven
days after notice when notice can be given as above set forth, or has been
detained for seven days after seizure when no notice has been given as set
forth above, and if the owner or person keeping or harboring said dog or
animal has not claimed said dog or animal and paid all expenses incurred by
reason of its detention, including a maintenance fee of $4 per day, or if a
dog is unlicensed at the time of the seizure and the owner or person keeping
or harboring said dog has not produced a license or registration tag for said
dog, the Animal Control Officer may cause the dog or animal to be destroyed
in a manner causing as little pain as possible. Editor's Note: Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).



   E.   The pickup fee for all purposes of any dog or animal so
impounded shall be $15, to be recovered by and in the name of the town
pursuant to § 82-13 of this article.



   F.   The Animal Control Officer is hereby authorized to go upon any
premises to seize for impounding any dog or animal or dogs or animals which
may lawfully be seized and impounded when such Animal Control Officer is in
immediate pursuit of such dog or animal or dogs or animals, except upon the
premises of the owner of the dog or animal if said owner is present and
forbids the same.



   G.   The Animal Control Officer is authorized to deal in the sale or
bartering of any dog or animal impounded or otherwise in his/her custody or
control. Any and all proceeds there from shall be collected by and paid
directly to the Town Clerk/Administrator and a record made of such
transactions. Furthermore, all proceeds collected or received under this
provision shall be forwarded to the Treasurer of the town by the Town
Clerk/Administrator pursuant to § 82-13 of this article, and such proceeds
shall be used for limited purposes as specified in § 82-13 of this article.



§ 82-18. Seizure practices.



   Any officer or agent authorized or empowered to perform any duty under
this article is hereby authorized to go upon any premises to seize for
impounding any dog or animal or dogs or animals which may lawfully be seized
and impounded when such officer is in immediate pursuit of such dog or animal
or dogs or animals, except upon the premises of the owner of the dog or
animals if said owner is present and forbids the same.



§ 82-19. Interference with authorities.



   No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this article.



§ 82-20. Control of animals causing nuisances and disturbance.



   No person shall keep on any premises within the Town of Hammonton any
dog or animal causing a nuisance and disturbing the peace and quiet of the
neighborhood in which it is kept, whether said nuisance or disturbance of the
peace is caused by excessive, loud and continuous barking and howling or
through the excessive, loud, continuous making of any similar sounds or
noises.



§ 82-21. Control of animals causing property damage or nuisance.



[Amended 10-28-2013 by Ord. No. 024-2013]



   A.   No person owning, maintaining or harboring any dog or animal
shall permit a dog or animal at large or a dog or animal which has previously
displayed a tendency to do damage to do any injury or damage to any lawn,
shrubbery, flowers, grounds or other personal property within the Town of
Hammonton. For purposes of this section, to permit a dog or animal at large
to deposit excrement on the property of another shall be considered a
violation of this section for all purposes.



   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to feed or harbor a stray
dog or domestic animal including, but not limited to, cats, without assuming
full ownership of same and subsequently, complying with all provisions of the
town's Animal Ordinance including, but not limited to, acquiring a rabies
vaccination and license.  In the event of a complaint filed against an
individual feeding or harboring stray animals under this subsection,
presentation of proof of a rabies vaccination and license shall be a defense
to that complaint. 



§ 82-22. Violations and penalties. 



[Amended 4-24-1989 by Ord. No. 10-1989]



   Except as provided in N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.19, violation of this article
shall be subject to one or more of the following: a fine of not more than
$1,000, imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days or a period of
community service not to exceed 90 days.



§ 82-22A. Limitation on number of domestic dogs or other animals.



[Adopted 10-28-2013 by Ord. No. 024-2013]



   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain upon any premises a
number of domestic animals including, but not limited to, dogs and cats, in
excess of that which he/she has the ability to manage in a humane, safe and
healthful environment.  It shall be the responsibility of the Animal Control
Officer to make a determination whether the number of such animals exceeds
that limit and, if so, to issue a warning directing that if the number of
animals is not reduced to a limit which meets that standard, a citation under
this section shall issue. 



Article II.
Vicious Dogs



[Adopted 12-14-1992 by Ord. No. 35-1992]



§ 82-23. Purpose.



   The purpose of this article is to comply with the uniform statewide
approach to the serious and widespread threat that unprovoked dog attacks
pose to the safety and welfare of citizens. This article complies with a
comprehensive scheme directed toward ascertaining whether a dog is vicious or
potentially dangerous. It will also prescribe various requirements for dogs
that are found to be vicious or potentially dangerous, ranging from mandatory
licensure of such dogs to humane destruction. Editor's Note: Former § 82-25,
Hearing panel, which immediately followed this section, was repealed
5-22-1995 by Ord. No. 14-1995. This ordinance also provided that "all matters
will now be heard by and before the Municipal Court of the Town of Hammonton."



§ 82-24. Types of cases.



   Whenever the Animal Control Officer shall seize and impound a dog that
has attacked a person and caused death or serious bodily injury, or caused
bodily injury to a person during an unprovoked attack, or engaged in dog
fighting activities, or had been trained, tormented, badgered, baited or
encouraged to engage in unprovoked attacks upon persons or domestic animals,
the officer shall notify the Chief of Police that a hearing should be
convened pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-20.



§ 82-25. Potentially dangerous dog.



   If it is determined by the panel that a dog is one characterized as
potentially dangerous, the owner, to avoid destruction of the dog, must
comply with those conditions outlined in N.J.S.A. 4:19-24. The panel shall
specify in writing the date or dates for compliance with all conditions. In
addition to the requirements specified in N.J.S.A. 4:19-24, the owner of the
potentially dangerous dog must also:



   A.   Maintain liability insurance covering acts committed by the dog
in a minimum amount of $1,000,000 and provide proof of this liability
coverage to the municipality to obtain a potentially dangerous dog license.



   B.   Pay an annual license fee to the municipality of $500.



§ 82-26. Vicious dogs.



[Amended 5-22-1995 by Ord. No. 14-1995]



   A.   If it is determined by the Municipal Court that a dog is one
characterized as vicious, the dog shall be destroyed in a humane and
expeditious manner.



   B.   The Municipal Court shall declare a dog vicious if it finds by
clear and convincing evidence that the dog:



      (1)   Killed a person or caused serious bodily injury, as
defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1b, to a person (unless the dog was provoked).



      (2)   Has engaged in dog fighting activities, as described in
N.J.S.A. 4:22-24 and 4:22-26.



   C.   The municipality shall bear the burden of proof to demonstrate
that the dog was not provoked.



§ 82-27. Appeal.



[Amended 5-22-1995 by Ord. No. 14-1995]



   Any appeal of any final decision, order or judgment issued by the
Municipal Court shall be made by filing an appeal with the Superior Court,
Law Division, in accordance with the New Jersey Court Rules pertaining to
appeals from courts of limited jurisdiction.



Article III.
Waterfowl



[Adopted 9-12-1994 by Ord. No. 27-1994]



§ 82-28. Purpose.



   It has been determined that the presence of large numbers of waterfowl,
on and around the Hammonton Lake in the Town of Hammonton, causes a public
health nuisance in and around said lake, including the Hammonton Lake Park,
which is inimical to the health and welfare of the public. The purpose of
this article is to prevent such conduct that may attract such waterfowl to
the Hammonton Lake, including the Lake Park.



§ 82-29. Prohibited conduct.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, association or corporation to:



   A.   Feed any waterfowl.



   B.   Create any condition or allow any congregation or congestion of
waterfowl which:



      (1)   Results in an accumulation of waterfowl feces or
droppings;



      (2)   Results in damage to flora or fauna on private or public
property; or



      (3)   Results in a threat or nuisance to the public health,
safety or general welfare of the public.



§ 82-30. Waterfowl defined.



   Waterfowl shall include those species of domesticated and
undomesticated birds commonly known as swans, geese, ducks, gulls or other
types of waterfowl.



§ 82-31. Enforcement.



[Amended 8-25-1997 by Ord. No. 15-1997 Editor's Note: Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). ]



   This article shall be enforced by the following:



   A.   The Police Department of the Town of Hammonton.



   B.   The Town of Hammonton Animal Control Personnel.



§ 82-32. Notification.



   A.   The Police Department or other town officials of Hammonton,
when advised of a violation to this article, shall give notice of the
nuisance to the owner or occupant of the premises upon which the nuisance
exists or the feeding is occurring. Notice shall be deemed sufficient if it
shall have been served either personally or by mailing such notice through
the United States mail. Mailed notice is to be deemed served upon proof that
such notice was deposited in the United States mail, first class postage
prepaid, and addressed, in the case of an individual, to their business
address, residence address or such address as the records of the addresser
shall reveal to be for tax purposes; or, in the case of a corporation, to the
registered office of the agent of such corporation as revealed to be for tax
purposes.



   B.   Such notice shall order nuisances to be immediately aborted
and/or the feeding immediately stopped.



§ 82-33. Violations and penalties.



   Any person or persons or corporation who continues to be in violation
of the provisions of this article after being duly notified shall, upon
conviction, be subject to one or more of the following: a fine of not more
than $1,000, imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days or a period of
community service not to exceed 90 days.



Article IV.
Control of Dogs



[Adopted 6-23-2003 by Ord. No. 12-2003]



§ 82-34. Control of dogs in public places.



   No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall suffer or permit
it to be upon the public streets or in any of the public places of the Town
unless such dog is accompanied by a responsible person and is securely
confined and controlled by an adequate leash not more than six feet long.



§ 82-35. Running at large.



   It shall be unlawful for any dog, whether licensed or not, to run at
large anywhere within the limits in the Town of Hammonton. A dog shall be
deemed to be running at large when off the premises of its owner or the
person keeping or harboring such dog and not on a leash or the like, the
overall length of which including the handgrip, shall not exceed six feet
held by its owner or other person able to control such dog.



§ 82-36. Nuisances by dog; sanitary requirements.



   A.   No person who owns, keeps, harbors, walks, or has custody of a
dog shall permit, cause, suffer or allow such dog to defecate upon, soil,
defile or commit any nuisances of any kind on any public or private property
without the express permission of the owner of such property.



   B.   In the event a dog should soil, defile or defecate upon any
public or private property, the owner, keeper, harborer and/or person having
custody of said dog shall immediately remove and sanitarily dispose of said
dog's feces and droppings deposited by such dog, which removal shall be by
shovel, container, disposal bag or any other sanitary matter.



§ 82-37.  Inclement weather.



[Added 9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 015-2015]



   No pet residing in the Town of Hammonton shall be kept outdoors during
extreme weather conditions.  Inclement weather for the purpose of this
article is any weather temperatures below 30 degrees or exceeding 80 degrees
with adequate food and water.



§ 82-37A.  Domestic animals in vehicles.



[Added 9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 015-2015]



   Pets shall not be kept inside a vehicle or other enclosure in severe
heat or cold (no less than 45 degrees nor more than 70 degrees).



§ 82-38.  Tethering of dogs.



[Added 9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 015-2015]



   A.   Dogs may be tethered only under the following circumstances:



      (1)   The tether must be at least 15 feet long and have an
operative swivel on both ends and be attached to a properly fitted collar or
harness.



      (2)   The collar used for tethering may not be a choke chain
collar, slip collar or pronged harness.



      (3)   The tether must allow the dog access to proper shelter,
sufficient food and sufficient water.



      (4)   The tether may not be used in any area where it may be
tangled around an object, such as, but not limited to, a tree, pole, fence or
stake.



      (5)   The tether cannot inhibit the movement of the animal's
limbs or cause injury, harm, entanglement or strangulation of the dog.



      (6)   The tether must restrain the dog within the bounds of
the owner's or custodian's property.



      (7)   The tether must terminate no less than five feet from
any fence, pool, wall, vehicle, sidewalk or roadway, or other object or
obstruction upon which the animal might harm itself.



      (8)   Dogs may be tethered for no more than six consecutive
hours in any 24 hour period of time and never between sunset and sunrise.



      (9)   If there are multiple dogs, each dog shall be tethered
separately and in such manner that the tethers shall not become entangled
with each other.



      (10)   No dog shall be tethered at a vacant structure or
premises for any purpose when it is not monitored by a competent adult who is
present at the property for the duration of such tethering.



      (11)   No dog that is sick or injured shall be tethered.



   B.   When a violation of this provision occurs, an animal control
officer or law enforcement officer is authorized to document the
circumstances and obtain evidence.



   C.   In the case where a resident keeps his or her domestic dog or
animal inside a fence, the fence shall be at least four feet in height and
the area where the domestic dog or animal resides shall be at least 5'X10'.



ARTICLE V
Dog Parks



[Adopted 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 008-2017]



§ 82-39.  Hammonton Dog Park.



   The Hammonton Dog Park shall be established and located off Moss Mill
Road in the Town of Hammonton and shall consist of a large dog park and a
small dog park and each shall have the perimeter fenced for safety, health
and welfare of dogs and civilians alike.



§ 82-40.  Use of dog park by Hammonton residents.



   Any Hammonton resident who has purchased a dog license from the
Municipal Clerk office of the Town of Hammonton for their dog(s) upon
providing proof of rabies inoculation and who has signed the required Hold
Harmless/Dog Park Agreement, shall be issued a key fob or other form of lock
device to gain entry to the dog park.



§ 82-41.  Use of dog park by non-Hammonton residents.



   Any non-Hammonton resident who has paid the annual fee of $25.00,
provided their current photo identification with current address matching
their current dog(s) license(s), provided a copy of their current dog(s)
license issued by the municipality in which they reside and pay property tax,
has submitted proof of rabies inoculation, has signed the Hold Harmless/Dog
Park Agreement, shall be issued a key fob or other form of lock device to
gain entry to the dog park.



§ 82-42.  Hold Harmless/Dog Park Agreement.



   The Hold Harmless/Dog Park Agreement attached to Ord. No. 008-2017 and
approved by the Town Solicitor and Risk Manager is the official Hold
Harmless/Dog Park Agreement.



§ 82-43.  Key fob or other entry device.



   The key fob or other entry device shall be permanently issued to
Hammonton residents who obtain a dog license(s) per laws of the State of New
Jersey and the Town of Hammonton.  The key fob or other entry device shall
be issued and expire annually upon completion of all terms and conditions
sited in Section 82-41 of Article V. 



§ 82-44.  Lost, stolen or missing key fob or other entry device.



   A lost, stolen or missing key fob or other entry device(s) replacement
shall be replaced by the person named on the current Hold Harmless/Dog Park
Agreement paying a fee of $25.00 to the office of the Town Clerk.  The Clerk
may request to see a police report or other document pertaining to the event
relating to the lost, stolen or missing key fob or other entry device.



CHAPTER 85.
ASSEMBLIES, PUBLIC



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton
11-8-1971 by Ord. No. 12-1971. Amendments noted where applicable.]



   § 85-1.   Permit required.



   § 85-2.   Application for permit.



   § 85-3.   License and registration fees.



   § 85-3A.   License exemption.



   § 85-4.   Insurance.



   § 85-5.   Condition for issuance of permit.



   § 85-6.   Violations and penalties.



§ 85-1. Permit required.



   No person, group of persons, corporation or other organization of any
kind or description shall conduct any celebration, feast, parade or any other
event on the public streets and highways, public rights-of-way, public parks
or other public property of the Town of Hammonton without first securing a
permit therefor from the Town Clerk/Administrator of the Town of Hammonton.



§ 85-2. Application for permit.



   Any person, group of persons, corporation or other organization of any
kind or description as set forth in § 85-1 of this chapter who applies for a
permit shall apply for said permit at least 20 days prior to the scheduled
event and shall specify on the application for such permit:



   A.   The name and address of the organization holding the event.



   B.   The streets, highways, public rights-of-way, parks or other
public property upon which said event is to be held.



   C.   The scheduled time for the event and the duration of same.



   D.   Whether comestibles, including but not limited to beverages,
are to be sold, dispensed or consumed as a part of said event.



   E.   Whether the protection and use of the police force or other law
enforcement agencies of the Town of Hammonton will be required for said
purpose.



§ 85-3. License and registration fees.



[Amended 9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 016-2015]



   All applications shall be filed with the Town Clerk with a permit fee
of $10 (except in the case of fraternal, religious or eleemosynary).  All
applications shall be referred to the Administration Committee as well as the
Chief of Police for review and approval.  Upon receiving approval of
Administration Committee and Chief of Police as well as compliance with all
other aspects of this chapter, the Clerk shall issue the permit.



§ 85-3A.  License exemption. 



[Added 9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 016-2015]



   Requests for public events/assemblies involving road closures that must
be approved by the Mayor and Council are exempt from applying for and paying
the permit fee.  However, the group or person(s) must still comply with all
other requirements of this chapter.



§ 85-4. Insurance.



[Amended 9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 016-2015]



   The applicant shall file a Certificate of Insurance with the Clerk per
Town of Hammonton insurance requirements.



§ 85-5. Condition for issuance of permit.



   All applicants to whom a permit is issued under this chapter for the
holding of any parade, celebration, feast, festival or other event covered by
this chapter shall receive a permit which is specifically conditioned upon
the applicant and all concessionaires operating pursuant to said permit,
dispensing all beverages sold at said event only in paper cups or similar
containers which shall not be composed in any part of any metal, plastic or
glass substance. Editor's Note: Former § 66-6, Failure to acquire permit,
which immediately followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).



§ 85-6. Violations and penalties.



   Any person, group of persons, corporation or other organization of any
kind or description, or any member, agent or servant thereof, who holds any
event covered by the provisions of this chapter without a permit or violates
§ 85-5 of this chapter shall be prosecuted in the Hammonton Municipal Court
and shall be subject to one or more of the following: a fine of not more than
$1,000, imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days or a period of
community service not to exceed 90 days.



CHAPTER 88.
AUCTIONS



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton
9-13-1971 by Ord. No. 10-1971 as Ch. 82 of the 1971 Code. Amendments noted
where applicable.]



   § 88-1.   License required to conduct auction.



   § 88-2.   Term defined.



   § 88-3.   Farmers' Cooperative Auction.



   § 88-4.   Application.



   § 88-5.   Investigation of application.



   § 88-6.   Bond.



   § 88-7.   Posting of license; nontransferable.



   § 88-8.   License fee.



   § 88-9.   Suspension and revocation.



   § 88-10.   Premises open to inspection.



   § 88-11.   Violations and penalties.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Special sales — See Ch. 244.



§ 88-1. License required to conduct auction.



   No person, firm, association, partnership or corporation shall
hereafter conduct or permit to be conducted any retail business commonly
known and designated as "auctions" in the Town of Hammonton, County of
Atlantic and State of New Jersey, unless a license for such business is first
obtained from the Town of Hammonton by the person desiring to operate said
auction.



§ 88-2. Term defined.



   Any business wherein the price of articles to be sold is fixed and
determined by bidding shall be construed an auction within the meaning of
this chapter.



§ 88-3. Farmers' Cooperative Auction.



   This chapter shall not apply to the Farmers' Cooperative Auction.



§ 88-4. Application.



   Before any license is granted as set forth in § 88-1 of this chapter,
the applicant shall make an application in writing therefor to the Mayor and
Common Council of the Town of Hammonton, which application shall disclose the
following:



   A.   Name, age and residence of applicant.



   B.   Type of merchandise to be displayed and sold at auction.



   C.   Business references of three persons not related to the
proposed applicant.



   D.   Where applicant is a corporation, give the registered office of
the corporation and the name of the registered agent.



   E.   Whether applicant has ever been convicted of a crime.



§ 88-5. Investigation of application.



   The Mayor and Common Council shall investigate each application made,
and are empowered and authorized to issue a license for said auction.



§ 88-6. Bond.



   A.   The Mayor and Common Council shall require as a condition
precedent to granting of said license, a bond from said applicant of the Town
of Hammonton in the sum of $5,000, with sufficient sureties acceptable to the
Mayor and Common Council, and conditioned for the due observation of this
chapter and such other ordinances or regulations that may be passed
respecting the conduct or operation of such auctions.



   B.   Said bond shall be for the protection of persons and property
and the preservation of the safety and property of the municipality and its
inhabitants, and as may now or hereafter be required by any state law or
municipal ordinance or regulation. Said bond shall be renewed from time to
time and no auction shall be operated or conducted if said bond is expired,
revoked or canceled for any reason whatsoever.



§ 88-7. Posting of license; nontransferable.



   Such license, if granted, shall be conspicuously placed upon the
premises and shall in no case whatsoever be transferable.



§ 88-8. License fee.



   The license fee shall be the sum of $200 per year, all payable in
advance for each year, and each year shall commence on January 1 and expire
on December 31 of each year.



§ 88-9. Suspension and revocation.



   The Mayor and Common Council may, upon its own motion or upon the
complaint in writing of any person, investigate the actions of the licensee,
and shall have power to suspend for the unexpired portion of the license
period, or revoke, any license issued under the provisions of this chapter or
any ordinance that may be hereafter adopted by said town, where the
applicant, licensee, tenant or any person acting for them or any of them, in
performing or attempting to perform any of the acts mentioned herein, is
deemed to be guilty of:



   A.   Making any false promises or misrepresentations.



   B.   For the violation of any part of the provisions of this chapter
or other ordinances or regulations relating thereto.



§ 88-10. Premises open to inspection.



   The said premises upon which said auctions are or may be located shall
be open to inspection at all reasonable hours by any town official or member
of the Department of Public Safety.



§ 88-11. Violations and penalties.



   Any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation, whether
applicant or tenant of any auction provided for in this chapter, and any
person acting for them or any of them, convicted of any violation of
provision of this chapter, shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to one
or more of the following: a fine of not more than $1,000, imprisonment for a
period not to exceed 90 days or a period of community service not to exceed
90 days.



CHAPTER 99.
BOATS ON HAMMONTON LAKE



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton
9-13-1971 by Ord. No. 10-1971 as Ch. 74 of the 1971 Code; amended in its
entirety 6-25-2007 by Ord. No. 20-2007. Subsequent amendments noted where
applicable.]



   § 99-1.   Distance from bathers to be maintained.



   § 99-2.   Boats with motors.



   § 99-3.   Violations and penalties.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Hammonton Lake Water Quality Advisory Committee — See Ch. 6, Art. VII.



   Waterfowl around Hammonton Lake — See Ch. 82, Art. III.



   Curfew for Hammonton Lake — See Ch. 119.



   Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 200.



§ 99-1. Distance from bathers to be maintained.



   No person shall paddle, row, sail or otherwise operate any boat,
including, but not limited to, rowboat, sailboat, or recreation or fishing
vessel, regardless of means of propulsion, closer than 50 feet of any person
swimming or bathing in the Hammonton Lake.



§ 99-2. Boats with motors.



   With the limited exception of an electric trolling motor generating
less than 10 hp, no person shall operate on the Hammonton Lake any boat
equipped with any form of motorized propulsion.



§ 99-3. Violations and penalties.



   Each and every violator of any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be, upon his or her conviction thereof, subject to one or more of the
following: a fine of not more than $1,000, imprisonment for a period not to
exceed 90 days, or a period of community service not to exceed 90 days, and
the Judge or other proper officer having jurisdiction before whom such
violator shall be convicted may impose such fine, penalty, term of
imprisonment or community service as he or she may see fit, not exceeding the
maximum herein fixed.



CHAPTER 104.
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton
3-27-1992 by Ord. No. 17-1992. Amendments noted where applicable.]



   § 104-1.   Purpose.



   § 104-2.   Applicability.



   § 104-3.   Responsibility for placement.



   § 104-4.   Specifications.



   § 104-5.   Assignment of numbers.



   § 104-6.   Enforcement.



   § 104-7.   Violations and penalties.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 115.



§ 104-1. Purpose.



   The purpose of this chapter is to require clear display of numbers
which have been authorized and assigned to all houses, buildings or other
structures which have frontage on any street in the Town of Hammonton in
order to assist the general public and emergency services, both public and
private, in identifying the property in case of emergency.



§ 104-2. Applicability.



   All dwelling houses, stores, buildings or other structures erected or
to be erected within the Town of Hammonton shall display house numbers
assigned by the Tax Assessor, or other town designee, as provided herein.



§ 104-3. Responsibility for placement.



   The owner, occupant or lessee of each and every house, store or other
building which now fronts or may front upon any public or private street
within the Town of Hammonton shall, at his/her own expense, within 90 days
after the adoption of this chapter, cause the assigned number of such house
or building to be permanently and conspicuously placed in accordance with the
specifications set forth herein.



§ 104-4. Specifications.



   A.   House or building numbers shall be:



      (1)   In Arabic numerals or letters.



      (2)   A minimum height of three inches.



      (3)   Mounted in a secure fashion on the front of the building
so as to be clearly visible from the road.



      (4)   Of a contrasting color to the background and arranged in
such a manner so as to be clearly legible from the street.



      (5)   At least 30 inches above ground level and so placed that
trees, shrubs and other obstructions do not block the line of sight of the
numbers from the street upon which the building fronts.



   B.   If the house or building is set back from the road in such a
location that the provisions of this chapter cannot be complied with, then
the owner, occupant or lessee shall provide a post, rod or other type of
fixture of a substantial nature with the number affixed thereon and so
located on the premises that the number shall be conspicuous and visible from
the street upon which the building property fronts.



§ 104-5. Assignment of numbers.



   House numbers shall be assigned by the Tax Assessor or other town
designee. Every owner, occupant or lessee of a building constructed or to be
constructed in the town shall apply to the Construction Code Official for an
authorized number.



§ 104-6. Enforcement.



   Upon the failure of an owner, occupant or lessee to ascertain and affix
upon any building to which this chapter applies the assigned number within
three months after the final adoption and publication, the town may enforce
the provision herein.



§ 104-7. Violations and penalties.



   Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to one or more of the following: a fine of not more
than $1,000, imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days or a period of
community service not to exceed 90 days.



CHAPTER 109.
BUSINESS REGISTRATION



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Town of Hammonton 2-23-2004
by Ord. No. 1-2004 amended in its entirety 6-26-2006 by Ord. No. 9-2006.
Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.]



   § 109-1.   Effective date.



   § 109-2.   Registration required.



   § 109-3.   Definitions.



   § 109-4.   Registration fee.



   § 109-5.   Registration forms.



   § 109-6.   Responsibilities of registered businesses.



   § 109-7.   Enforcement.



   § 109-8.   Violations and penalties.



§ 109-1. Effective date.



   This chapter shall take effect on July 18, 2006.



§ 109-2. Registration required.



   No person shall engage in or carry on any business in the Town of
Hammonton unless registered pursuant to this chapter. This chapter applies to
all existing businesses within the Town as well as any businesses commencing
on or after the effective date of this chapter.



§ 109-3. Definitions.



   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:



   BUSINESS



   Includes:



   A.   Offering goods or services for sale or hire from a fixed
location in the Town;



   B.   The solicitation of business including offering goods or
services for sale or hire from a fixed location in the Town;



   C.   Any and all other professions, enterprises, trades, and
vocations except those defined in Chapter 204 of the Town Code.



   PERSON



   Includes an individual, firm, cooperation, or any other organizational
entity or association.



§ 109-4. Registration fee.



   An initial registration fee of $35 shall be paid to the Town Clerk at
the time the applicant submits the registration form required by this
chapter. Thereafter, an annual registration fee of $35 shall be paid on or
before August 1 of each year. If any person or entity, who is required to
obtain a registration pursuant to this chapter, does not register and pay the
registration fee by August 1 of the respective year, the Construction
Official will assess a late fee by August 15 of the respective year equal to
50% of the registration fee which is late. All late fees assessed against a
business must be paid with the registration fee. In addition to any late
fees, the business must pay all registration fees for the previous years that
were not paid and applicable late charges. In any action to enforce this
chapter, the Construction Official shall include all late fees and past due
registration fee amounts in the summons and complaint filed against the
business or other party.



§ 109-5. Registration forms.



   Registration shall be made on forms to be obtained from the Town Clerk.
Businesses in operation prior to the effective date of this chapter shall
register with the Town Clerk within 30 days after the effective date of this
chapter. The registration form submitted for each business must contain
updated emergency information with the names, addresses and telephone numbers
for at least two people to be contacted after business hours in reference to
building security, damage, or any occurrence that requires that access be
gained to any facility owned or operated by such business.



§ 109-6. Responsibilities of registered businesses.



   A.   Registration is mandatory whether or not the business is
alarmed. Registration information must be updated annually, and changes must
be reported immediately after they occur.



   B.   Every business registered pursuant to this chapter must
maintain evidence of its registration, as provided by the Town Clerk, on the
registered premises in a place where it may be readily seen at all times.



   C.   Failure to comply with the requirements of this section may
result in a penalty as provided in § 109-8 of this chapter.



§ 109-7. Enforcement.



   The Chief of Police, the Town Clerk, the Construction Official and any
police officer of the Town of Hammonton has the authority to examine all
places of business and all persons of the Town of Hammonton to determine if
this chapter has been complied with and to enforce the provisions of this
chapter against any persons found to be violating the same.



§ 109-8. Violations and penalties.



   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
subject to a fine not exceeding $500 or to imprisonment not exceeding 30
days, or both.



CHAPTER 115.
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton
12-27-1976 by Ord. No. 24-1976. Amendments noted where applicable.]



   § 115-1.   Enforcing agency established; Subcode officials
designated.



   § 115-2.   Fees.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 104.



   Uniform Fire Code — See Ch. 144, Art. II.



   Flood hazard areas — See Ch. 147.



   Housing standards — See Ch. 165.



   Land development — See Ch. 175.



   Property maintenance — See Ch. 211.



§ 115-1. Enforcing agency established; Subcode officials designated.



   A.   There is hereby established in the Town of Hammonton a State
Uniform Construction Code enforcing agency to be known as the "Building
Department of the Town of Hammonton," consisting of a Construction Official,
Building Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode Official, Electrical Subcode
Official, Fire Protection Subcode Official and such other Subcode officials
for such additional sub codes as the Commissioner of the Department of
Community Affairs, State of New Jersey, shall hereafter adopt as part of the
State Uniform Construction Code. The Construction Official shall be the chief
administrator of the enforcing agency. The incumbent Building Inspector shall
be considered the Building Subcode Official for all purposes of this chapter,
with his/her present civil service status attaching to said position in lieu
of his/her present designation as Building Inspector. All other construction
and Subcode officials shall be such individuals as are appointed by the Mayor
and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton and shall be appointed for
four-year terms for so long a time as they are not classified under civil
service. All appointments made after the first such appointment shall be for
four-year terms commencing January 1 or for the unexpired portion of any
term, as the case may be.



   B.   Each official position created in Subsection A hereof shall be
filled by a person qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217,
as amended (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.), and N.J.A.C. 5:23, provided that,
in lieu of any particular Subcode official, an on-site inspection agency may
be retained by contract pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such
official position may be held by the same person, provided that such person
is qualified pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, and N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold each
such position.



   C.   The public shall have the right to do business with the
enforcing agency at one office location, except for emergencies and
unforeseen or unavoidable circumstances, which office location shall be the
Town Hall, Hammonton, New Jersey.



§ 115-2. Fees.



[Last amended 4-25-1994 by Ord. No. 10-1994 Editor's Note: Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). ]



   The permit fees are established in the Town of Hammonton by ordinance
adopted from time to time and the applicable fees shall be paid prior to
issuance of said permit.



CHAPTER 119.
CURFEW



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton
6-28-1993 by Ord. No. 14-1993. Amendments noted where applicable.]



   § 119-1.   Purpose.



   § 119-2.   Establishment.



   § 119-3.   Special curfew for Hammonton Lake Park.



   § 119-4.   Responsibility of parents or guardian.



   § 119-5.   Exceptions.



   § 119-6.   Violations and penalties.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Sale of alcoholic beverages to minors — See Ch. 75.



   Minors playing games at Carnival Grounds — See Ch. 79, Art. II.



§ 119-1. Purpose.



   The Town of Hammonton desires to promote a safe and healthy environment
for its citizens. To accomplish this purpose, various recreational parks,
historic areas, thoroughfares, buildings and other public lands have been
established over the years for the enjoyment of all citizens of this town and
the surrounding communities. To ensure that all citizens can enjoy the use of
public lands, the following regulations have been established to promote
peace and order on the public lands.



§ 119-2. Establishment.



   It shall be unlawful for any child under the age of 18 years to be upon
any public lands or upon any place of public amusement or recreation between
the hours of 9:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless accompanied by the parent,
guardian or other adult person having the care, custody or control of said
child.



§ 119-3. Special curfew for Hammonton Lake Park.



   It shall be unlawful for any child under the age of 18 years to be in
the Hammonton Lake Park at any time that the park is open, unless accompanied
by the parent, guardian or other adult person having the care, custody or
control of said child. Notice of this special restriction shall be posted on
the entrance to the park and at various other places, so as to advise the
public of this special curfew.



§ 119-4. Responsibility of parents or guardian.



   It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or any other person
having the care, custody or control of any child under the age of 18 years to
permit such child to be in any of the places as enumerated in this chapter
during the prohibited times and/or without the proper supervision.



§ 119-5. Exceptions.



Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I). A juvenile on the street during the hours referred to in
the previous sections shall not be considered in violation of this chapter
under the following circumstances:



   A.   When accompanied by a parent or guardian of such juvenile.



   B.   When accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent of such
juvenile to take said parent's place in accompanying said juvenile for a
designated period of time and purpose within a specified area.



   C.   When exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United
States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech
and the right of such exercise, provided that the juvenile has in his/her
possession a written communication, signed by the juvenile and countersigned
by a parent or guardian of the juvenile with their home address and telephone
number, specifying when, where and in what manner the juvenile will be on the
streets at night during hours when this chapter is otherwise applicable to
said juvenile in the exercise of a First Amendment right specified in such
communication.



   D.   In case of reasonable necessity for the juvenile remaining on
the streets, provided that the juvenile has in his/her possession a written
communication, signed by the juvenile and countersigned by a parent or
guardian of the juvenile with their home address and telephone number,
setting forth the facts establishing the reasonable necessity relating to
specified streets at a designated time for a described purpose including
points of origin and destination.



   E.   When the juvenile is on the sidewalk or property where the
juvenile resides or on either side of or across the street from the place
where the juveniles resides and the adult owner or resident of that property
has given permission for the juvenile to be there.



   F.   When returning home from and within one hour after the
termination of a school- or town-sponsored activity or an activity of a
religious or other voluntary association, provided that the juvenile has in
his/her possession a written communication, signed by the juvenile and
countersigned by a parent or guardian of the juvenile with their home address
and telephone number, indicating the place and probable time of termination
of the activity.



   G.   When the juvenile is, with parental consent, in a motor
vehicle. This contemplates normal travel. It is the intention of this
provision to clearly exempt bona fide interstate movements along major routes
through the Town of Hammonton and interstate travel beginning or ending in
the Town of Hammonton.



   H.   When engaged in or traveling to or from a place of employment.



   I.   When engaged in an errand involving a medical emergency.



§ 119-6. Violations and penalties.



   Each and every person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject, upon conviction thereof, to one or more of the following: a fine of
not more than $1,000, imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days or a
period of community service not to exceed 90 days, in the discretion of the
Judge before whom said conviction shall be had.



CHAPTER 122
DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS, GEMS AND SECONDHAND GOODS



   § 122-1.   Purpose and intent.



   § 122-2.   Definitions.



   § 122-3.   Registration and issuance of license.



   § 122-4.   License fees; non-transferability.



   § 122-5.   Revocation of license.



   § 122-6.   Dealers' responsibilities, requirements and record
keeping.



   § 122-7.   Non-applicability.



   § 122-8.   Purchases from minors.



   § 122-9.   Violations and penalties.



[HISTORY: Adopted 8-26-2013 by Ord. No. 015-2013]



§ 122-1.   Purpose and intent.



   The purpose and intent of this chapter is to assist law enforcement
officials and victims of crime in recovering stolen precious metals, gems,
gemstones and/or other articles by requiring minimum reporting, maintenance
and distribution criteria for secondhand and transient dealers.



   No person shall use, exercise or carry on the business, trade or
occupation of buying scrap gold, old gold, silver, jewelry, home
electronics/audio and visual equipment, musical instruments, telephones and
telephonic equipment, scales, computers, computer hardware and software,
typewriters, word processors, scanners, sporting goods of all kinds,
antiques, platinum, all other precious metals, tools of all kinds,
televisions, DVRs, GPS, camcorders, car stereos, gift cards, furniture,
clothing or other valuable articles, hereinafter referred to as "secondhand
goods or articles," or being a secondhand dealer within the Town of Hammonton
without having first obtained a license from the Town of Hammonton Police as
hereinafter provided.



   The provisions of the preamble of Ord. No. 015-2013 are incorporated by
reference in this chapter.



§ 122-2.   Definitions.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meanings ascribed herein.  Words used
in the present tense shall include the future, words in the plural number
shall include the singular number and words in the singular number shall
include the plural number.  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not
merely directory.



   A.   ACCEPTABLE IDENTIFICATION: Acceptable forms of identification
include: a current valid New Jersey Driver's License or Identification Card,
a current valid photo driver's license issued by another US state, a valid
United States Passport, or other verifiable US Government issued
identification.



   B.   ARTICLE: Any article of merchandise, including any portion of
such article, whether a distinct part thereof or not, including every part
thereof whether separable or not, and also including material for
manufacture.  And as so defined in N.J.S.A. 51:6-1.



   C.   CHIEF OF POLICE: the Chief of Police of the Town of Hammonton
or his designee/ representative.



   D.   DATABASE: A computerized internet capable database with
hardware and software compliant to that set by the Chief of Police.



   E.   DEALER: Any person, partnership, corporation, or other entity,
whether permanent or itinerant, who on one or more occasions (through any
means) buys or sells or otherwise exchanges or trades secondhand gold,
silver, precious metals, gems, or jewelry, and includes anyone advertising
the purchase or sale of any of the aforementioned  items.



   F.   DESIGNATED VENDOR: A person or entity who is appointed or
designated by the Chief of Police who is authorized to collect and maintain
precious metal transaction information, or other purchase information as
defined herein, for the Town of Hammonton.



   G.   GIFT CARD: is a restricted monetary equivalent or scrip that is
issued by retailers or banks to be used as an alternative to a non-monetary
gift.



   H.   ITINERANT BUSINESS: Any business conducted intermittently
within the Town of Hammonton or at varying locations. 



   I.   PERSON: Any individual natural person, partnership, joint
venture, business, society, associate, club, trustee, trust, corporation, or
unincorporated group, or an officer, agent, employee, servant, factor or any
form of personal representative of any thereof, in any capacity, acting for
self or on behalf of another.



   J.   PRECIOUS METALS: comprised of gold, silver, sterling, platinum
and/or their alloys as defined in N.J.S.A. 51:5-1 et seq., N.J.S.A. 51:6-1 et
seq. and/or N.J.S.A. 51:6A-1 et seq.; gems, gemstones, coins and all forms of
jewelry herein contained.



   K.   PUBLIC: Individuals and retail sellers, not to include
wholesale transactions or transactions between other merchants.



   L.   PURCHASE: The exchange of money and the exchange, deposit,
pledge, sale, conveyance or trade of any tangible or intangible article.



   M.   REPORTABLE TRANSACTION: Every transaction conducted by a dealer
in which precious metals, or other tangible property, are purchased or
exchanged from or with the public.



   N.   SECONDHAND GOODS: Any article previously sold, acquired,
exchanged, conveyed, traded or otherwise formerly owned, including but not
limited to scrap gold, old gold, silver, jewelry, home electronics/audio and
visual equipment, telephones and telephonic equipment, scales, computers,
computer hardware and software, coins, electronic tablets, cameras, scanners,
sporting goods of all kinds, antiques, platinum, all other precious metals,
tools of all kinds, televisions, DVRs, GPS, camcorders, car stereos, gift
cards, furniture, clothing or other valuable articles.



   O.   TRANSIENT BUYER: A dealer who has not been in any retail
business continuously for at least six months at any address in the
municipality where the dealer is required to register or who intends to close
out or discontinue all retail business in the Town of Hammonton within six
months.  Or as so defined in N.J.S.A. 51:6A-5 and N.J.A.C. 13:47C-1.1. 
Vendors doing business during a community event sponsored/sanctioned by the
Town of Hammonton shall not be considered a transient buyer.



§ 122-3.   Registration and issuance of license.



   Each dealer conducting business within the jurisdiction of the Town of
Hammonton shall first register with the Chief of Police, or his designee, who
shall fingerprint the applicant and institute such an investigation of the
applicant's moral character and business responsibility as he deems necessary
for the protection of the public welfare.  In the event that the dealer is a
business entity other than a sole proprietorship, the officers in a
corporation or the partners in a partnership (or limited partnership) shall
be deemed to be the applicant(s) who shall be fingerprinted and investigated
in accordance with this section.  Upon completion of the investigation, the
Chief of Police shall either issue or deny the license based upon the results
of his investigation.  Upon issuance of the license, the applicant shall be
given a copy of this chapter.



   A dealer of precious metals, gems or gemstones or second hand goods
shall, prior to buying, attempting to buy or offering to buy, register with
the Chief of Police, providing the following information on an application
prescribed by the Police Department:



      (1)   Name and address of dealer;



      (2)   Address from which dealer shall conduct business;



      (3)   Copy of valid zoning and/or construction permits from
the Town of Hammonton;



      (4)   Proof that dealer has obtained computer equipment and
software required in § 122-6B., for purposes of reporting all transaction
data in electronic format to the Hammonton Police Department.



§ 122-4.   License fees; non-transferability.



   A.   Each application for a Dealer of Secondhand Goods License shall
be accompanied by an annual fee of $300 payable to the Town of Hammonton at
the Town Clerk's Office by January 10th of each year. 



   B.   A license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall not
be transferable and shall terminate on December 31st of the year in which
said license is issued. 



§ 122-5.   Revocation of license.



   A.   Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be
revoked by the Chief of Police after a hearing upon notice to the applicant
for any of the following causes:



      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained
in the application for license;



      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in the
course of carrying on the business of purchasing secondhand precious metals,
gems, and jewelry;



      (3)   Any violation of this chapter;



      (4)   Conviction of any crime or disorderly persons offense
involving moral turpitude; and



      (5)   Conducting the business of soliciting or canvassing in
an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace
or to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the
public. 



   B.   Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be
given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the
time and place of hearing.  Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to
the licensee at his last known address at least five days prior to the date
set for the hearing. 



§ 122-6.   Dealers' responsibilities, requirements and record keeping.



   Every dealer within the Town of Hammonton shall, upon the purchase of
any precious metals, or second hand goods from the public, be required to do
as follows:



   A.   Record on a numbered receipt the name, address and telephone
number of the purchaser; the name, address and telephone number of the seller
or sellers; the time and date of the transaction; the net weight in terms of
pounds Troy, pennyweight (Troy) or kilograms/grams of the precious metals;
fineness in terms of karats for gold, and sterling or coin for silver, in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 51:5-1 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 51:6-1 et seq. This
information is to be documented through use of an electronic database
software system as designated by the Chief of Police.  These records shall
be subject to the inspection of any authorized police officer of the Town of
Hammonton. 



   B.   Through the use of applicably required computer equipment, and
using the electronic format approved by the Chief of Police, enter all
transactions into the electronic database within 48 hours from the date of
purchase. The information entered will contain the information in § 122-6A.
above, plus the following:



      (1)   A physical description of the seller;



      (2)   The receipt number;



      (3)    A full description of the item or items purchased,
including but not limited to, marks, numbers, dates, sizes, shapes, initials,
monograms and serial numbers;



      (4)    The price paid for the item;



      (5)   The form must be signed by the seller;



      (6)   The form must be legibly initialed by the clerk or the
dealer who made the transaction so as to readily identify that individual;



      (7)   A color photograph or color image of the seller's
presented identification;



      (8)   A color photograph or color image of all items sold.
When photographing or imaging all items must be positioned in a manner that
makes them readily and easily identifiable;



      (9)   Items should not be grouped together when photographing
or imaging; each item will have its own color photograph or color image.



   C.   The precious metals are to be made available for inspection by
the Chief of Police of the Town of Hammonton and to any other federal, state,
county or other law enforcement entity for a period of five days from the
date the information required above is received by the Chief of Police on the
approved form. The precious metals shall remain in the same condition as when
purchased and shall not be changed, modified, melted or disposed of by the
purchaser until the five-day period has expired. During this five-day period,
the precious metals shall be placed in public view at the purchaser's place
of business. If the property is such that it would create a hardship on the
dealer by holding the precious metals for such period, the dealer may present
the property to the Chief of Police in order that it may be photographed and,
if deemed necessary by the Chief of Police, an investigation be implemented.
The Chief of Police has the authority to grant the dealer a waiver of the
requirement under this section.



   D.   In the event a database failure, or dealer's computer equipment
malfunction, all transaction information is required to be submitted on paper
forms approved by the Chief of Police. In the event that paper forms are
used, the dealer is responsible to enter all transaction information into the
database as soon as possible upon the dealer's equipment being repaired or
replaced, or the database coming back into service. Failure by the dealer to
properly maintain computer equipment in a reasonable fashion, or failure by
the dealer to replace faulty computer equipment, may result in the dealer
being cited for a violation of the chapter and subsequently being subject to
the penalties for doing so.



   E.   Dealer payment to sellers in cash shall be limited to two
transactions during a seven day period for the same seller. The seven day
period will commence on the day of the first transaction and end seven days
after the transaction, i.e. if transaction #1 occurs on Monday the seven day
period ends on Sunday. Furthermore, no cash payments shall be made to the
same sellers who make more than five transactions in any given 30 day period.
Sellers making transactions over the number of prescribed weekly and monthly
periods will be paid by the dealer by means of a bank check drawn from the
dealer's business account.



   F.   It shall be the requisite duty of every dealer, and of every
person in the dealer's employ, to admit to the premises during business hours
any member of the Hammonton Police Department to examine any database, book,
ledger, or any other record on the premises relating to the purchase of
precious metals from the public, as well as the articles purchased or
received, and to take possession of any article known by the police officer
or official to be missing or to have been stolen, or where the officer or
official has probable cause to believe the article is missing or stolen.



§ 122-7.   Non-applicability.



   This chapter shall not apply to purchases made by jewelers or other
dealers from wholesalers or other suppliers, but shall only apply to those
purchases made from the public or other retail purchases. The dealer shall
keep records of all wholesale purchases for a period of six months from the
date of such purchase, which records shall be opened to investigation by the
Town of Hammonton Police Department.



§ 122-8.   Purchases from minors.



   No dealer within the Town of Hammonton shall purchase any precious
metals from any person under the age of 18 years.



§ 122-9.   Violations and penalties.



   Violation of any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a minimum fine of $100 or a maximum of $2,000 or by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days or by a period of community
service not exceeding 90 days and a 10 day suspension of its license. Each
and every violation shall be considered a separate violation. Every day that
a violation continues shall be a separate violation. Each violation shall
result in an additional ten day suspension. Any person who is convicted of
violating the provisions of this chapter within one year of the date of a
previous violation and who was fined for the previous violation may be
sentenced by the Court to an additional fine as a repeat offender. The
additional fine imposed as a repeat offender shall not be less than the
minimum or exceed the maximum fine provided herein, and same shall be
calculated separately from the fine imposed for the violation of this chapter.



CHAPTER 125.
DRUG-FREE ZONES



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton as
indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]



ARTICLE I.
Drug-Free School Zones



   § 125-1.   Legislative authority; purpose.



   § 125-2.   Map to be official finding.



   § 125-3.   Continuation of map; additions and deletions.



   § 125-4.   Notification of location and boundary changes.



   § 125-5.   Copy of map on file; availability.



   § 125-6.   Additional findings.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Under the influence of drugs — See Ch. 202.



Article I.
Drug-Free School Zones



[Adopted 9-12-1988 by Ord. No. 18-1988]



§ 125-1. Legislative authority; purpose.



   It is deemed to be in the public interest that the Town of Hammonton
enact an ordinance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7, as amended, to provide for
Drug-Free School Zones within the Town of Hammonton in order to assist in the
prosecution of drug offenses in and near said facilities in order to promote
the general health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Town of
Hammonton and especially the school children therein.



§ 125-2. Map to be official finding.



[Amended 9-22-2008 by Ord. No. 29-2008]



   A.   In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of P.L. 1988,
c. 44 (N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7), the Drug-Free School Zone Map as updated by Adams,
Rehmann and Heggan, Town Engineers, in August 2008, is hereby approved and
adopted as an official finding and record of the location and areas within
the municipality of property which is used, owned by or leased to any public
or private school within 1,000 feet of such school property (including but
not limited to Hammonton School Board, Hammonton High School, Hammonton
Middle School, Hammonton Elementary School, St. Joseph High School, St.
Joseph Elementary School, St. Joseph Athletic Field).



   B.   In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of P.L. 1988,
c. 44 (N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7), the Drug-Free School Zone Map as updated by Adams,
Rehmann and Heggan, Town Engineers, in August 2008, is hereby approved and
adopted as an official finding and record of the location and areas within
the municipality of property which is used, owned by or leased to any
Library, museum, or recreational facility within 500 feet of such property
(including but not limited to Atlantic County Library, Hammonton Lake Park,
Boyer Avenue Recreation Fields and the Wharton State Forrest).



§ 125-3. Continuation of map; additions and deletions.



[Amended 9-22-2008 by Ord. No. 29-2008]



   The Drug-Free School Zone Map approved and adopted pursuant to § 125-1
of this article shall continue to constitute an official finding and record
as to the location and boundaries of areas as described in § 125-2A and B
until such time, if any, that this article shall be amended to reflect any
additions or deletions with respect to the location and boundaries of
Drug-Free School Zones.



§ 125-4. Notification of location and boundary changes.



[Amended 9-22-2008 by Ord. No. 29-2008]



   Those designated in Drug-Free Zones as described in § 125-2A and B are
hereby directed and shall have the continuing obligation to promptly notify
the Municipal Engineer and the Municipal Solicitor of any changes or
contemplated changes in the location and boundaries.



§ 125-5. Copy of map on file; availability.



   The Clerk/Administrator of the municipality is hereby directed to
receive and to keep on file the original of the map approved and adopted
pursuant to § 125-1 of this article and to provide at a reasonable cost a
true copy thereof to any person, agency or court which may from time to time
request such a copy, along with a certification that such copy is a true copy
of the map approved and adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby further
directed that a true copy of such map and of this article shall be provided
without cost to the County Clerk and to the office of the Atlantic County
Prosecutor.



§ 125-6. Additional findings.



[Amended 9-22-2008 by Ord. No. 29-2008]



   A.   It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to
§ 125-1 of this article was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence
in prosecution arising under the criminal laws of this state and that,
pursuant to state law, such map shall constitute prima facie evidence of
locations as described in § 125-2A and B.



   B.   Pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1988, c. 44 (N.J.S.A.
2C:35-7), a prosecutor is not precluded from introducing or relying upon any
other evidence or testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined
in that statute, including use of map or diagram other than the one approved
and adopted pursuant to § 125-1 of this article. The failure of the map
approved herein to depict the location and boundaries of any property which
is, in fact, used as described in § 125-2A and B, whether the absence of
such depiction is the result of inadvertent omission or the result of any
changes in the location and boundaries of such property which have not yet
been incorporated into a revised approved map, shall not be deemed to be an
official finding and record that such property is not owned by those
described in § 125-2A and B.



   C.   All of the requirements set forth in P.L. 1988, c. 44 (N.J.S.A.
2C:35-7), concerning the preparation, approval and adoption of a Drug-Free
School Zone Map have been complied with.



CHAPTER 134.
FEES



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton as
indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]



ARTICLE I.
Human Waste in Fertilization of Crops



   § 134-1.   Purpose.



   § 134-2.   Annual fee.



   § 134-3.   Collection of fee; penalty; copy of manifests.



   § 134-4.   Use of collected fees.



   § 134-5.   Construal of provisions.



ARTICLE II.
Vital Statistics Records



   § 134-6.   Rate schedule.



Article I.
Human Waste in Fertilization of Crops



[Adopted 6-21-1999 by Ord. No. 14-1999]



§ 134-1. Purpose.



   The purpose of this article is to establish a fee to those enterprises
which employ the use of human waste for the purpose of fertilization of crops
or as a raw material in any percent by weight or volume. It has been found
and determined that the use of said material, its application and storage
onto or into the land has detrimental effects to the citizenship of the Town
of Hammonton, including but not limited to the degradation of roadways,
emissions of odors and exposure of certain types of contamination which
necessitates certain prophylactic measures.



§ 134-2. Annual fee.



   An annual fee shall be imposed at a rate of $0.04 per gallon
(calculated at $5.71 per ton) on all materials which are comprised of human
waste material accepted by any facility existing within the Town of Hammonton.



§ 134-3. Collection of fee; penalty; copy of manifests.



   The fee shall be collected on a quarterly basis and shall be due on the
13th day after the end of each quarter. The quarter shall begin on the first
of the month following the enactment of this article. Any fee which becomes
due and is not paid within the prescribed time shall be subject to an
interest penalty of 5% per month on any part thereof which is not paid. In
addition to the payment, the person and/or firm responsible for payment of
the fee shall provide a copy of all manifests upon which the fee is due and
payable.



§ 134-4. Use of collected fees.



   All sums collected as a result of this article shall be used by the
Town of Hammonton for the following purposes:



   A.   To offset a reduction in tax revenue due to the devaluation of
land values.



   B.   To hire professionals and purchase equipment to perform any and
all tests to varying media for the study of the effects of human waste(s)
applied and stored into and onto the land both on and off site.



   C.   To improve or modify roadways which are effected by the
importation of human waste products.



   D.   To establish and award grants/loans to mitigate the detrimental
effects of the use/application of human waste products.



§ 134-5. Construal of provisions.



   This article when adopted is not intended in any circumstance to limit,
modify or prescribe the manner in which human waste materials are used,
applied, modified, processed or stored.



Article II.
Vital Statistics Records



[Adopted 7-26-2004 by Ord. No. 16-2004]



§ 134-6. Rate schedule.



   The following rate schedule for acquiring certificates and licenses
from the Registrar of Vital Statistics in the Town of Hammonton shall apply:



   A.   Certified copies of certificates of birth, death, marriage,
domestic partnership and civil union:



[Amended 4-23-2007 by Ord. No. 8-2007; 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011]



      (1)   First page: $20;



      (2)   Each additional page of the same record: $10.



   B.   Processing of correction forms: $10 each.



CHAPTER 137.
FENCES AND BARRIERS



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton as
indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]



ARTICLE I.
Construction and Maintenance



   § 137-1.   Purpose; legislative authority.



   § 137-2.   Permit required; application requirements.



   § 137-3.   Construction standards.



   § 137-4.   Maintenance of fences.



   § 137-5.   Complaints; notice of violation.



   § 137-6.   Hearing; failure to remove nonconforming fence.



   § 137-7.   Violations and penalties.



ARTICLE II.
Commercial and Industrial Zones



   § 137-8.   Definitions.



   § 137-9.   Setback required.



   § 137-10.   Fences permitted in industrial zones.



   § 137-11.   Violations and penalties.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Satellite earth stations — See Ch. 220.



Article I.
Construction and Maintenance



[Adopted 9-13-1971 by Ord. No. 10-1971 as Art. I of Ch. 94 of the 1971 Code;
amended in its entirety 11-24-2008 by Ord. No. 37-2008]



§ 137-1. Purpose; legislative authority.



   It is hereby determined to be against the health, safely and general
welfare of the citizens of the Town of Hammonton and deleterious to property
values and an impediment to proper development of any area of the Town of
Hammonton for unsightly, oversized or improperly constructed fences, as
hereinafter defined, to be built or maintained within the limits of the Town
of Hammonton, subject to those exceptions hereinafter set forth, and this
article is enacted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 under the general regulatory
powers of the Town of Hammonton.



§ 137-2. Permit required; application requirements.



   A.   Before the erection of any fence, an application for zoning
approval must be submitted to the Administration Officer and the required fee
paid. Said fee shall be in addition to any fees required for a construction
permit.



   B.   Such application must include a reasonably accurate
representation of the property showing the current conditions, including but
not limited to the following: all existing building footprints and
dimensions; any existing fences; property layout including dimensions; other
improvements and the proposed location of any proposed fences, including
dimensions of placement on property and distance(s) to property line(s).



   C.   Such application must include the owner's name, address of the
property, block and lot of the property, the description and specifications
of the fence, including the size, height, dimensions, material and size of
openings.



§ 137-3. Construction standards.



   A.   All fences erected in the Town of Hammonton shall be subject to
the following:



      (1)   All fences must be erected entirely upon the private
property of the person constructing or causing the construction of the fence;



      (2)   All fences must be constructed in accordance with the
manufacturer's specifications, within reasonable building standards and
approved by the Construction Official;



      (3)   All fences shall be erected with the face or finished
side of the fence facing toward adjacent properties. The structural side of
the fence shall face toward the interior of the subject property on which the
fence has been installed;



      (4)   Fence gates shall have a latch and they shall not open
onto a sidewalk, street or adjacent property;



      (5)   Fences shall be erected in a manner as to permit the
flow of natural drainage and shall not cause surface water to be blocked or
dammed;



      (6)   Any screening or buffering consisting of landscaping
plant materials shall be planted no closer than 50% of the anticipated mature
growth width of such screening or buffering, but in no event closer than four
feet from any property line. Additionally, any screening or buffering
consisting of landscaping plant materials shall not encroach over a sidewalk,
sight triangle easement, public right-of-way or beyond a private property
line. Except as otherwise stated, all fences, screening or buffering
consisting of landscaped plant materials shall be subject to the requirements
and conditions of this chapter;



      (7)   No fence shall be erected so as to encroach upon a
public right-of-way or site triangle;



      (8)   The use of barbed wire or other similar-type fencing is
prohibited unless otherwise stated in the ordinances of the Town of Hammonton;



      (9)   Utility poles, lolly columns, scrap materials,
individually installed elements or columns and other nontraditional fence
materials shall not be permitted to be used for construction of any fence
within the Town of Hammonton. All proposed fence materials are subject to the
review, approval and discretion of the Construction Code Official of the Town
of Hammonton;



      (10)   No fence shall be constructed and/or maintained so as
to deny access to public utilities by an authorized person;



      (11)   Fences in residential properties.



         (a)   Any fence installed on a property within a
residential zoning district, or on a property which contains a residential
use, shall not exceed three feet in height installed within a front yard
setback area, or along a front property line.



         (b)   Any fence installed on a property within a
residential zoning district, or on a property which contains a residential
use, shall not exceed three feet in height installed within a side yard
setback area, or along a side property line. The fence height may increase to
six feet in height at the point of 75% of the length of the side building
wall, measured from the front of the house. The fence may continue at a
height of six feet along the remainder of the side property line to a point
where the fence meets the rear yard area or rear property line.



         (c)   Any fence installed on a property within a
residential zoning district, or on a property which contains a residential
use, shall not exceed six feet in height installed within a rear yard setback
area or along a rear property line; and



      (12)   Any fence installed on a property within a
nonresidential zoning district, or on a property which contains a
nonresidential use property, or a mixed use, shall not exceed six feet.



   B.   Should any property be a corner property which has frontage on
two streets, the rear building line, for the purpose of this article, shall
be interpreted to mean that point where the property line of any corner
property abuts the rear building line of any adjacent property, and the owner
of said corner property shall not be entitled to construct any fence that
exceeds three feet in height from the average ground grade in any point
closer to the nearest roadway with which said line intersects than the rear
building line of all adjacent properties.



   C.   These fence regulations shall not apply to the erection of an
open-wire fence within a publicly owned park, playground or school premises
if the need for such a fence for such uses as athletic fields and the like
are demonstrated to and approved by the Building Construction Officer.



§ 137-4. Maintenance of fences.



   A.   Fences must be maintained by the owner and kept in alignment
and shall be maintained in a safe, sound and upright condition and in
accordance with the approved plan (if required) on file with the Building
Construction Officer.



   B.   All fences shall be kept in a clean, trash-free manner, without
weeds. Manicured landscaping plant materials shall be permitted.



   C.   The fence, its posts, and the chain link (if applicable) shall
not be permitted to be maintained in a condition where deterioration or rust
is exposed to public view.



   D.   In the event of a screening or buffering consisting of
landscaped plant materials, the landscaping plant materials shall be property
trimmed, maintained and irrigated. The property owner is responsible for the
maintenance of the manicured landscaping plant materials as set forth herein
and shall at all times be responsible for the continued upkeep, maintenance,
trimming, removal of debris and trash, replanting, if necessary, and to take
those steps necessary to insure that the manicured landscaping plant
material, screening or buffering shall be maintained in a safe and sightly
condition.



§ 137-5. Complaints; notice of violation.



   Upon a complaint being filed by the Building Inspector or any citizen
complaining of a fence being constructed in violation of this article and
upon the Board of Adjustment being satisfied that said complaint is made for
good cause, the Secretary of the Board of Adjustment shall notify the owner,
as shown by the records of the Board of Tax Assessors of the Town of
Hammonton, of the premises upon which said fence is being or has been
constructed, by certified mail, that failure on the owner's part to request a
hearing or have said nonconforming fence removed will result in a complaint
being made against the owner in the Hammonton Municipal Court for violation
of this article. Said notice shall give the owner 10 days to remove the fence
or request a hearing before the Board of Adjustment to show cause why said
fence should not be removed.



§ 137-6. Hearing; failure to remove nonconforming fence.



   The owner, upon receipt of the notice set forth by § 137-5 above, may
demand a hearing before the Board of Adjustment, notifying the Secretary of
the Board of Adjustment of his/her desire to have said hearing at any time
before the expiration of the ten-day period. Failure to have a nonconforming
fence removed after the end of the ten-day period, where no request for a
hearing is made, or after a hearing is held and a determination is made by
the Board of Adjustment that said fence is in violation of this article,
shall result in a complaint being filed before the Hammonton Municipal Court
for a violation of this article. Nothing in this article shall be construed
as prohibiting any fence required by any other ordinance of the Town of
Hammonton to be constructed or maintained, and such fences shall not be
subject to this article. Each day that a fence remains in violation of this
article after said determination after a hearing, or the passage of the
original ten-day period without a request for a hearing, shall be a separate
violation of this article.



§ 137-7. Violations and penalties.



   Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be subject to
one or more of the following: a fine of not more than $1,000, imprisonment
for a period not to exceed 90 days or a period of community service not to
exceed 90 days.



Article II.
Commercial and Industrial Zones



[Adopted 9-13-1971 by Ord. No. 10-1971 as Art. II of Ch. 94 of the 1971 Code]



§ 137-8. Definitions.



   As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:



   BARRIER



   Any structure of any kind which has the effect of limiting, blocking or
otherwise impairing or affecting the view of the public traffic or a
commercial enterprise.



   COMMERCIAL ZONE



   Any area of the Town of Hammonton which is zoned commercial by and
through Chapter 175, Land Development.



§ 137-9. Setback required.



   No individual, partnership, corporation or other entity or group of
individuals shall erect or maintain in any commercial zone of the Town of
Hammonton any fence or other barrier of any kind or description which shall
be closer at any point to the nearest existing roadway than that point where
buildings are required to be set back from said road by municipal ordinance
or state law, or closer at any point to the nearest existing roadway than the
existing building line is to said road, whichever point is farther from said
existing roadway.



§ 137-10. Fences permitted in industrial zones.



[Added 6-24-1974 by Ord. No. 14-1974]



   Any property owner in the Town of Hammonton who has a structure erected
or is in the process of erecting a structure on premises situate in an
Industrial M1, Industrial M2 or Industrial M3 Zone, as defined in Chapter
175, Land Development, shall be permitted to erect a fence on said premises
from the front building line of the structure, on a course not closer to the
roadway upon which said structure fronts at any point than said front
building line, to the side property line, and shall be permitted to construct
a fence along both side property lines and the rear property line to the rear
of the aforementioned front building line, which fence shall not exceed six
feet in height from average ground grade at any point. The height
restrictions of § 137-2, insofar as such conflict with this section, are
hereby repealed to the extent of said inconsistency. All other provisions of
Article I of this chapter not inconsistent with this section are hereby
retained in full force and effect. Editor's Note: Former § 94-11, Removal of
noncom plying fences or barriers, which immediately followed this section,
was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
I).



§ 137-11. Violations and penalties.



   Any individual who erects or maintains a fence or other barrier in
violation of the provisions of this article shall be subject to one or more
of the following: a fine of not more than $1,000, imprisonment for a period
not to exceed 90 days or a period of community service not to exceed 90 days
for every day that said fence is in existence in violation of the provisions
of this article. Said fines may be imposed in addition to the right of the
Building Inspector of the Town of Hammonton to enter upon and remove said
fence or other barrier.



CHAPTER 141.
FIREARMS



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton
9-13-1971 by Ord. No. 10-1971 as Ch. 96 of the 1971 Code; amended in its
entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Amendments noted where applicable.]



   § 141-1.   Discharge of firearms restricted.



   § 141-2.   Exceptions.



   § 141-3.   Violations and penalties.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Firearms in parks — See Ch. 200, § 200-4.



§ 141-1. Discharge of firearms restricted.



   The discharge of any firearms, bow and arrow, crossbow, slingshot, air
gun, spring gun, gas gun or any other device which impels a projectile
through the use of force is prohibited in the Town of Hammonton.



§ 141-2. Exceptions.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:



   A.   Any duly appointed law officer in the course of his or her
official duty.



   B.   The use of firearms when necessary for the preservation of
human life.



   C.   The use of firearms when hunting in conformity with the
applicable laws and regulations of the State of New Jersey.



   D.   Use of a firearm on a licensed pistol, rifle or firearm range
and under the supervision of the Police Department.



§ 141-3. Violations and penalties.



   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000, a
term of imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or a period of community service
not exceeding 90 days, or any combination thereof.



CHAPTER 144.
FIRE PREVENTION



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton as
indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]



ARTICLE I.
(Reserved)



   § 144-1.   (Reserved)



   § 144-2.   (Reserved)



   § 144-3.   (Reserved)



   § 144-4.   (Reserved)



   § 144-5.   (Reserved)



   § 144-6.   (Reserved)



   § 144-7.   (Reserved)



   § 144-8.   (Reserved)



ARTICLE II.
Uniform Fire Code



   § 144-9.   Adoption of standards.



   § 144-10.   Local enforcement.



   § 144-11.   Agency designation and duties.



   § 144-12.   Organization of Bureau of Fire Prevention.



   § 144-13.   Appointments; terms; removal from office.



   § 144-14.   Life-hazard uses.



   § 144-15.   Non-life-hazard uses: inspection fee schedule.



   § 144-16.   Permits.



   § 144-17.   Board of Appeals.



   § 144-18.   Enforcement; violations and penalties.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Fire Department — See Ch. 25.



   Fire Prevention Bureau — See Ch. 28.



   Alarm systems — See Ch. 74.



   Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 115.



   Fire insurance claims — See Ch. 168, Art. I.



   Extinguishing fires in picnic areas — See Ch. 200, § 220-4.



Article I.
(Reserved)



Editor's Note: Former Art. I, Hazardous Conditions, adopted 9-13-1971 by Ord.
No. 10-1971 as; 24-6 through 24-10 and 24-16 through 24-19 of the 1971 Code,
as amended 4-23-2001 by Ord. No. 15-2001, was repealed 3-25-2002 by Ord. No.
9-2002.



§ 144-1. (Reserved)



§ 144-2. (Reserved)



§ 144-3. (Reserved)



§ 144-4. (Reserved)



§ 144-5. (Reserved)



§ 144-6. (Reserved)



§ 144-7. (Reserved)



§ 144-8. (Reserved)



Article II.
Uniform Fire Code



[Adopted 4-14-1986 by Ord. No. 8-1986; amended in its entirety 8-28-1989 by
Ord. No. 25-1989]



§ 144-9. Adoption of standards.



[Amended 3-25-2002 by Ord. No. 9-2002]



   The Uniform Fire Safety Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.) was enacted
for the purpose of establishing a system for the enforcement of minimum fire
safety standards throughout the State of New Jersey. The Uniform Fire Safety
Act authorizes municipalities to provide for local enforcement and to
establish local enforcement agencies for that purpose. The Town of Hammonton
has agreed to that plan, which is set forth herein, for the administration
and enforcement of the Uniform Fire Code (N.J.A.C. 5.70-1.1 et seq.),
pursuant to the Uniform Fire Safety Act.



§ 144-10. Local enforcement.



   Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-202, the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code shall
be locally enforced in the Town of Hammonton.



§ 144-11. Agency designation and duties.



   The local enforcing agency shall:



   A.   Be the Bureau of Fire Prevention, which is hereby created in
the Hammonton Fire Department.



[Amended 3-8-1993 by Ord. No. 5-1993]



   B.   Enforce the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code in all buildings,
structures and premises within the established boundaries of the Town of
Hammonton, other than owner-occupied buildings used exclusively for dwelling
purposes and containing fewer than three dwelling units or buildings,
structures and premises owned by the state, interstate agencies or the
federal government.



[Amended 3-8-1993 by Ord. No. 5-1993]



   C.   Faithfully comply with all the requirements of the Uniform Fire
Safety Act and the Uniform Fire Code.



§ 144-12. Organization of Bureau of Fire Prevention.



Editor's Note: See Ch. 28, Fire Prevention, Bureau of.



[Amended 3-8-1993 by Ord. No. 5-1993; 4-23-2001 by Ord. No. 15-2001;
3-25-2002 by Ord. No. 9-2002]



   The Bureau of Fire Prevention established by § 144-10 of this article
shall:



   A.   Be a part of the Hammonton Fire Department.



   B.   Be under the direct supervision and control of the Fire
Official.



   C.   Have at least one paid Fire Official and such paid inspectors
as may be necessary to enforce the Code.



   D.   The Fire Official shall be required to report to the Town
Administrator.



§ 144-13. Appointments; terms; removal from office.



   A.   Appointment of Fire Official. The Fire Official shall be
certified by the state and shall be appointed by the governing body from a
list of three names submitted by the Chief of the Fire Department.



[Amended 3-8-1993 by Ord. No. 5-1993]



   B.   Inspectors and other employees. Inspectors and other employees
of the enforcing agency shall be appointed by the governing body upon the
recommendation of the Fire Official. All life hazard use inspectors shall be
certified by the state.



   C.   Appointment of legal counsel. The governing body shall
specifically appoint legal counsel to assist the agency in enforcing the
Uniform Fire Code.



   D.   Term of office. The Fire Official shall serve the term of
office in accordance with New Jersey Department of Personnel Rules and
Regulations.



   E.   Removal from office. The Fire Official, inspectors and other
employees of the agency shall be subject to removal by the governing body for
just cause. Before removal from office, all persons shall be afforded an
opportunity to be heard by the governing body or a hearing officer designated
by the same.



§ 144-14. Life-hazard uses.



   The Bureau of Fire Prevention established by § 144-10 of this article
shall carry out the periodic inspections of life-hazard uses required by the
Uniform Fire Code on behalf of the Commissioner of the Department of the
Community Affairs.



§ 144-15. Non-life-hazard uses: inspection fee schedule.



[Amended 4-23-2001 by Ord. No. 15-2001]



   A.   Residential use group. Includes all buildings with dwelling
units not listed as a life-hazard by the New Jersey Bureau of Fire Safety,
except one- or two-family owner-occupied units.



 

 
Unit Size
 
Fee


 
One to three units
 
$30


 
Four to 10 units
 
60


 
Eleven to 20 units
 
100


 
Twenty to 40 units
 
130


 
Each additional 20 units or less
 
29



 



   B.   Business or industrial use group. Business or industrial use
group includes all buildings not listed as a life-hazard by the New Jersey
Bureau of Fire Safety.



      (1)   Building types.



         (a)   Buildings with or without attached dwelling units
not in excess of 1,000 square feet: $30.



         (b)   Buildings with or without attached dwelling units
in excess of 1,000 square feet not exceeding 3,000 square feet: $40.



         (c)   Buildings with or without attached dwelling units
in excess of 3,000 square feet not exceeding 9,000 square feet: $60.



         (d)   Buildings with or without attached dwelling units
in excess of 9,000 square feet not exceeding 15,000 square feet: $100.



         (e)   Buildings in excess of 25,000 square feet not
exceeding 50,000 square feet: $150.



         (f)   Buildings in excess of 50,000 square feet not
exceeding 100,000 square feet: $200.



         (g)   Buildings in excess of 100,000 square feet not
exceeding 200,000 square feet: $300.



         (h)   Buildings in excess of 200,000 square feet not
exceeding 300,000 square feet: $400.



         (i)   Additional 100,000 square feet or part thereof:
$100.



      (2)   Each floor or story shall be calculated as separate
areas for total building calculation.



   C.   Certificate of fire code status. [Amended 2-26-2018 by Ord. No.
005-2018; 4-23-2018 by Ord. No. 013-2018]



      (1)   Any structure requiring inspection not covered under
either the life-hazard schedule or the non-life-hazard fee schedule: $25.



      (2)   The following building or structure, if classified as
non-life hazard, although not exempt from registration or inspection, will be
exempt from paying an inspection fee pursuant to the Act.



         (a)   Municipal-owned buildings.



         (b)   Fire stations.



         (c)   EMS stations.



         (d)   House of worship (excluding rooms for public
assembly, i.e., meeting halls, social halls, rental halls).



         (e)   Farm buildings, packing houses, labor camps and
farm storage buildings.



         (f)   All inspections must be performed every five years.



   D.   Smoke detector inspections. Smoke detector inspections to be
conducted on all one- and two-family residential dwellings for resale and
rental: $25.



   E.   Fire safety permits. All permit fees shall be regulated by the
fee schedule set by the State of New Jersey Uniform Fire Act (N.J.S.A.
52:27d-192 et seq; N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.9(C).)



§ 144-16. Permits.



[Amended 3-8-1993 by Ord. No. 5-1993]



   In accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:18-2(e), the fees for the permits listed
in N.J.A.C. 5:18-2.7(b) shall be as follows:



 

Type
 
Fee


1
 
$ 25.00


2
 
100.00


3
 
200.00


4
 
300.00


5
 
1,000.00



 



§ 144-17. Board of Appeals.



[Amended 3-25-2002 by Ord. No. 9-2002]



   Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-208, any person aggrieved by any action of
the local enforcing agency shall have the right to appeal to Atlantic County
Construction Board of Appeals.



§ 144-18. Enforcement; violations and penalties.



   Enforcement, violations and penalties shall be in conformity with the
Uniform Fire Safety Act and the Uniform Fire Code.



CHAPTER 147.
FLOOD HAZARD AREAS



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton
7-25-1988 by Ord. No. 16-1988. Amendments noted where applicable.]



   § 147-1.   Findings; purpose.



   § 147-2.   Mechanisms for protection against flood hazard and
blight.



   § 147-3.   Word usage and definitions.



   § 147-4.   Applicability.



   § 147-5.   Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.



   § 147-6.   Compliance required; violations and penalties.



   § 147-7.   Abrogation; more stringent restrictions to prevail.



   § 147-8.   Interpretation of provisions.



   § 147-9.   Warning; disclaimer of liability.



   § 147-10.   Development permits.



   § 147-11.   Designation of enforcement official.



   § 147-12.   Review of development permits by Construction Official.



   § 147-13.   Use of other base flood data.



   § 147-14.   Interpretation of FIRM boundaries.



   § 147-15.   Appeal Board.



   § 147-16.   Conditions for variances.



   § 147-17.   Standards for flood hazard reduction.



   § 147-18.   Floodways.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 115.



   Sludge spreading on areas of seasonal flooding — See Ch. 230, §
230-4.



   Land development floodplain regulations — See Ch. 175, § 175-103.



§ 147-1. Findings; purpose.



   A.   The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has, in N.J.S.A.
40:48-1 et seq. and 40:55D-1 et seq., delegated the responsibility to local
governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public
health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Mayor and
Common Council find as a fact that:



      (1)   The flood hazard areas of the Town of Hammonton are
subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property,
health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety and general welfare.



      (2)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect
of obstructions in areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights
and velocities and, when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas.
Uses that are inadequately flood proofed, elevated or otherwise protected
from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.



   B.   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health,
safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to
flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:



      (1)   Protect human life and health.



      (2)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood
control projects.



      (3)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts
associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the
general public.



      (4)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions.



      (5)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such
as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines and streets and
bridges, located in areas of special flood hazard.



      (6)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the
sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize
future flood blight areas.



      (7)   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property
is in an area of special flood hazard.



      (8)   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood
hazard assume responsibility for their actions.



§ 147-2. Mechanisms for protection against flood hazard and blight.



   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:



   A.   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health,
safety and property due to water or erosion hazards or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities.



   B.   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction.



   C.   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream
channels and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters.



   D.   Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development
which may increase flood damage.



   E.   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers
which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards
in other areas.



§ 147-3. Word usage and definitions.



   A.   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in
this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.



   B.   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:



   APPEAL



   A request for a review of the Zoning Officer's interpretation of any
provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.



   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING



   A designated AO Zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base
flood depths range from one to three feet, a clearly defined channel does not
exist, the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate and velocity
flow may be evident.



   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD



   The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one-percent
or greater chance of flooding in any given year.



   BASE FLOOD



   The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year.



   BASEMENT



   Any area of the building having its floor Subgrade (below ground level)
on all sides.



   BREAKAWAY WALL



   A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and
is intended, through its design and construction, to collapse under specific
lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the
building or supporting foundation system.



   DEVELOPMENT



   Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including
but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling,
grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations located within the area of
special flood hazard.



   ELEVATED BUILDING



   A nonbasement building built, in the case of a building in an area of
special flood hazard, to have the top of the elevated floor or, in the case
of a building in a coastal high-hazard area, to have the bottom of the lowest
horizontal structural member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground
level by means of piling, columns (posts and piers) or shear walls parallel
to the flow of the water and adequately anchored so as not to impair the
structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of
the base flood. In areas of coastal high-hazard, "elevated building" also
includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building"
even though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls.



   FLOOD OR FLOODING



   A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from:



      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or



      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff or surface
waters from any source.



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM)



   The official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.



   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY



   The official report provided in which the Federal Insurance
Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the Flood Boundary -
Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the base flood.



   FLOODWAY



   The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas
that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 0.2 feet.



   LOWEST FLOOR



   The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including the basement.
An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for the parking of
vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement, is not
considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not
built so as to render the structure in violation of other applicable
nonelevation design requirements.



   MANUFACTURED HOME



   A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain
management purposes, the term "manufactured home" also includes park
trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a site for
greater than 180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes, the term
"manufactured home" does not include park trailers, travel trailers and other
similar vehicles.



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION



   A parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION



   Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after
the effective date of this chapter.



   START OF CONSTRUCTION



   Includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit
was issued, provided that the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the
permit date. The "actual start" means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work
beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of
streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does
it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure.



   STRUCTURE



   A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home or a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT



   Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure either
before the improvement or repair is started or, if the structure has been
damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes
of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the
building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either:



      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply
with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications
which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or



      (2)   Any alteration of a structure listed on the National
Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.



   VARIANCE



   A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits
construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.



§ 147-4. Applicability.



   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within
the jurisdiction of the Town of Hammonton.



§ 147-5. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.



   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance
Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled the "Flood
Insurance Study for the Town of Hammonton," dated January 6, 1982, with
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Boundary - Floodway Maps is
hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The
Flood Insurance Study is on file at Hammonton Town Hall, Central Avenue,
Hammonton, New Jersey 08037.



§ 147-6. Compliance required; violations and penalties.



   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violations of the provisions of this
chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements, including
violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
conditions, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this
chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to one or more of the following: a fine of not
more than $1,000, imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days or a period
of community service not to exceed 90 days and in addition shall pay all
costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall
prevent the Town of Hammonton from taking such other lawful action as is
necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.



§ 147-7. Abrogation; more stringent restrictions to prevail.



   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
other ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.



§ 147-8. Interpretation of provisions.



   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions
shall be:



   A.   Considered as minimum requirements;



   B.   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and



   C.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted
under state statutes.



§ 147-9. Warning; disclaimer of liability.



   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the Town of Hammonton, any officer
or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance Administration for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision lawfully made there under.



§ 147-10. Development permits.



   A development permit shall be obtained before construction or
development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in §
147-5. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished
by the Zoning Officer and may include but not be limited to plans, in
duplicate, drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and
elevations of the area in question, existing or proposed structures, fill,
storage of materials, drainage facilities and the location of the foregoing.
Specifically, the following information is required:



   A.   Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor,
including the basement of all structures.



   B.   Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any
structure had been flood proofed.



   C.   Certification by a registered professional engineer or
architect that the flood proofing methods for any nonresidential structure
meet the flood proofing criteria in § 147-17.



   D.   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be
altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.



§ 147-11. Designation of enforcement official.



   The Construction Official is hereby appointed to administer and
implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications
in accordance with its provisions.



§ 147-12. Review of development permits by Construction Official.



   The duties of the Construction Official shall include, but not be
limited to review of permits for development as follows:



   A.   Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.



   B.   Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental
agencies from which prior approval is required.



   C.   Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway and, if located in the floodway, to
assure that the encroachment provisions of § 147-18 are met.



§ 147-13. Use of other base flood data.



   A.   When base flood elevation and floodway data has not been
provided in accordance with § 147-5, Basis for establishing areas of special
flood hazard, the Construction Official shall obtain, review and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal,
state or other source in order to administer § 147-17F(1), Residential
construction, and § 147-17F(2), Nonresidential construction.



   B.   Information to be obtained and maintained. The Construction
Official shall:



      (1)   Obtain and record the actual elevation, in relation to
mean sea level, of the lowest habitable floor, including the basement, of all
new or substantially improved structures and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.



      (2)   For all new substantially improved flood proofed
structures:



         (a)   Verify and record the actual elevation, in
relation to mean sea level.



         (b)   Maintain the flood proofing certifications
required in § 147-10C.



      (3)   Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to
the provisions of this chapter.



   C.   On applications to watercourses, the Construction Official
should:



      (1)   Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection Division of Water Resources prior to
any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.



      (2)   Require that maintenance is provided within the altered
or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity
is not diminished.



§ 147-14. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries.



   The Construction Official shall make interpretations, where needed, as
to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard
(for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary
and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the
boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation
as provided in § 147-15.



§ 147-15. Appeal Board.



   A.   Appeal Board.



      (1)   The Town Planning Board, as established by the Town of
Hammonton, shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.



      (2)   The Town Planning Board shall hear and decide appeals
when it is alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision or
determination made by the Construction Official in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.



      (3)   Those aggrieved by the decision of the Town Planning
Board, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Mayor and Council
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26b.



      (4)   In passing upon such applications, the Planning Board
shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter and:



         (a)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other
lands to the injury of others.



         (b)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or
erosion damage.



         (c)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and
its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner.



         (d)   The importance of the services provided by the
proposed facility to the community.



         (e)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront
location, where applicable.



         (f)   The availability of alternative locations for the
proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage.



         (g)   The compatibility of the proposed use with
existing and anticipated development.



         (h)   The relationship of the proposed use to the
Comprehensive Plan and floodplain management program of that area.



         (i)   The safety of access to the property in times of
flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles.



         (j)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of
rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site.



         (k)   The costs of providing governmental services
during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems
and streets and bridges.



      (5)   Upon consideration of the factors of § 147-15A(4) and
the purposes of this chapter, the Town Planning Board may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the
purposes of this chapter.



   B.   The Construction Official shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions, including technical information, and report any variances to
the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.



§ 147-16. Conditions for variances.



   A.   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in size
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed
below the base flood level, provided that the items in § 147-15A(4)(a)
through (k) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the
1/2 acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.



   B.   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation
or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic
Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places without regard to the
procedures set forth in the remainder of this section.



   C.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if
any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.



   D.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.



   E.   Variances shall only be issued upon:



      (1)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;



      (2)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and



      (3)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public as identified in § 147-15A(4) or conflict with
existing local laws or ordinances.



   F.   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the
reduced lowest floor elevation.



§ 147-17. Standards for flood hazard reduction.



   In all areas of special flood hazard, the following standards are
required:



   A.   Anchoring.



      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the
structure.



      (2)   All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist
flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include,
but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground
anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local
anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.



   B.   Construction materials and methods.



      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.



      (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.



   C.   Standards for utilities.



      (1)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.



      (2)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
systems and discharge from the systems into floodwaters.



      (3)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.



      (4)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and
air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed
and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within
the components during conditions of flooding.



   D.   Standards for subdivision proposals.



      (1)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the
need to minimize flood damage.



      (2)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities
and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.



      (3)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.



      (4)   Base flood elevation data shall be provided for
subdivision proposals and other proposed development in accordance with §§
175-66 and 175-69 of the Hammonton Land Use Code.



   E.   Standards for enclosure openings. For all new construction and
substantial improvements, fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:



      (1)   A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided.



      (2)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one
foot above grade.



      (3)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters.



   F.   Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazard where
base flood elevation data have been provided as set forth in § 147-5, Basis
for establishing areas of special flood hazard, or in § 147-13, Use of other
base flood data, the following standards are required:



      (1)   Residential construction. New construction and
substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest
floor, including the basement, elevated to or above base flood elevation.



      (2)   Nonresidential construction. New construction and
substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential
structure shall either have the lowest floor, including the basement,
elevated to the level of the base flood elevation or, together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities, shall:



         (a)   Be flood proofed so that below the base flood
level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water;



         (b)   Have structural components capable of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and



         (c)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable provisions of
this subsection. Such certification shall be provided to the Zoning Officer
as set forth in § 147-13B(2).



§ 147-18. Floodways.



   Floodways and control thereof. Located within areas of special hazard
established in § 147-5 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway
is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry
debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions
apply:



   A.   Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other development, unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood
levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.



   B.   If § 147-18A is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of § 147-17, Standards for flood hazard reduction.



CHAPTER 151.
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton
9-13-1971 by Ord. No. 10-1971 as Ch. 127 of the 1971 Code. Amendments noted
where applicable.]



   § 151-1.   License required.



   § 151-2.   Fees.



   § 151-3.   Term of license; application; time period for compliance.



   § 151-4.   Suspension or revocation of license.



   § 151-5.   Interpretation.



   § 151-6.   Violations and penalties.



§ 151-1. License required.



Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I). It shall be unlawful for any person or any body
corporate to conduct a retail food establishment as defined in and governed
by N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.1 et seq. without first having procured a license from the
local Board of Health so to do or without complying with any or all of the
provisions concerning operation and maintenance of the same as contained in
the aforementioned provisions.



§ 151-2. Fees.



Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I). The annual fees for licenses for each retail food
establishment shall be as adopted from time to time by ordinance.



§ 151-3. Term of license; application; time period for compliance.



Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I). All applications shall run from January 1 to December 31
of each given year. All applications for licenses under this chapter shall be
in writing to the Secretary of the Board of Health on such forms as are
designated by the Board of Health. All establishments covered by the
provisions mentioned in § 151-1 in operation on the effective date of this
chapter shall have 10 days from said effective date to apply for said license
before any complaints for violations shall issue.



§ 151-4. Suspension or revocation of license.



   A.   Any license issued under the terms and provisions of this
chapter may be suspended or revoked by the Board of Health of this
municipality for the violation by the licensee of any provision of this
chapter or N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.1 et seq. or whenever it shall appear that the
business, trade, calling, profession or occupation of the person, firm or
corporation to whom such license was issued is conducted in a disorderly or
improper manner, or in violation of any law of the United States, the State
of New Jersey or any ordinance of this municipality, or that the person or
persons conducting the retail food establishment is of an unfit character to
conduct the same, or that the purpose for which the license has been issued
is being used for a purpose foreign to that for which the license was issued.



   B.   A license issued under the terms and provisions of this chapter
shall not be revoked, canceled or suspended until a hearing thereon shall
have been had by the Board of Health. Written notice of the time and place of
such hearing shall be served upon the licensee at least three days prior to
the date set for such hearing. Such notice shall also contain a brief
statement of the grounds to be relied upon for revoking, canceling or
suspending such license. Notice may be given either by personal delivery
thereof to the person to be notified or be deposited in the United States
Post Office in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such person
to be notified at the business address appearing upon said license. At the
hearing before the Board of Health the person aggrieved shall have an
opportunity to answer and may thereafter be heard, and upon due consideration
and deliberation by the Board of Health, the complaint may be dismissed, or
if the governing body concludes that the charges have been sustained and
substantiated, it may revoke, cancel or suspend the license held by the
licensee.



   C.   If any such license shall have been revoked, neither the holder
thereof nor any person acting for him/her, directly or indirectly, shall be
entitled to another license to carry on the same business within the town
unless the application for such license shall be approved by the Board of
Health.



§ 151-5. Interpretation.



   No provision of this chapter shall be applied so as to impose any
unlawful burden on either interstate commerce or any activity of the state or
federal government.



§ 151-6. Violations and penalties.



   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions
of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to one or more of the
following: a fine of not more than $1,000, imprisonment for a period not to
exceed 90 days or a period of community service not to exceed 90 days, and
each violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, and each day the
same is violated, shall be deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct
offense.



CHAPTER 154.
FUNDRAISING



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton as
indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]



ARTICLE I.
Use of Town Name, Personnel, Logo, Equipment or Symbols



   § 154-1.   Purpose.



   § 154-2.   Consent of Mayor and Council required.



   § 154-3.   Filing of written request; required information.



   § 154-4.   Violations and penalties.



   § 154-5.   Enforcement.



Article I.
Use of Town Name, Personnel, Logo, Equipment or Symbols



[Adopted 2-14-1994 by Ord. No. 3-1994]



§ 154-1. Purpose.



   Fundraising is a viable means to ensure the financial integrity of many
local civic, social and fraternal organizations. The Town of Hammonton wants
to encourage fundraising but wants to ensure that it is done in an
environment that is void of fraud or suspicion. It is the purpose of this
article that guidelines shall be established for the use of the official name
of the town or any of its departments or components in any fundraising
activity.



§ 154-2. Consent of Mayor and Council required.



   No individual or organization shall be permitted to use the official
name of the town, the town name, the name of any town employee in their
official capacity, the name of any town department, the logo of the town or
any department or any other symbol related to the town in any fundraising
effort without first obtaining the consent of the Mayor and Council. The use
may be either direct communication, mailing, telephone solicitation or any
other means employed to induce the public to make donations of money or
contributions of any kind.



§ 154-3. Filing of written request; required information.



   If an individual or organization desires to use the official name of
the town, the town name, the name of any town employee in their official
capacity, the name of any town department, the logo of the town or any
department or any other symbol related to the town in a fundraising effort, a
written request must be made to the Mayor and Council at least 14 days prior
to the use of any of the aforementioned, and said request is to be filed in
the Town Clerk/Administrator's office and presented to the Mayor and Council
at the next subsequent Council meeting. The request must contain the name of
the individual or organization doing the fundraising, the type of fundraising
activity, the duration of the activity and the exact use of the town name(s)
specified in this article which will be used. The Mayor and Council's
decision shall be set forth in a resolution, to be filed in the town's
minutes.



§ 154-4. Violations and penalties.



   A.   If an individual uses a name or symbol specified in this
article without first obtaining the permission of the Mayor and Council, that
person shall be deemed to have violated this article and shall be subject to
one or more of the following: a fine of not more than $1,000, imprisonment
for a period not to exceed 90 days or a period of community service not to
exceed 90 days.



   B.   The sentence, upon conviction, shall be within the discretion
of the judge presiding over the matter. In addition to the penalties above,
the judge shall issue an order that the individual or organization shall
immediately cease all fundraising activities. If any individual or
organization is found to have engaged in such activities after being ordered
to cease, the individuals may be subject to the same penalties specified
above upon conviction.



§ 154-5. Enforcement.



   This article shall be enforced by the local Police Department, the
local Zoning Officer or upon complaint brought by any citizen. Upon the
complaint being filed, the matter will be brought before the Municipal Court
for hearing.



CHAPTER 157.
GAMES OF CHANCE



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton as
indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]



ARTICLE I.
Raffles



   § 157-1.   Operation on Sunday.



   § 157-2.   License data.



ARTICLE II.
Bingo



   § 157-3.   Operation on Sunday.



   § 157-4.   License data.



ARTICLE III.
Issuances of Licenses



   § 157-5.   Delegation of authority.



   § 157-6.   Compliance with standards.



   § 157-7.   Denial of license; review.



Article I.
Raffles



[Adopted 6-13-1971 by Ord. No. 10-1971 as Art. I of Ch. 100 of the 1971 Code]



§ 157-1. Operation on Sunday.



   Games of chance may be conducted under any license issued by the Mayor
and Common Council pursuant to the Raffle Licensing Law (N.J.S.A. 5:8-58) on
Sunday, in the Town of Hammonton, County of Atlantic, State of New Jersey.



§ 157-2. License data.



   The license issued for the holding, operating and conducting of such
games of chance, by the Mayor and Common Council, shall provide that said
games of chance may be conducted on Sunday.



Article II.
Bingo



[Adopted 9-13-1971 by Ord. No. 10-1971 as Art. II of Ch. 100 of the 1971 Code]



§ 157-3. Operation on Sunday.



   Games of chance may be conducted under any license issued by the Mayor
and Common Council pursuant to the provisions of the Bingo Licensing Law,
Laws 1954, Chapter 6, Section 1 et seq. (N.J.S.A. 5:8-31), on the first day
of the week, commonly known and designated as Sunday, in the Town of
Hammonton, Atlantic County, New Jersey.



§ 157-4. License data.



   The license to be issued for the holding, operating and conducting of
such games of chance, by the Mayor and Common Council, shall provide that
such games of chance may be conducted on the first day of the week, commonly
known and designated as Sunday.



Article III.
Issuances of Licenses



[Adopted 4-27-2009 by Ord. No. 6A-2009]



§ 157-5. Delegation of authority.



   The Municipal Clerk is delegated the authority to approve and grant
raffle and bingo licenses to be held in the Town of Hammonton.



§ 157-6. Compliance with standards.



   The issuance of raffle and bingo licenses by the Municipal Clerk will
comply with N.J.A.C. 13:47 and any other laws or regulations of the State of
New Jersey and the Legalized Games of Chance Control Commission.



§ 157-7. Denial of license; review.



   In the event the Municipal Clerk denies a bingo or raffle license for
any reason, that application and reason for denial of license shall be
reviewed by the Administration Committee prior to issuing the denial of
license to the applicant.



CHAPTER 162.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP AND REMOVAL



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton
10-28-2002 by Ord. No. 38-2002. Amendments noted where applicable.]



   § 162-1.   Purpose.



   § 162-2.   Definitions.



   § 162-3.   Assignment of liability.



   § 162-4.   Schedules of fees.



   § 162-5.   Hearing upon reasonableness of assessment.



   § 162-6.   Liability of attorney's fees and collection costs.



§ 162-1. Purpose.



   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the recovery of costs for
the cleanup and removal of hazardous substances within the Town of Hammonton
either by intentional or unintentional acts and hold those responsible for
such discharges financially obligated to the Town of Hammonton for any
expenditures for labor, materials and use of equipment.



§ 162-2. Definitions.



   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:



   CLEANUP AND REMOVAL COSTS



   All costs associated with a discharge, as defined herein, within the
boundaries of the Town of Hammonton, which shall include labor and material
for the removal of hazardous substances or taking of reasonable measures to
prevent or mitigate damages to the public health, safety or welfare of the
residents of the Town of Hammonton, including real property, both private and
public.



   DISCHARGE



   Any intentional or unintentional act or omission resulting in the
release, spill, leak, emission, dumping, or disposal of hazardous substances
into the waters or lands within the Town of Hammonton, or outside the Town of
Hammonton when damage may result to the waters or lands within the Town.



   HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE



   All elements and compounds, including petroleum products, as set forth
in N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11b, as amended, except that sewage and sewage sludge
sh3all be considered hazardous substances for the purposes of this chapter.



   PERSON



   Any individual, public or private corporation, companies, association,
societies, firms, partnerships or joint-stock companies.



§ 162-3. Assignment of liability.



   After due investigation by the Town of Hammonton, any person who shall
be found to have discharged hazardous substances within the Town of Hammonton
shall be held strictly liable for all cleanup and removal costs incurred by
the Town of Hammonton and its agents, servants and employees. Said person
shall receive written notification of the amount due. Payment is required to
be made to the Town of Hammonton within 30 days of the date of notice.



§ 162-4. Schedules of fees.



   A.   The following fees shall be imposed:



      (1)   Hazardous Materials Technician: $30 per hour.



      (2)   Fire fighters: $20 per hour.



      (3)   Use of fire apparatus: $100 per hour.



   B.   The within fee schedule may be amended and/or supplemented by
resolution of the Mayor and Council on an annual basis.



§ 162-5. Hearing upon reasonableness of assessment.



   Upon assessment of cleanup and removal costs, the person assessed may,
within 10 days of receipt of such notice of assessment, make a written
request for a hearing before the Township Committee. The hearing shall deal
exclusively with the reasonableness of the amount assessed. Liability will
not be an issue.



§ 162-6. Liability of attorney's fees and collection costs.



   The person responsible for the discharge shall be liable for all
reasonable attorney's fees and costs incurred in the collection of cleanup
and removal cost due to failure of the responsible person to remit payment as
required herein.



CHAPTER 165.
HOUSING STANDARDS



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton
12-13-1982 by Ord. No. 20-1982. Amendments noted where applicable.]



   § 165-1.   Construction Code Official designated.



   § 165-2.   Determination that dwellings are unfit for habitation.



   § 165-3.   Adoption of standards.



   § 165-4.   Procedure for complaints.



   § 165-5.   Order to repair; removal or demolition by town.



   § 165-6.   Service of complaints or orders.



   § 165-7.   Powers and duties of Construction Code Official.



   § 165-8.   Construal of provisions.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Fair-share housing obligation — See Ch. 3, Art. II.



   Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 115.



   Property maintenance — See Ch. 211.



   Rent control — See Ch. 217.



§ 165-1. Construction Code Official designated.



   The Construction Code Official of the Town of Hammonton be and is
hereby designated as the officer to exercise the powers prescribed by this
chapter and shall serve in such capacity without any additional salary.



§ 165-2. Determination that dwellings are unfit for habitation.



Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I). For the purpose of this chapter, the Construction Code
Official may determine that a dwelling is unfit for human habitation if
he/she finds that conditions exist in such dwelling which are dangerous or
injurious to the health or safety of the occupants of such dwelling, the
occupants of neighboring dwellings or other residents of the Town of
Hammonton. Such conditions may include the following, without limiting the
generality of the foregoing: defects therein increasing the hazards of fire,
accident or other calamities; lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary
facilities; and dilapidation, disrepair, structural defects or uncleanliness;
failure to comply with the requirements of the Building Code or the
certificate of occupancy.



§ 165-3. Adoption of standards.



Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I). Pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1946, c. 21,
(N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1 et seq.), N.J.A.C. 5:28-1.1 et seq. is hereby accepted,
adopted and established as a standard to be used as a guide in determining
the fitness of a building for human habitation or occupancy or use. A copy of
N.J.A.C. 5:28-1.1 et seq. is annexed to this chapter, and three copies of the
same have been placed on file in the office of the Town Clerk/Administrator
and are available to all persons desiring to use and examine the same.



§ 165-4. Procedure for complaints.



Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I). Whenever a petition is filed with the Construction Code
Official by a public authority as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.4 or by at
least five residents of the municipality charging that any dwelling is unfit
for human habitation as herein defined or whenever it appears to the
Construction Code Official, on his/her own motion, that any dwelling is unfit
for human habitation, as herein defined, the Construction Official shall, if
preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause
to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest in such dwelling a
complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a
hearing will be held before the Construction Code Official or designated
agent at a place therein fixed and not less than seven days nor more than 30
days after the serving of said complaint, that the owner and parties in
interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to
appear in person or otherwise and give testimony at the time and place fixed
in the complaints and that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law
or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the Construction Code
Official.



§ 165-5. Order to repair; removal or demolition by town.



   If after such notice and hearing the Construction Code Official
determines that the dwelling under consideration is unfit for human
habitation, as herein defined, he/she shall state in writing the findings of
fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served
upon the owner thereof and parties in interest an order requiring:



   A.   The repair, alteration or improvement of the said building to
be made by the owner, within a reasonable time, which shall be set forth in
the order or at the option of the owner to vacate or to have said building
vacated and closed within the time set forth in the order.



   B.   If the building is in such condition as to make it dangerous to
the health and safety of persons on or near the premises and the owner fails
to repair, alter or improve the said building within the time specified in
the order, that the owner remove or demolish the said building within a
reasonable time as specified in the said order of removal.



   C.   That if the owner fails to comply with an order to repair,
alter or improve or, at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the
building, the Construction Code Official may cause such building to be
repaired, altered or improved or to be vacated and closed; that the
Construction Code Official may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any
building so closed a placard with the following words: "This building is
unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use; the use or occupation of this
building is prohibited and unlawful."



   D.   That if the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or
demolish the building, the Construction Code Official may cause such building
to be removed or demolished or may contract for the removal or demolition
thereof after advertisement for and receipt of bids therefor.



   E.   That the amount of the cost of the filing of legal papers,
expert witnesses' fees, search fees and advertising charges incurred in the
course of any proceeding taken under this chapter determined in the favor of
the municipality and the cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements or
of vacating and closing or of removal or demolition, if any, or the amount of
the balance thereof remaining after deduction of the sum, if any realized
from the sale of materials derived from such building or from any contract
for removal or demolition thereof, shall be a municipal lien against the real
property upon which such cost was incurred. If the building is removed or
demolished by the Construction Code Official, he/she shall sell the materials
of such building. There shall be credited against the cost of the removal or
demolition thereof the proceeds of any sale of such materials or any sum
derived from any contract for the removal or demolition of the building. If
there are no such credits or if the sum total of such costs exceeds the total
of such credits, a detailed statement of the aforesaid costs and the amount
so due shall be filed with the Municipal Tax Assessor or other custodian of
the records of tax liens, and a copy thereof, shall be forthwith forwarded to
the owner by certified mail. If the total of the credits exceed such costs,
the balance remaining shall be deposited in the Superior Court by the
Construction Code Official, shall be secured in such manner as may be
directed by such court and shall be disbursed according to the order or
judgment of the court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final
order or judgment of such court; provided, however, that nothing in this
section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the
municipality to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or
abatement, by summary proceedings or otherwise. Any owner or party in
interest may, within 30 days from the date of the filing of the lien
certificate, proceed in a summary manner in the Superior Court to contest the
reasonableness of the amount or the accuracy of the costs set forth in the
municipal lien certificate. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).



§ 165-6. Service of complaints or orders.



   Complaints or orders issued by the Construction Code Official pursuant
to this chapter shall be served upon persons either personally or by
certified mail, but if the whereabouts of such persons is unknown and the
same cannot be ascertained by said Construction Code Official in the exercise
of reasonable diligence and the said Construction Code Official shall make an
affidavit to that effect, then the serving of such complaint or order upon
such persons may be made by publishing the same once each week for two
successive weeks in a newspaper circulating in the Town of Hammonton. A copy
of such complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the
premises affected by the complaint or order, and a copy of such complaint or
order shall be duly recorded or lodged for record with the county recording
officer of the county in which the dwelling is located.



§ 165-7. Powers and duties of Construction Code Official.



   The Construction Code Official is hereby authorized and empowered to
exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and
effectuate the purposes and provisions of this chapter, including the
following, in addition to others herein granted:



   A.   To investigate the dwelling conditions in the Town of Hammonton
in order to determine which dwellings therein are unfit for human habitation.



   B.   To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and
receive evidence.



   C.   To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examination,
provided that such entries shall be made in such a manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.



   D.   To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and
employees as he/she deems necessary to carry out the purpose of this chapter.



   E.   To delegate any of his/her functions and powers under this
chapter to such officers and agents as he/she may designate.



§ 165-8. Construal of provisions.



   A.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to abrogate or
impair the power of the municipality or any officer or department to enforce
any provisions of its Charter or its ordinances or regulations, nor to
prevent or punish violations thereof, and the powers conferred by this
chapter shall be in addition and supplemental to the powers conferred upon
the city by any other law or ordinance.



   B.   Any action taken using revenues derived from the local property
tax shall be taken only after advertisement for, and receipt of, bids
therefor, pursuant to the provisions of the Local Public Contracts Law
(N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.) unless the action is necessary to prevent
imminent danger to life, limb or property. Editor's Note: Added at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).



CHAPTER 168.
INSURANCE



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton as
indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]



ARTICLE I.
Fire Insurance Claims



   § 168-1.   Payment to claimant prohibited until charges due paid.



   § 168-2.   Payment of liens by insurance company required; appeal.



   § 168-3.   Payment by installments; payment to insured by insurance
company.



   § 168-4.   Prevalence of claim; exception.



   § 168-5.   Construal of provisions.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Fire prevention — See Ch. 144.



Article I.
Fire Insurance Claims



[Adopted 6-25-1979 by Ord. No. 7-1979]



§ 168-1. Payment to claimant prohibited until charges due paid.



Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I). It is determined that the payment to a claimant by any
insurance company of any claim in excess of $2,500 is prohibited for fire
damages on any real property located within the municipality pursuant to any
fire insurance policy issued or renewed after the adoption of this article
and after the filing of this article with the State Commissioner of
Insurance. Payment shall be prohibited until such time as anticipated
demolition costs and all taxes and assessments and all other municipal liens
or charges due and payable, appearing on the official certificate of search,
shall have been paid either by the owner of such real property or by the
insurance company, pursuant to the provisions of § 168-2 of this article, or
the municipality submits to the insurance company a copy of a resolution
adopted pursuant to § 168-3 of this article. No change in such an ordinance
shall take effect until filed with the Commissioner.



§ 168-2. Payment of liens by insurance company required; appeal.



Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I). Unless a resolution is received pursuant to § 168-3 of
this article by an insurance company writing fire insurance policies in the
Town of Hammonton, such insurance company is hereby authorized and required,
prior to the payment of any claims for fire damages in excess of $2,500, to
pay the Town of Hammonton the amount of anticipated demolition costs and the
liens appearing on the official certificate and such other recorded liens or
related charges as may be certified to the insurance company; provided,
however, that if an appeal is taken on the amount of any lien or charge,
other than an appeal on the assessed valuation of real property pursuant to
N.J.R.S. 54:3-21, the insurance company shall withhold 75% of the full amount
of the lien or charge being contested pending termination of all proceedings,
at which time such moneys and all interest accruing thereon at a rate paid on
interest bearing accounts in banking institutions or savings and loan
associations in the state shall be disbursed in accordance with the final
order or judgment of the court.



§ 168-3. Payment by installments; payment to insured by insurance company.



   The governing body of the Town of Hammonton, in which the fire-damaged
property is located, may enter into agreement with the owner of any
fire-damaged property to pay in full all delinquent taxes, assessments or
other municipal liens by installments pursuant to N.J.R.S. 54:5-19 or for the
redemption of the tax sale lien by installment payments pursuant to Article 7
of Chapter 5 of Title 54 of the Revised Statutes, if the governing body of
the Town of Hammonton is satisfied that the claim for fire damages is to be
used to restore or improve the fire-damaged property. An insurance company
receiving a certified copy of a resolution of agreement from the governing
body of the Town of Hammonton is authorized to make full payment on the claim
to the insured person.



§ 168-4. Prevalence of claim; exception.



   A claim made in accordance with the provisions of this article shall be
paramount to any other, except that the claim of a holder of a mortgage on
the fire-damaged property, where the fire insurance policy at the time of the
loss listed the mortgagee as a named insured, in which event the claim of the
mortgagee to the proceeds shall be paramount to the municipal lien under this
act only to the extent of the amount due and payable to the mortgagee under
the mortgage contract.



§ 168-5. Construal of provisions.



   Nothing in this article shall be construed:



   A.   To obligate an insurance company for any amount in excess of
the value of the fire insurance policy on the property or the amount of the
liability of the insurance company there under;



   B.   Except as provided in the case of appeals under § 168-2 of
this article, to obligate the insurance company for any liens not appearing
on the official certificate or any certified changes submitted by the bonded
official;



   C.   To affect the authority of the Town of Hammonton to enforce a
municipal lien under any other law of this state; or



   D.   To obligate an insurance company for the payment of demolition
costs or anticipated costs, as the case may be, if those costs did not appear
on an official certificate or a certified change submitted by the bonded
official. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I).



CHAPTER 170
CONTROL OF THE GROWTH OF INVASIVE PLANT SPECIES



   § 170-1.   Definition of invasive plants.



   § 170-2.   Control of growth.



   § 170-3.   Inspections.



   § 170-4.   Violations and penalties.



[HISTORY:  Adopted 9-23-2013 by Ord. No. 020-2013]



§ 170-1.   Definition of invasive plants.



   All native and non-native vines and vegetation that grow out of place
and are competitive, persistent, and pernicious.  These plants may damage
trees, vegetation, or structures.  Examples include but are not limited to
bamboo (spreading or running type), ragweed, multi flora rose, kudzu-vine and
poison ivy or oak as well as the invasive plants species lists developed by
the New Jersey Species Strike Team and the New Jersey Forestry Association.



§ 170-2.   Control of growth.



   All persons must control the growth of invasive plants.  Failure to
control the spread of such vegetation beyond the boundaries of a resident's
property is a violation of this chapter.



§ 170-3.   Inspections.



   All places and premises in the Town of Hammonton shall be subject to
inspection by the enforcing officer.  Such inspections shall be performed by
such person, persons or agency duly authorized and appointed by the Town of
Hammonton.  Such inspection shall be made if that official has reason to
believe that any section of this chapter is being violated.



§ 170-4.   Violations and penalties.



   Whenever an invasive plant, as defined by this chapter, is found on any
plot of land, lot or any other premises or place, a violation notice shall be
given to the owner, in writing, to remove or abate the same within such time
as shall be specified therein, taking into account the nature of the specific
invasive species.



   The cost of abatement shall be borne by the property owner.



   If the owner fails to comply with such notice within the time specified
therein, the enforcing official may remove or otherwise control the invasive
plant species and the town may thereafter recover the cost of such removal
from the property owner and place a lien on the property to recover the cost
of invasive plant removal.



CHAPTER 172.
JUNKYARDS



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton
9-13-1971 by Ord. No. 10-1971 as Ch. 108 of the 1971 Code. Amendments noted
where applicable.]



   § 172-1.   Definitions.



   § 172-2.   Approval of use by Board of Adjustment.



   § 172-3.   (Reserved)



   § 172-4.   Regulations.



   § 172-5.   Renewal of licenses; hearing.



   § 172-6.   Suspension and revocation of license; hearing.



   § 172-7.   Violations and penalties.



   § 172-8.   Location restriction.



   § 172-9.   Inspection; administration.



   § 172-10.   Refund of fees.



   § 172-11.   Alternate violations and penalties.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Business registration — See Ch. 109.



   Fences — See Ch. 137.



   Land development — See Ch. 175.



§ 172-1. Definitions.



   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:



   JUNKYARD



   A place where old metal or material of any kind, including, but not by
way of excluding, disabled vehicles not held for sale in parts or as junk
metal or materials, paper, glass, rags, bags or other old materials, is
collected, bought, sold, stored or dealt in.



   PERSON



   Includes partnerships and corporations; the masculine gender shall
include the feminine and the neuter genders; and the single number shall
include the plural number.



§ 172-2. Approval of use by Board of Adjustment.



   No junkyard shall henceforth be established on any premises unless and
until approval for such use is obtained from the Board of Adjustment pursuant
to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70. The Board of Adjustment, in its
review, shall request an opinion from the Planning Board as to the
relationship of the proposed use to surrounding uses and the effect such
proposed use may have on any adopted plans of the Planning Board of any
long-range goals established by the Planning Board, and shall consider such
items as the location of the proposed facility, size of operation, setbacks,
fences, buffer areas, noise, fire hazards and drainage. No such facility
shall be permitted to be established on a lot containing less than three
acres. Such facility shall be set back from all property lines at least 35
feet; shall have a solid fence on all sides with a minimum height of 10 feet;
and shall include plans for access to the site by at least one fifteen-foot
driveway. In no case shall any junkyard be permitted to be established or
maintained in any area within the limits of the Town of Hammonton other than
within an industrial zone as classified by Chapter 175, Land Development.



§ 172-3. (Reserved)



Editor's Note: Former § 172-3, Application for license; fee; expiration, was
repealed 6-26-2006 by Ord. No. 10-2006. See Ch. 109, Business Registration.



§ 172-4. Regulations.



   All licensed junkyards shall comply with the following regulations:



   A.   No car or part of a car shall be kept, stored or stacked in
such a manner that rainwater would collect and remain in any of the parts
thereof for a period longer than 48 hours.



   B.   It shall be unlawful to stack, pile or place motor vehicles,
parts of motor vehicles or other junk or materials upon such premises in such
a manner as to create a place for the harboring or breeding of mice, rats or
other vermin, or to stack, pile or place junk above the height of the
boundary fence surrounding the premises.



   C.   All yards or places where such business is or shall be
conducted shall be enclosed by a fence at least 10 feet high and of a type
and construction as shall be approved by the Building Inspector of the Town
of Hammonton. Editor's Note: See Ch. 137, Fences.



   D.   It shall be unlawful to burn any automobile or automobile parts
or other junk or materials on the premises without application first being
made to the Fire Chief of the Town of Hammonton, who shall, in writing,
approve or disapprove said application, and if approved, shall designate the
time for such burning, which shall be under the Chief's supervision, provided
that such burning is not otherwise prohibited by any statutes of the State of
New Jersey.



   E.   It shall be unlawful to hammer or pound any metal or other
materials on said premises between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. from
Monday to Saturday, inclusive, or at any time on Sundays.



   F.   Any inoperable vehicle stored in a licensed junkyard shall have
all gasoline removed from said vehicle within one hour after said vehicle is
so stored.



   G.   No license issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall
be assigned or transferred without the prior approval of the Council of the
Town of Hammonton. Any application for transfer of a junkyard license secured
pursuant to this chapter to a new applicant shall be considered for all
purposes in the same manner as a new application for said license.



§ 172-5. Renewal of licenses; hearing.



   A.   The Town of Hammonton, by issuing said license, reserves unto
itself the right to refuse the renewal of any existing license upon a finding
by the Mayor and Council that the operation of said junkyard at the premises
used for said purpose is detrimental to the health, safety and general
welfare of the public. The granting of a license under this chapter shall not
be construed for any purpose a permission to the licensee to maintain any
condition which would constitute a public or private nuisance.



   B.   Should the town determine on the hearing of the application for
renewal of the existing license that there is probable cause for refusing to
renew said license, the Town Clerk/Administrator is to immediately notify the
applicant that the Town of Hammonton will hold a hearing on whether or not
said license should be renewed. Said notification should inform the applicant
of the time and date and the place of the hearing, which hearing shall be
held within not less than seven nor more than 14 days from the date of
service of said notice. The applicant shall then have an opportunity to be
heard on the issue of whether or not said license should be renewed.



   C.   The Town Clerk/Administrator shall also notify all property
owners within 1,000 feet of the subject junkyard of the time and place and
date of said hearing.



   D.   All of the said notices shall be sent certified mail, return
receipt requested.



§ 172-6. Suspension and revocation of license; hearing.



   A.   Upon any violation of the provisions of this chapter by a
licensee, the Town of Hammonton shall have the right to serve on said
licensee a notice that a hearing will be held by the Mayor and Common Council
of the Town of Hammonton for the purpose of determining whether or not the
licensee's junkyard license should not be revoked. Said notice shall set
forth the particular violations complained of and shall set a date for the
hearing, not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days after the service of
said notice of hearing.



   B.   The Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton shall
have the right to revoke or suspend the license of any licensee after the
hearing as set forth above should it find the licensee guilty of having
committed any or all of the violations complained of.



§ 172-7. Violations and penalties.



   Any person who, by himself/herself or by his/her agent, servant,
Clerk/Administrator or employee, shall establish, operate and maintain a
junkyard, as herein defined, without a license as required by this chapter,
or who, having had the license revoked, shall continue to establish or
operate or maintain a junkyard upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to
one or more of the following: a fine of not more than $1,000, imprisonment
for a period not to exceed 90 days or a period of community service not to
exceed 90 days, in the discretion of the Municipal Judge before whom said
person is convicted.



§ 172-8. Location restriction.



   No license issued hereunder shall entitle such licensee to operate
there under at any premises or location other than the location or premises
specified in said license.



§ 172-9. Inspection; administration.



   All licensed premises shall at all time be subject to such rules and
regulations as may hereafter be made by the Mayor and Council of the Town of
Hammonton, and shall be subject to inspection by the Building Inspector or
any of his, her or their agents. The Building Inspector of the Town of
Hammonton shall have the responsibility of administering this chapter and
making all complaints under this chapter.



§ 172-10. Refund of fees.



   There shall be no refund to a licensee of any of the license fees upon
either the surrender or the revocation of a license granted hereunder.



§ 172-11. Alternate violations and penalties.



   All penalties imposed under this chapter for violations thereof shall
be independent of one another, and the Town of Hammonton shall have the
option of whether to prosecute a violator in the Hammonton Municipal Court
under § 172-7 of this chapter or whether to move for revocation of the
licensee's license, if such he/she has, under § 172-6, or both. The invoking
of sanctions under § 172-6, or criminal penalties under § 172-7, shall not
be a bar to a subsequent proceeding under either section.



CHAPTER 180.
LAUNDERETTES



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton
9-13-1971 by Ord. No. 10-1971 as Ch. 112 of the 1971 Code. Amendments noted
where applicable.]



   § 180-1.   Definitions.



   § 180-2.   (Reserved)



   § 180-3.   Condition of premises; manner of operation.



   § 180-4.   Noise.



   § 180-5.   Inspections by Board of Health.



   § 180-6.   Suspension or revocation of license.



   § 180-7.   Violations and penalties.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Business registration — See Ch. 109.



   Sewer connection fees — See Ch. 226, § 226-2.



   Laundry facilities in trailer parks — See Ch. 264.



   Water connection fees — See Ch. 264, § 264-23.



§ 180-1. Definitions.



   The following words, when used in this chapter, shall have the
following meaning:



   LAUNDERETTE



   An establishment or place of business conducted for the purpose of
washing, cleaning, drying and laundering clothes and other washable materials
that may be brought to said establishment or place of business by customers
and wherein the work is done in machines, coin-operated or otherwise, located
on the premises, by the customers themselves or by or under the supervision
of the owners or operators of said establishment or place of business for
said customers, and shall include a Laundromat, wash-o-mat and similar names
and types under which laundering of the self-service type is carried on.



   PERSON



   Includes a corporation, association, organization, firm and partnership
as well as an individual.



§ 180-2. (Reserved)



Editor's Note: Former § 180-2, License required; application; expiration;
fee, was repealed 6-26-2006 by Ord. No. 11-2006. See Ch. 109, Business
Registration.



§ 180-3. Condition of premises; manner of operation.



   The entire premises devoted to the operation of the launderette and all
machines used in connection therewith shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition. The floor shall be kept clean and dry. The premises shall be
adequately ventilated and provided with sufficient natural or artificial
light. The walls of said premises shall be covered with nonabsorbent paint,
cement or other impervious materials. All plumbing work shall at all times
conform to the provisions of the Plumbing Code Editor's Note: See Ch. 115,
Construction Codes, Uniform. of the town and shall always be kept in a good
condition and state of repair. Each launderette shall furnish to the public
or its customers suitable rest rooms and sanitary facilities so as to prevent
nuisances and unsanitary conditions which are detrimental to the health,
welfare and safety of the public. Said launderette shall be operated in such
a manner as to always comply in all respects with the requirements and
regulations of the Fire Department, Board of Health, Building Code, Plumbing
Code and Zoning Ordinance of the town.



§ 180-4. Noise.



   No machinery used in the operation of a launderette shall be operated
in such manner as to cause unnecessary or unreasonable noise or vibration to
the annoyance of residents in the surrounding neighborhood or to the
detriment of the well-being of the neighborhood or to buildings and premises
in the neighborhood.



§ 180-5. Inspections by Board of Health.



   The Board of Health of the town shall, at least once a month, check
each licensed premises to see that the business is being conducted and
operated within the provisions of this chapter. The Board may make more
frequent inspections in its discretion.



§ 180-6. Suspension or revocation of license.



   Licenses granted hereunder may be suspended or revoked at any time by
the Common Council upon conviction of the holder thereof of a violation of
any provisions of this chapter.



§ 180-7. Violations and penalties.



   Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to one or more of the
following: a fine of not more than $1,000, imprisonment for a period not to
exceed 90 days or a period of community service not to exceed 90 days, at the
discretion of the Judge. Each succeeding violation shall be construed to be a
new violation.



CHAPTER 182.
(RESERVED)



[Former Ch. 182, Licensing of Businesses, adopted 1-27-2003 by Ord. No.
2-2003, was repealed 2-23-2004 by Ord. No. 1-2004. See now Ch. 109, Business
Registration.]



CHAPTER 184.
LITTERING



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton as
indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]



ARTICLE I.
Depositing of Litter and Handbills



   § 184-1.   Word usage and definitions.



   § 184-2.   Littering prohibited; use of receptacles.



   § 184-3.   Use of town landfill.



   § 184-4.   Business owners to keep premises free of litter.



   § 184-5.   Littering in bodies of water.



   § 184-6.   Dropping litter from aircraft.



   § 184-7.   Litter on private property; maintenance of receptacles.



   § 184-8.   Responsibility of property owner.



   § 184-9.   Littering on vacant lots.



   § 184-10.   Removal of litter from private property by town.



   § 184-11.   Litter in commercial and industrial places.



   § 184-12.   Litter from pets.



   § 184-13.   Distribution of handbills in public places.



   § 184-14.   Placing handbills on vehicles.



   § 184-15.   Depositing handbills on vacant private premises.



   § 184-16.   Distribution of handbills prohibited where posted.



   § 184-17.   Distributing handbills on inhabited private premises.



   § 184-18.   Posting notices in certain public places.



   § 184-19.   Presumption of violation; issuance of summons;
continuing responsibility; exceptions.



   § 184-20.   Violations and penalties.



ARTICLE II.
Clean Communities Program



   § 184-21.   Definitions.



   § 184-22.   Litter receptacles and servicing required.



   § 184-23.   Prohibited acts.



   § 184-24.   Violations and penalties.



   § 184-25.   Enforcement.



   § 184-26.   Scope.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Deposit of dog excrement — See Ch. 82, § 82-21.



   Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 200, 200-4A.



   Property maintenance — See Ch. 211.



   Abandoned refrigerators — See Ch. 214.



   Solid waste — See Ch. 241.



Article I.
Depositing of Litter and Handbills



[Adopted 10-12-1987 by Ord. No. 11-1987]



§ 184-1. Word usage and definitions.



   A.   Word usage. When not inconsistent with the context, words used
in the present tense in this chapter include the future, words used in the
plural number include the singular number, and words used in the singular
number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and
not merely directory.



   B.   Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:



   AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE



   A litter storage and collection receptacle.



   COMMERCIAL HANDBILL



   Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular,
leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise
reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature which:



      (1)   Advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity
or thing.



      (2)   Directs attention to any business or mercantile or
commercial establishment or other activity for the purpose of either directly
or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales.



      (3)   Directs attention to or advertises any meeting,
theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind for which an
admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit.



      (4)   While containing reading matter other than advertising
matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is distributed
or circulated for advertising purpose or for the private benefit and gain of
any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.



   GARBAGE



   Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.



   LITTER



   Garbage, refuse and rubbish, as defined herein, and all other waste
material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create
a danger to public health, safety and welfare.



   NEWSPAPER



   Any newspaper of general circulation, as defined by general law, any
newspaper duly entered with the United States Postal Service in accordance
with federal statute or regulation and any newspaper filed and recorded with
any recording officer as provided by general law. In addition thereto,
"newspaper" shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine
regularly published with not less than four issues per year and sold to the
public. The term "newspaper" shall not include publications delivered free of
charge, not at the request of the property owner, which consist primarily of
advertising material. Such publications are, for the purpose of this article,
to be considered commercial handbills.



   NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL



   Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular,
leaflet, pamphlet newspaper, magazine, paper booklet or any other printed or
otherwise reproduced original copies of any matter of literature not included
in the aforesaid definitions of a commercial handbill or newspaper.



   PARK



   A park, reservation, playground, recreation center or any other public
area in the town, owned or used by the town and devoted to active or passive
recreation.



   PERSON



   Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.



   PRINCIPAL ADVERTISER



   In a commercial handbill, the person, firm or corporation whose
advertising message occupies a substantial amount of the advertising space in
the handbill, such that it appears to be the sponsor of the handbill.



   PRIVATE PREMISES



   Any dwelling house, building or other structure designed or used,
either wholly or in part, for private residential purposes, whether
uninhabited or temporarily or continuously inhabited or vacant, including but
not limited to any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or
mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other
structure.



   PUBLIC PLACE



   Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public
ways, paved or unpaved, and any and all public parks, squares, spaces,
grounds and buildings.



   REFUSE



   All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, except body wastes,
including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned
automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes.



   RUBBISH



   Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin
cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.



   TOWN



   The Town of Hammonton.



   VEHICLE



   Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon
stationary rails or tracks.



§ 184-2. Littering prohibited; use of receptacles.



   No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk
or other public place within the town except in public receptacles for
collection. Editor's Note: Former § 114-3, Placement of litter in
receptacles; § 114-6, Throwing litter from vehicles; and § 114-7, Litter
caused by uncovered vehicle, which followed this section, were deleted at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).



§ 184-3. Use of town landfill.



   No person shall throw or deposit litter in, at or about the town
landfill except within the confines of said landfill or at a location
specified herein, if a town employee is present and specifies a location, nor
shall any person throw or deposit litter at said landfill or attempt to do
so, except during the hours permitted, as established by the Sanitary
Landfill Supervisor or his/her designee in the Department of Public Works.



§ 184-4. Business owners to keep premises free of litter.



   No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the town the
accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private
sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business within
the town shall keep their business premises free of litter.



§ 184-5. Littering in bodies of water.



   No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, stream
or any other body of water within the town.



§ 184-6. Dropping litter from aircraft.



   No person, in any aircraft, shall throw out, drop or deposit within the
town any litter, handbill or any other object.



§ 184-7. Litter on private property; maintenance of receptacles.



   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied or unoccupied
private property within the town, whether owned by such person or not, except
that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain
authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter
will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any
street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property.



§ 184-8. Responsibility of property owner.



   The owner or person in control of any property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this section
shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles
for collection.



§ 184-9. Littering on vacant lots.



   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the town, whether owned by such person or not.



§ 184-10. Removal of litter from private property by town.



   A.   Notice to remove. The Code Enforcement Officer or his/her duly
designated agent is authorized and empowered to notify the owner of any
private premise or vacant land, or the tenant or agent of such owner, to
dispose properly of litter located on such owner's property which is
dangerous to public health, safety or welfare. Notice shall be by registered
or certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to said property owner
or his/her agent or tenant at his/her last known address or served personally
upon said owner, tenant or agent.



   B.   Action upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal
of any owner, tenant or agent so notified to dispose properly of said litter
within 10 days after receipt of written notice specified in Subsection A of
this section, or within 10 days after the date of such notice in the event
that it is returned to the town by the United States Postal Service because
of inability to make delivery thereof, provided that the notice was properly
addressed to the last known address of the owner, tenant or agent, the Code
Enforcement Officer or his/her duly designated agent is authorized and
empowered to pay for disposing of such litter or to order its disposal by the
town.



   C.   When the town has effected the removal of dangerous litter or
has paid for its removal, the actual cost thereof shall, unless paid by the
owner prior thereto, be charged to the owner of the property on the next
regular tax bill forwarded to the owner by the town. The charge shall be due
and payable by the owner at the time set for payment of the tax bill.



   D.   Where the full amount due the town is not paid by the owner
within 30 days after the disposal of such litter as specified in Subsections
A and B of this section, then, and in that case, the Code Enforcement Officer
shall certify the cost thereof to the Town Council, which shall examine the
certificate and, if found to be correct, shall cause the cost as shown
thereon to be charged against said lands. The amount so charged shall
constitute a lien on the property and shall remain in full force and effect
for the amount due in principal and interest, plus costs of court, if any,
for collection, until final payment has been made. Said costs and expenses
shall be collected in the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes and
shall be subject to a delinquent penalty at the same rate as in the case of
taxes in the event that they are not paid in full on or before the date the
tax bill upon which the charge appears becomes delinquent. The certification
of the Code Enforcement Officer in accordance with the provisions hereof
shall be prima facie evidence that all legal formalities have been complied
with and that the work has been done properly and satisfactorily and shall be
full notice to every person concerned that the amount of the statement, plus
interest, constitutes a charge against the property designated or described
in the statement and that the same is due and collectible as provided by law.



§ 184-11. Litter in commercial and industrial places.



   No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any commercial or
industrial place except in approved receptacles. Persons owning or in control
of commercial or industrial places must provide receptacles for litter of
sufficient size to be adequate for the area. Owners or tenants are completely
responsible for the policing of the premises. Upon complaint of any citizen
or town official of trash or litter, if it can be determined from which store
or place of business the trash originated, the owner(s) or tenant(s) will be
held responsible.



§ 184-12. Litter from pets.



   The owner of any animal that violates this article shall be subject to
the same penalty as provided for violations generally.



§ 184-13. Distribution of handbills in public places.



   No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the
town, nor shall any person hand out, distribute or sell any commercial
handbill in any public place; provided, however, that it shall not be
unlawful for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the
receiver thereof, any noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept
it.



§ 184-14. Placing handbills on vehicles.



   No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any vehicle; provided, however, that it shall not be
unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute, without
charge to the receiver thereof, a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of a
vehicle who is willing to accept it.



§ 184-15. Depositing handbills on vacant private premises.



   No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or
continuously uninhabited or vacant.



§ 184-16. Distribution of handbills prohibited where posted.



   No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill upon any private premises if requested by anyone
thereon not to do so or if there is placed on said premises in a conspicuous
position near the entrance thereof a sign bearing the words "No Trespassing,"
"No Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertisement" or any similar notice, indicating
in any manner that the occupants of said premises do not desire to be
molested or have their rights of privacy disturbed or to have any such
handbills left upon such premises.



§ 184-17. Distributing handbills on inhabited private premises.



   A.   No person shall throw, deposit or distribute or cause to be
thrown, deposited or distributed any commercial or noncommercial handbill in
or upon private premises which are inhabited if the owner of said premises
has either posted said premises as specified in § 184-16 or notified the
publisher or distributor of said handbill, by certified mail, return receipt
requested, that no handbills are to be delivered to said premises. In the
case of premises which are not posted and for which no notice has been sent,
a person may place or deposit handbills thereupon, being careful to secure
the same and prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such
premises or sidewalks or streets or other public places; mailboxes may not be
so used when so prohibited by federal postal law or regulations.



   B.   Exemption for mail and newspapers. The provisions of § §
184-16 and 184-17A shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United
States, nor to newspapers, as defined herein, except that newspapers shall be
placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried
or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place
or upon private property.



   C.   The provisions of §§ 184-16 and 184-17A shall not apply to
the distribution of any noncommercial handbill, the entire content of which
consists of solely religious written matter.



§ 184-18. Posting notices in certain public places.



   No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or
device calculated to attract the attention of the public to any lamppost,
public utility pole or shade tree or upon any public structure or building,
except as may be authorized or required by law.



§ 184-19. Presumption of violation; issuance of summons; continuing
responsibility; exceptions.



   A.   There shall be a rebut table presumption that an owner or
person in control of any private property has violated this article and
failed to keep and maintain the premises free of litter, as the term is used
in this article, if the litter, as defined herein, remains on the property
and is not removed for a period in excess of 24 hours.



   B.   No notice or warning by or to any person is required prior to
the issuance of a summons or complaint for any violation of this article;
however, nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent the issuance of said
notice or warning permitting a reasonable time period for the removal of
litter prior to the issuance of said summons or complaint.



   C.   The fact of the charging or conviction of any person for the
throwing or depositing of litter in violation of this article shall not
relieve the owner or person in control of any private property of the
responsibility to keep and maintain the property free of litter in accordance
with the provisions of this article.



   D.   The provisions of this article shall not apply to the offices
and employees of the Town Department of Public Works in the exercise of their
trash collection activities; nor shall the provisions hereof apply to the
deposit and maintenance of litter in a location, suitably enclosed in a
secured trash dumpster, trash can or trash bag, along the street line,
suitable for town or other authorized trash collection, for a period not to
exceed one day.



§ 184-20. Violations and penalties.



   Any person, firm, corporation or other entity convicted of a violation
of this article, or any section hereof, shall be subject to one or more of
the following: a fine of not more than $1,000, imprisonment for a period not
to exceed 90 days or a period of community service not to exceed 90 days. In
addition, any person, firm, corporation or other entity convicted of a
violation of this article shall pay all expenses incurred for the removal of
said litter. Each day that any violation hereunder shall continue shall be
deemed a separate offense or violation.



Article II.
Clean Communities Program



[Adopted 2-26-1990 by Ord. No. 3-1990; amended in its entirety 3-26-1990 by
Ord. No. 10-1990]



§ 184-21. Definitions.



   For the purposes and use in this article, the following term, phrases,
words and their deviations shall have the meanings given herein:



   LITTER



   Any used or consumed substance or waste material measuring less than
one cubic foot which has been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass,
plastic, rubber, paper or other natural or synthetic material, or any
combination thereof, including but not limited to any bottle, jar or can or
any top, cap or detachable tab of any bottle, jar or can, any lighted or
unlighted cigarette, cigar, match or any flaming or glowing material or any
garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or
garden waste, newspaper, magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers
or other packaging or construction material, but does not include the waste
of the primary processes of mining or other extraction processes, logging,
sawmilling, farming, or manufacturing.



   LITTER RECEPTACLE



   A container suitable for the depositing of litter.



   SOLID WASTE



   Garbage, refuse and other discarded materials resulting from
industrial, commercial and agricultural operations, and from domestic and
community activities, and shall include all other waste materials, including
liquids, except for liquids which are treated in the public sewage treatment
plants and except for solid animal and vegetable wastes collected by swine
producers licensed by the State Department of Agriculture to collect, prepare
and feed such wastes to swine on their own farms.



   TOWN PROPERTY



   Any land, water or building owned by and controlled or leased, occupied
and controlled by the Town of Hammonton, including any land or water used for
recreation or conservation purposes and any street, road, highway, alley,
sidewalk or other right-of-way.



§ 184-22. Litter receptacles and servicing required.



   Litter receptacles and their servicing are required at the following
public places which exist in the Town of Hammonton, including sidewalks used
by pedestrians in active retail commercially zoned areas, such that at a
minimum there shall be no single linear quarter mile without a receptacle;
buildings held out for the use by the public, including schools, government
buildings and railroad and bus stations; parks; drive-in restaurants; all
street vendor locations; self-service refreshment areas; construction sites;
gasoline service station islands; shopping centers; parking lots; campgrounds
and trailer parks; marinas, boat moorage and fueling stations; boat launching
areas; public and private piers operated for public use; beaches and bathing
areas; at special events to which the public is invited, including but not
limited to sporting events, parades, carnivals and circuses, and the event
sponsor shall be responsible for providing and servicing the receptacles such
that adequate containerization is available.



§ 184-23. Prohibited acts.



   A.   Storage of vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any residential
property owner to park or permit the parking of any vehicle on his or her
residential lawn.



   B.   Inoperable vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person to
keep or permit the keeping of on streets, vacant lots and residential lawns,
except in a fully enclosed structure, any motor vehicle, trailer or semi
trailer which is missing tires, wheels, engine or any essential parts; or
which displays extensive body damage or deterioration; or which does not
display a current, valid state license; or which is wrecked, disassembled or
partially disassembled.



   C.   Uncovered vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be
driven, moved, stopped or parked on any highway unless such a vehicle is
constructed or loaded to prevent any of its load from dropping, sifting,
leaking or otherwise escaping there from. Any person operating a vehicle from
which any glass, liquid or objects have fallen or escaped, which could cause
an obstruction, damage a vehicle or otherwise endanger travelers or public
property shall immediately cause the public property to be cleaned of all
glass, liquid or objects and shall pay the costs thereof.



   D.   Littering.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop,
discard or otherwise place any litter upon town property other than in a
litter receptacle.



      (2)   With respect to any litter thrown from a conveyance,
whether in motion or not, when such conveyance is on town property, there
shall be rebut table presumption that the registered owner of the conveyance,
if present in the conveyance, or, in his/her absence, the driver of the
conveyance, is presumed to be responsible for any violation of this section,
if:



         (a)   A bundle, object, article or debris of any nature
is thrown or dropped from the conveyance by the occupant of the conveyance;



         (b)   There are two or more occupants in the conveyance;
and



         (c)   It cannot be determined which occupant of the
conveyance is the violator.



   E.   Illegal dumping. It shall be unlawful for any person to discard
or dump any solid waste in any place not specifically designated and
authorized pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1 et seq. for the purposes of solid
waste collection, storage or disposal.



§ 184-24. Violations and penalties.



   Any person convicted of violating this article shall be subject to one
or more of the following: a fine of not more than $1,000, imprisonment for a
period not to exceed 90 days or a period of community service not to exceed
90 days. If the violation is of a continuing nature, each day during which it
continues constitutes a separate and distinct offense.



§ 184-25. Enforcement.



   This article shall be enforceable by any law enforcement officer and by
any Town of Hammonton Police Special Services Unit officer, including the
Hammonton Fire Marshal.



§ 184-26. Scope.



   Nothing in this article is intended to nor shall be construed to limit
the jurisdiction of the Atlantic County Division of Public Health or the
Department of Environmental Protection to enforce violations of the Solid
Waste Management Act (N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1 et seq.). The County Environmental
Code, nor limit the jurisdiction of law enforcement officials to prosecute
for the violation of statutes not covered by the terms of this article.



CHAPTER 190.
(RESERVED)



[Former Ch. 190, Noise, which consisted of Art. I, Compression Release Engine
Brakes, adopted 7-25-2005 by Ord. No. 28-2005, was repealed 12-19-2005 by
Ord. No. 44-2005.]



CHAPTER 193.
OBSCENITY



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton
10-27-1980 by Ord. No. 21-1980. Amendments noted where applicable.]



   § 193-1.   Distribution or display prohibited.



   § 193-2.   Definitions.



   § 193-3.   Submission of materials to Review Committee; time limit
for decision.



   § 193-4.   Violations and penalties.



   § 193-5.   Interpretation and enforcement.



§ 193-1. Distribution or display prohibited.



   The commercial distribution or commercial display of obscene materials
or acts to anyone, particularly minors and including consenting adults, is
hereby prohibited.



§ 193-2. Definitions.



   As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
indicated:



   COMMERCIAL DISPLAY



   The exhibition of obscene material, which is obscene to the senses of
another person, for valuable consideration, whether the valuable
consideration is paid by the recipient of the exhibition or by another. Where
obscene material is exhibited incident to another commercial transaction, it
is a commercial display, whether or not the parties state that the valuable
consideration is paid in part for the obscene exhibit.



   COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION



   Any transfer or possession, whether temporary or permanent, for any
valuable consideration, whether the valuable consideration is paid by the
recipient of the obscene material or by another. Where obscene material is
transferred incident to another commercial transaction, it is a commercial
distribution, whether or not the parties state that the valuable
consideration is paid in part for the obscene material.



   OBSCENE MATERIALS AND ACTS



   A.   FILMS and MOVING PICTURES — A film or moving picture is
obscene if, when considered as a whole, its calculated purpose or dominate
effect is:



      (1)   Substantially to arouse sexual desires, whether natural
or unnatural, and if the probability of this effect is so great as to
outweigh whatever other merits the film may possess.



      (2)   To portray acts of sexual immorality or lewdness as
profitable, desirable, acceptable or proper behavior.



      (3)   To advocate the illegal use of narcotics or
habit-forming drugs.



   B.   PHOTOGRAPHS, PAINTINGS or ILLUSTRATIONS — A photograph,
painting or illustration is obscene if it portrays human sexual intercourse,
homosexual acts, sadistic sexual acts, sexual acts between man and beast or
human sexual organs. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a photograph, painting or
illustration which portrays human sexual organs is not obscene if it is part
of a medical textbook or it is a work of art, the original or a copy of which
has been displayed by a museum receiving public funds or the subject of which
is the human body as a whole without particular emphasis on its sexual parts
and, if considered as a whole, its calculated purpose or dominate effect is
not to substantially arouse sexual desires, whether natural or unnatural, so
as to outweigh whatever other merits it may possess.



   C.   BOOKS and MAGAZINES — A book or magazine containing
photographs, paintings or illustrations of the type defined as obscene in
Subsection B above is obscene if, considered as a whole, its calculated
purpose or dominate effect is substantially to arouse sexual desires, whether
natural or unnatural, and if the probability of this effect is so great so as
to outweigh whatever other merits it may possess. A book or magazine
containing no photographs, paintings or illustrations shall not be considered
obscene for purposes of this chapter.



   D.   OBJECTS — An object is obscene if it is by itself a
recognizable reproduction of a sexual organ or if some part of it consists of
a recognizable reproduction of sexual organs substantially exaggerated in
size or appearance.



   E.   ACTS — An act is obscene if it involves the naked display of
sexual organs or if it is explicitly suggestive of sexual acts or if it
involves sexual acts.



§ 193-3. Submission of materials to Review Committee; time limit for
decision.



   A.   Any person desiring to make a commercial distribution or
commercial display of obscene materials and/or acts, as hereinabove defined,
or which he/she has reason to believe may be obscene, shall first submit it
for inspection by the Review Committee consisting of the Mayor, a consenting
elected or appointed official of the Town of Hammonton and a consenting
resident of said town who is registered to vote therein, the latter two to be
appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the Town Council without
compensation, which Review Committee shall act by a majority of the members
thereof.



   B.   The applicant shall give the Review Committee written notice of
his/her intention to submit any obscene materials and/or acts for inspection.
Said notice shall be delivered to the Review Committee or to the Town
Clerk/Administrator and shall contain the applicant's name, address within
the municipality and telephone number where he/she can be reached during
normal business hours. Within 48 hours (Saturdays, Sundays and holidays
excepted) of receipt of said notice, the Review Committee shall make itself
available to said applicant during normal business hours for the purpose of
inspecting and/or reviewing the obscene materials and/or potentially obscene
materials and/or acts. The Review Committee shall notify the applicant of the
appointed time, either by telephone or by written notice left at the address
within the municipality stated by the applicant, when said review shall take
place. The failure of the applicant to cooperate in any way in arranging a
time for inspection within said forty-eight-hour period shall not relieve
said applicant of the duty to submit the materials for inspection as soon
thereafter as possible and prior to any commercial distribution or commercial
display. The applicant shall bring said obscene materials and/or acts and/or
potentially obscene materials and/or acts, together with any necessary
projector, screen, operating personnel and/or other required paraphernalia,
to the Review Committee or Town Clerk/Administrator at the Town Hall for the
Town of Hammonton, whereupon the applicant shall demonstrate and/or otherwise
permit inspection of said obscene materials and/or acts and/or potentially
obscene materials and/or acts by the Review Committee. Within 72 hours
(Saturdays, Sundays and holidays excepted) of the determination of said
inspection, the Review Committee shall either inform the applicant in writing
of its disapproval or approval of the materials and/or acts inspected and
that it may or may not be commercially distributed or commercially displayed
without fear of prosecution under this chapter or that the municipality will
seek to have the same enjoined if necessary because of its obscene character,
whichever shall be the decision of the Review Committee.



   C.   It shall be a violation of this section to make commercial
distribution or commercial display of any material submitted for inspection
as hereinabove set forth prior to the expiration of said seventy-two-hour
period. Nothing contained herein shall prevent the applicant from making
commercial distribution or commercial display of said materials and/or acts
after the end of said seventy-two-hour period, subject to any judicial
restraints imposed and subject further to any penalties set forth hereafter
in this chapter, should said materials and/or acts ultimately be adjudged
obscene by a court of law.



§ 193-4. Violations and penalties.



   Anyone having violated any section of this chapter shall be subject to
one or more of the following: a fine of not more than $1,000, imprisonment
for a period not to exceed 90 days or a period of community service not to
exceed 90 days. Each separate film, moving picture, photograph, painting,
illustration, book, magazine, object and/or act (and each issue of them)
which is commercially distributed or commercially displayed in violation of
this chapter shall constitute a separate offense under this chapter. Each
separate commercial distribution or commercial display, whether to different
persons or to the same person, in violation of this chapter shall constitute
a separate offense under this chapter.



§ 193-5. Interpretation and enforcement.



   Notwithstanding any other section, clause or provision of this chapter
to the contrary, the definitions of "obscene" and "obscenity," for all
purposes of interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, shall be
construed in accordance with and in no event more strictly than the criteria
set forth by the state statutes or case law of the State of New Jersey,
effective as of the date of the passage of this chapter, as the same may be
from time to time amended as supplemented, as well as in accordance and not
more strictly construed than judicial interpretations thereof pursuant to the
Constitution of the United States and of the State of New Jersey finally
concluded in courts of jurisdiction sufficient to render decisions on
constitutional questions having general application.



CHAPTER 195.
(RESERVED)



[Former Ch. 195, Open Space and Recreation, adopted 3-22-1999 by Ord. No.
2-1999, as amended, was repealed 8-28-2006 by Ord. No. 16-2006]



CHAPTER 197.
PARKING, OFF-STREET



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton as
indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]



ARTICLE I.
Authority



   § 197-1.   Authority to regulate vehicular and pedestrian traffic
in public parking places.



   § 197-2.   Authority to preserve public safety and welfare.



   § 197-3.   Authority of Police and Fire Departments.



ARTICLE II.
Handicapped Parking Zones



   § 197-4.   Restricted parking zones designated.



   § 197-5.   Violations and penalties.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Parking of motor vehicles in parks — See Ch. 200.



   Taxicabs — See Ch. 257.



   Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 271.



Article I.
Authority



[Adopted 1-28-1980 by Ord. No. 1-1980]



§ 197-1. Authority to regulate vehicular and pedestrian traffic in public
parking places.



   In addition to the powers conferred to a municipality under N.J.S.A.
39:4-197 concerning the adoption of ordinances for the regulation of
entrances to and exits from parking yards, the governing body of the Town of
Hammonton may make, amend, repeal and enforce ordinances to regulate
vehicular and pedestrian traffic and the parking of vehicles in parking yards
and parking places which are open to the public or to which the public is
invited, whether maintained or operated separately or in conjunction with any
business or enterprise.



§ 197-2. Authority to preserve public safety and welfare.



   The Town of Hammonton may establish requirements for placement and
types of lighting and signs, regulate and control noisy or boisterous persons
or things, require installation and maintenance of internal traffic
directional lines and take such other action as may be reasonably required to
preserve and safeguard public health, safety, morals and welfare.



§ 197-3. Authority of Police and Fire Departments.



Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I). The governing body of the Town of Hammonton shall
authorize the officials in charge of the Fire and Police Departments to
exercise exclusive municipal control of traffic in public parking yards,
parking places and fire areas.



Article II.
Handicapped Parking Zones



[Adopted 7-9-1984 by Ord. No. 12-1984]



§ 197-4. Restricted parking zones designated.



   Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-197(3)c, there are hereby designated
restricted parking spaces for use by persons who have been issued special
vehicle identification cards by the Division of Motor Vehicles, pursuant to
the provisions of Section 2 of Chapter 280 of the Laws of 1949 (N.J.S.A.
39:4-205) and Section 1 of Chapter 202 of the Laws of 1977 (N.J.S.A.
39:4-197.5), in the following locations:



 

Location
 

Number of Spaces





Atlantic County Library
 

2



Hammonton Shopping Plaza
 

8



James way Shopping Plaza
 

8



New Jersey Employment Office
 

4



Hammonton Town Hall
 

1



Hammonton Middle School, Vine Street
 

1



Hammonton Elementary School
 

1



Hammonton High School
 

1



Kessler Hospital
 

8



Wendy's
 

2



Ponderosa
 

2



Burger King
 

2



McDonald's
 

1



First Federal Savings and Loan (Bellevue Avenue)
 

1



Hammonton Cold Cuts
 

1



Hammonton Motor Inn
 

6



Bagliani's Market
 

2





 



§ 197-5. Violations and penalties.



[Added 7-9-1984 by Ord. No. 13-1984; amended 6-28-2004 by Ord. No. 13-2004]



   The fine for unauthorized parking in a restricted parking space
pursuant to Chapter 197 shall be $250 for the first offense and a fine of
$250, plus a maximum of 90 days' community service for all subsequent
offenses.



CHAPTER 200.
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton
3-9-1981 by Ord. No. 4-1981. Amendments noted where applicable.]



   § 200-1.   Purpose.



   § 200-1A.   Definitions.



   § 200-2.   Hours of operation.



   § 200-3.   Permits for special events required.



   § 200-4.   Prohibited conduct.



   § 200-5.   Parking of motor vehicles.



   § 200-6.   Enforcement.



   § 200-7.   Permit fees.



   § 200-8.   Field scheduling.



   § 200-9.    Violations and penalties.



   § 200-10.   Construal of provisions.



   § 200-11.   “Adopt-a-Park” program.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Board of Park Commissioners — See Ch. 6, Art. II.



   Waterfowl near Hammonton Lake — See Ch. 82, Art. III.



   Boats on Hammonton Lake — See Ch. 99.



   Curfew at Hammonton Lake Park — See Ch. 119.



§ 200-1. Purpose.



   It is hereby declared to be for the best interest, health, safety and
general welfare of the residents and citizens of the Town of Hammonton that
rules and regulations be promulgated and enacted for the control of public
parks and recreation areas in the Town of Hammonton.



§ 200-1A.  Definitions.



[Added 3-26-2018 by Ord. No. 010-2018]



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:



   DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION — Duly appointed personnel of the
Town, including the Director of Parks and Recreation and their designated
staff members.



   PARK(S)/RECREATION AREA(S) — Includes but is not limited to a park,
playground, recreation or senior center or any other public area owned or
used by the Town or local authorized government agencies and devoted to
active or passive recreation.



   BOARD OF PARK COMMISSION — The Board of Park Commission is
responsible for guiding the administrative policy of Hammonton Town park(s)
and recreation area(s) as well as steering future development of facilities
to serve the residents of Hammonton.



§ 200-2. Hours of operation.



[Amended 3-26-2018 by Ord. No. 010-2018]



   A.   Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, parks shall be
open to the public every day of the year during designated hours. The opening
and closing hours for each individual park shall be posted therein for public
information and shall be determined from time to time by the Board of Park
Commissioners.



   B.   Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to the
public by the Board of Park Commissioners at any time and for any interval of
time, either temporarily or at regular and stated intervals (daily or
otherwise) and either entirely or merely to certain uses, as the Board of
Park Commissioners shall find reasonably necessary.



   C.   Hours.  The following hours of use have been established:



      (1)   11th Street Park: sunrise to sunset.



      (2)   Front Street Park: sunrise to sunset.



      (3)   Veterans Park: sunrise to sunset.



      (4)   Hammonton Lake Park: sunrise to sunset; except for the
ball fields until 11:00 p.m.



      (5)   Hammonton Recreation Complex: sunrise to sunset; except
for lighted fields until 11:00 p.m.



      (6)   Key Club Park: sunrise to sunset.



      (7)   Centennial Drive Playgrounds: sunrise to sunset.



   D.   Exceptions.  The provisions of this chapter shall not be
applicable when:



      (1)   A function is being held or is being sponsored by the
Town for a religious, school, civic or properly supervised event or program.



      (2)   A supervised social meeting, gathering or assemblage for
which a property permit has been issued.



   E.   Rules and regulations.  The following rules and regulations
are hereby established, and it shall be unlawful to violate any of the said
rules and regulations:



      (1)   No person shall act in a loud, indecent, obscene or
offensive manner.



      (2)   No person shall revel, disport or behave in a noisy and
boisterous manner, emitting loud cries and other noises, so as to
inconvenience others, or otherwise disrupt and disturb the public peace and
dignity within the park(s) and recreation area(s) defined or such adjacent
areas. Use of profane, loud, threatening, insulting, indecent and abusive
language is prohibited.



      (3)   No person shall drive and/or operate mini-bikes, motor
scooters, motorbikes, go-carts, swamp buggies and snowmobiles and any other
similar type of motor-driven vehicle within the park(s) and recreation
area(s). Golf carts (gas and electric) are permitted for use by Category I,
II, and III organizations with the approval of the Hammonton Park Commission.



      (4)   The starting or maintenance of an open fire or fires in
the park(s) and recreation area(s) at any time during the entire year is
prohibited.



      (5)   Pets brought into the park(s) and recreation area(s)
shall be confined or under direct control and on a leash. All pet owners must
abide by Town regulations and are responsible for cleaning up after their
pet(s). Animals trained to assist the disabled are permitted in all areas.



      (6)   No person shall carry or possess firearms of any
description, or air rifles, spring guns, bow and arrows, slings or any other
forms of weapons potentially inimical to wildlife and dangerous to human
safety, or any instrument that can be loaded with and fire blank cartridges,
or any kind of trapping device. Shooting into park(s) and recreation area(s)
from beyond park boundaries is forbidden.



      (7)   The Recreation Commission shall be authorized to
establish any other rules and regulation governing parks which it deems
appropriate.



      (8)   No person shall engage in smoking of any kind or use
tobacco products while in any park(s) and recreation area(s) listed in
Ordinance No. 036-2014. Smoking is defined as the act of lighting by fire by
any means, and/or the act of inhaling, exhaling, burning, or the carrying of
any lit smoke product, including, but not limited to, a cigarette, cigar,
pipe, electronic smoking device, tobacco, weed, plant or other vegetation or
similar material. "Tobacco products" encompasses all smokeless tobacco,
including, but not limited to, chewing tobacco, loose-leaf tobacco, tobacco
pellets, plug tobacco, twist or rope tobacco, dipping tobacco and dissolvable
tobacco.



      (9)   The Director of Parks and Recreation, in conjunction
with the Board of Park Commissioners, reviews and approves all park(s) and
recreation area(s) use requests for the Town. The Department of Parks and
Recreation then works with its sponsored youth organizations and permitted
groups to schedule the use of all fields and facilities located in Hammonton
Town park(s) and recreation area(s).



      (10)   Field closure for maintenance to preserve the quality
of Hammonton Town park(s) and recreation area(s) to allow for appropriate
rest and repair of turf areas will be identified by the Director of Parks and
Recreation and their designated staff members. Mandatory field closure
periods will be identified by park(s) and/or recreation area(s). The closed
park(s) and/or recreation area(s) will be identified by posted signs and/or
fencing and the organization's contact person will be notified. Consequences
for not adhering to the field closure periods will result in the following:



         (a)   First offense: written warning to the organization
representative. Security deposit will be forfeited and retained by the Town
of Hammonton.



         (b)   Second offense: a monetary penalty of $500 will be
imposed and must be paid to the Town of Hammonton. Use of facilities will be
suspended until such time as the penalty is paid in full and any or all
future permitted use will be canceled.



         (c)   Third offense: hearing before the Hammonton Town
Parks and Recreation Commission with a potential loss of the field use permit
for the organization.



      (11)   Athletic fields may be closed due to inclement weather
or saturated conditions. If a field is to be determined closed or deemed
unplayable by Hammonton Town authorized staff on weekdays, notice will be
sent to the appropriate league/organization contact person via email by 2:00
p.m. that day. At later weekday times and weekends, each organization is
required to cancel its permitted activity if injury may result to
participants or if damage to the playing surface or facility may occur. Users
must notify the Director of Parks and Recreation, or designated staff member,
if the organization closed the field so other users questioning whether to
close their fields can be so advised. If there is any doubt, the field should
be closed and all activities canceled. Consequences for not adhering to the
above closure requirements will result in the consequences for offenses
stated above in Subsection 11. Field use is prohibited in the following
circumstances:



         (a)   It is closed for renovation or repair;



         (b)   Water is standing on the field;



         (c)   Soil is frozen;



         (d)   The soil is wet and "spongy";



         (e)   Grass can be dislodged from the field easily;



         (f)   Steady rain is falling;



         (g)   A lightning/electrical storm is occurring; and



         (h)   The field is deemed unplayable by staff from the
Department of Parks and Recreation and/or Public Works due to other
unforeseen condition or vandalism.



      (12)   All managers, coaches, or persons in charge of a group
using the park(s) and recreation area(s) will be responsible for the conduct
of all participants, spectators and others connected with the activity,
including visiting teams and opponents. Group users must inform their
participants of the conduct rules. Users must clean up after themselves
(i.e., trash, recycling, etc.) and managers, coaches, or persons in charge of
a group must inspect the park(s) and recreation area(s) before leaving. All
trash must be placed in proper receptacles. Users are expected to leave the
park(s) and recreation area(s) in the same or better condition in which it
was found.



      (13)   Warm-ups for the next scheduled event must be performed
so as not to interfere with existing event and so as not to endanger the
welfare of all participants, spectators and facilities.



      (14)   Use or possession of alcoholic beverages or controlled
substances of any kind are prohibited.



      (15)   No field user may put down lines, significantly or
permanently alter, or make any changes to a park and/or recreation area.



      (16)   The Town may remove any article or property found in a
park(s) and recreation area(s) after hours of operation at the owner's
expense.



      (17)   No person or organization shall post by any means or
erect or cause to be erected any sign, placard, advertisement, or
inscription, in any Town park(s) and recreation area(s), without
authorization from the Department of Parks and Recreation.



§ 200-3. Permits for special events required. 



[Amended 3-26-2018 by Ord. No. 010-2018]



   Permits for special events in parks shall be obtained by application to
the Board of Park Commissioners in accordance with the following procedures:



   A.   A person seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall file an
application with the Board of Park Commissioners stating:



      (1)   The name and address of the applicant.



      (2)   The name and address of the person, persons, corporation
or association sponsoring the activity, if any.



      (3)   The day and hours for which the permit is desired.



      (4)   The park or portion thereof for which such permit is
desired.



      (5)   Any other information which the Board of Park
Commissioners shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to
whether a permit should be issued hereunder.



   B.   Standards for issuance of a use permit by the Board of Park
Commissioners shall include the following findings:



      (1)   That the proposed activity or use of the park will not
unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public employment of
the park.



      (2)   That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the park.



      (3)   That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare,
safety and recreation.



      (4)   That the proposed activity or uses that are reasonably
anticipated will not include violence, crime or disorderly conduct.



      (5)   That the proposed activity will not entail extraordinary
or burdensome expense or police operation by the town.



      (6)   That the facilities desired have not been reserved for
other use at the date and hour requested in the application.



   C.   Use of Facility. Applications for park(s) and recreation
area(s) use are issued in priority order by category in which the
organization or event is placed. A Category I user/event has priority over
Category II, III and IV user/event, etc. Permits must be available for review
at time of field use. Department of Parks and Recreation will make every
reasonable effort to treat all organizations, teams, and individuals using
Town facilities in a fair and equitable manner. All parties must comply with
federal and state anti-discrimination laws. Permits for park(s) and
recreation area(s) use are issued by priority as listed below and according
to policies contained herein. Park(s) and recreation area(s) use permits
should be carried by the permittee at all times, during scheduled use of the
park(s) and recreation area(s) and must be presented upon request. These
permits are nontransferable and may not be passed on to other user groups.
All field users must adhere to their designated activity, times, locations
and dates of assigned use. Authorized permits will only be distributed after
all required documentation has been submitted. All organized sports activity
must have an authorized permit for use of Town athletic fields.



   D.   Use categories:



      (1)   Category I permit/use: Hammonton Town programs and
events. Any Hammonton Town-sanctioned program and/or special event.



      (2)   Category II permit/use: recognized and sponsored
Hammonton Town youth sports organizations.



         (a)   Hammonton Town Little League Baseball Association.



         (b)   Hammonton Town Bulldogs Basketball Association.



         (c)   Hammonton Town Wrestling Association.



         (d)   Hammonton Town Youth/Adult Baseball and Softball
Associations.



         (e)   Hammonton Town HYSA Soccer Association.



         (f)   Hammonton Town Men's Softball Association.



         (g)   Hammonton Hawks Football and Cheerleading
Association.



         (h)   Other Hammonton Town Youth Organization approved
at a formal meeting by Hammonton Park Commission.



      (3)   Category III permit/use: Hammonton Town School District.
Programs, events, and/or activities officially sanctioned, coordinated and
sponsored by the Hammonton School District.



      (4)   Category IV permit/use: Hammonton Town nonprofit
organizations/Hammonton Town church groups/Hammonton Town Boy and Girl Scout
groups. St. Josephs Elementary, Middle and High School. Nonprofit
organizations, entities, individuals or groups for the purpose of providing
recreational services primarily to Hammonton Town residents must show proof
of nonprofit certification. Organization address of record is a Hammonton
Town address. Team rosters must show 75% or higher Hammonton Town residents.



      (5)   Category V permit/use: Non-Town nonprofit organizations.
Nonprofit organizations, entities, individuals or groups for the purpose of
providing recreational services, must show proof of nonprofit certification.
For all teams with fewer than 75% Hammonton Town residents.



      (6)   Category VI permit/use: independent organizations.
Organizations, entities, individuals or groups for the purpose of providing
recreational services who do not operate as a commercial enterprise or
business and can't provide verifiable proof of operating on a nonprofit basis
as defined herein.



      (7)   Category VII permit/use: Commercial. Organizations,
entities, individuals or groups for the purpose of providing recreational
services that are operated as a for-profit commercial enterprise.



   E.   To qualify as a nonprofit organization in Category IV or V
above, the organization must be registered as a not-for-profit corporation
with the State of New Jersey. Nonprofit organizations are those organizations
that have evidence of Federal 501(c) filing and state nonprofit status.



   F.   Priority is given within a particular sport's designated
"season." In-season sports have equal status to each other; out of season
sports have equal status to each other.



   G.   In the event of special cases or circumstances (such as
decisions on "last-minute" completed applications with no time to go through
the process described above), the Director of Parks and Recreation will use
their best discretion for park(s) and recreation area(s) use, and have the
support of the Quality of Life Committee of Hammonton Town Council.



   H.   Appeal. Within five days after the receipt of an application,
the Board of Park Commissioners shall apprise an applicant in writing of its
reasons for refusing a permit, and any aggrieved person shall have the right
to appeal to the Town Council by serving written notice thereof on the Town
Clerk/Administrator within five days of said refusal. A copy of said notice
shall also be served on the Board of Park Commissioners within the same time,
and said Board of Park Commissioners shall immediately forward the
application and the reasons for its refusal to the Town Council, which shall
consider the application under the standards set forth under Subsection B
hereof and shall sustain or overrule the Park Commission's decision within 10
days from the receipt of the appeal by the Town Clerk/Administrator. The
decision of the Town Council shall be final.



   I.   A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations
and all applicable ordinances fully as though the same were inserted in said
permits.



   J.   The person or persons to whom a permit is issued shall be
liable for all loss, damage or injury sustained by any person whatever by
reason of the negligence of the person or persons to whom such permit shall
have been issued. The Board of Park Commissioners shall have the right to
require any permittee to submit evidence of liability insurance covering
injuries to members of the general public arising out of such permitted
activities in such amounts as may from time to time be determined by the
Commission prior to the commencement of any activity or issuance of any
permit.



   K.   Revocation. The Board of Park Commissioners shall have the
authority to revoke a permit upon a finding of violation of any rule or
ordinance or upon good cause shown.



§ 200-4. Prohibited conduct.



   A.   No person in a public park and recreation area shall:



      (1)   Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with
or displace or remove any buildings, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces,
railings, pavings or paving materials, waterlines or other public utilities
or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards, whether
temporary or permanent, monuments, stake posts or other boundary markers or
other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances
whatsoever, either real or personal.



      (2)   Fail to cooperate in maintaining rest rooms and
washrooms in a neat and sanitary condition. No person over the age of six
years shall use the rest rooms and washrooms designated for the opposite sex.



      (3)   Dig or remove any soil, rock, sand, stones, trees,
shrubs or plants or other wood or materials or make any excavation by tool,
equipment, blasting or other means or agency.



      (4)   Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever
kind, whether permanent or temporary, or run or string any public service
utility into, upon or across such lands, except on special written permit
issued hereunder.



      (5)   Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or
plant or injure the park or pick the flowers or seed of any tree or plant,
dig in or otherwise disturb grass areas or in any other way injure the
natural beauty or usefulness of any area.



   (6)   Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, pursue, chase,
tease, shoot or throw missiles at any animal, wildlife, reptile or bird; nor
remove or possess the young of any wild animal or the eggs or nest or young
of any reptile or bird. 



[Amended 11-18-2013 by Ord. No. 027-2013]



      (7)   Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be
placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream or other body of
water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary stream, storm sewer or
drain flowing into such water any substance, matter or thing, liquid or
solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said waters. Editor's
Note: See Ch. 184, Littering, Art. II, Clean Communities Program.



      (8)   Have brought in or shall dump in, deposit or leave any
bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste,
garbage or refuse or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in
any waters in or contiguous to any park or left anywhere on the grounds
thereof but shall be placed in the proper receptacles, where these are
provided. Where receptacles are not provided, all such rubbish or waste shall
be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and
properly disposed of elsewhere.



      (9)   Drive any vehicle on any area except where there are
paved park roads or parking areas or such areas as may on occasion be
specifically designated as temporary areas by the Board of Park Commissioners.



      (10)   Park a vehicle in other than an established or
designated parking area, and such shall be in accordance with posted
directions there and at and with the instruction of any attendant who may be
present.



      (11)   Ride a bicycle without reasonable regard to the safety
of others.



      (12)   Swim, bathe or wade in any waters or waterways in or
adjacent to any park, except in such waters and at such places as are
provided therefor and in compliance with such regulations as are herein set
forth or may be hereinafter adopted; nor shall any person frequent any waters
or places customarily designated for the purpose of swimming or bathing or
congregate thereat when such activities are prohibited by the Board of Park
Commissioners upon a finding that such use of the water would be dangerous or
otherwise inadvisable.



      (13)   Frequent any waters or places designated for the
purposes of swimming or bathing or congregate thereat except between such
hours of the day as shall be designated by the Board of Park Commissioners
for such purposes for each individual site.



      (14)   Erect, maintain, use or occupy on or in any beach or
bathing area any tent, shelter or structure of any kind unless there shall be
an unobstructed view into said tent, shelter or structure from at least two
sides; nor shall any guy wire, rope or extension brace or support be
connected or fastened from any such structure to any other structure, stake,
rock or other object outside thereof.



      (15)   Dress or undress on any beach or in any vehicle, toilet
or other place, except in such bathing houses or structures as may be
provided for that purpose.



      (16)   Bring into or operate any boat, raft or other
watercraft, whether motor-powered or not, upon any waters except at places
designated for boating by the Board of Park Commissioners. Such activity
shall be in accordance with applicable regulations as are now or may
hereafter be adopted. Editor's Note: See Ch. 99, Boats on Hammonton Lake.



      (17)   Navigate, direct or handle any boat in such a manner as
to unjustifiably or unnecessarily annoy or frighten or endanger the occupant
of any other boat.



      (18)   Launch, dock or operate any boat of any kind on any
water between the closing hour of the park at night and the opening hour of
the park the following morning; nor shall any person be on or remain on or in
any boat during said closed hours of the park.



      (19)   Fish in any waters except in waters designated by the
Board of Park Commissioners for that use and under such regulations and
restrictions as have or may be prescribed by the Park Commissioner.



      (20)   Fish in any area where bathing is permitted.



      (21)   Carry or possess firearms of any description or air
rifles, spring guns, bows and arrows, slings or any other forms of weapons
potentially inimical to wildlife and dangerous to human safety or any
instrument that can be loaded with and fire blank cartridges or any kind of
trapping device. Shooting into park areas from beyond park boundaries is
forbidden. Editor's Note: See Ch. 141, Firearms.



      (22)   Violate the regulation that use of individual
fireplaces, together with tables and benches, follows the generally accepted
rule of "first come, first served."



      (23)   Use any portion of the picnic area or any of the
buildings or structures therein for the purpose of holding picnics to the
exclusion of other persons; nor shall any person use such areas and
facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded.



      (24)   Leave a picnic area before the fire is completely
extinguished and before all trash is placed in the disposal receptacles,
where provided. If no such trash receptacles are available, then trash shall
be carried away from the park area by the picnicker to be properly disposed
of elsewhere.



      (25)   Set up tents, shacks or any other temporary shelter for
the purpose of overnight camping, nor shall any person leave in a park after
closing hours any movable structure or special vehicle to be used or that
could be used for such purpose, such as a house trailer, camp trailer,
camp-wagon or the like, except in those areas designated by the Board of Park
Commissioners for those purposes.



   B.   While in a public park or recreation area, all persons shall
conduct themselves in a proper and, orderly manner, and, in particular, no
person shall:



      (1)   Bring alcoholic beverages or drink same at any time
therein.



[Amended 8-24-2009 by Ord. No. 19-2009]



      (2)   Have in his/her possession or set or otherwise cause to
explode or discharge or burn any firecrackers, torpedo rockets or other
fireworks, firecrackers or explosives of flammable material, or discharge
them or throw them into any such areas from lands or highways adjacent
thereto. This prohibition includes any other substance or compound, mixture
or article that in conjunction with any other substance or compound would be
dangerous from any of the foregoing standpoints. At the discretion of the
Board of Park Commissioners, permits may be given for conducting properly
supervised fireworks in designated park areas.



      (3)   Permit any dog or other domestic animal into areas
marked "Domestic Animals Prohibited in This Area." In areas in which dogs are
permitted, they shall be supervised and controlled. Horseback riding shall be
prohibited.



      (4)   Enter into or loiter or remain in any pavilion or any
other park structure or section thereof which may be reserved and designated
by the Board of Park Commissioners for the use of the opposite sex. Exception
is made for children under six years of age.



      (5)   Solicit alms or contributions for any purpose, whether
public or private. Editor's Note: See Ch. 204, Peddling and Soliciting.



      (6)   Build or attempt to build a fire except in such areas
and under such regulations as may be designated by the Board of Park
Commissioners. No person shall drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted
matches, burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco paper or other flammable
material within any park or on any highways, roads or streets abutting or
contiguous thereto.



      (7)   Enter an area posted as "Closed to the Public"; nor
shall any person use or abet in the use of any area in violation of posted
notices.



      (8)   Gamble or participate in or abet any game of chance
except in such areas and under such regulations as may be designated by the
Board of Park Commissioners.



      (9)   Go onto the ice or any of the waters except such areas
as are designated as skating fields, provided that a safety signal is
displayed.



      (10)   Use threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent
language or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to breach
the public peace. Editor's Note: See Ch. 202, Peace and Good Order.



      (11)   Fail to produce and exhibit any permit from the Board
of Park Commissioners he/she claims to have upon request of any authorized
person who shall desire to inspect the same for the purpose of enforcing
compliance with any ordinance or rule.



      (12)   Disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or
party occupying any area or participating in any activity under the authority
of a permit.



      (13)   Expose or offer for sale any article or thing; nor
station or place any stand, car or vehicle for the transportation, sale or
display of any such article or thing. Exception is here made as to any
regularly licensed concessionaire acting by and under the authority and
regulation of the Board of Park Commissioners.



      (14)   Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard,
advertisement or inscription whatever; nor shall any person erect or cause to
be erected any sign whatever on any public lands or highways or roads
adjacent to a park.



      (15)   Prevent any person or group from using any park or
playground or any of its facilities or interfere with such use in compliance
with this chapter and the rules applicable to such use.



      (16)   Fail to obey or interfere with any police officer, town
official or employee in the proper performance of his/her duties.



      (17)   Endanger the life and safety of any person by any
conduct or act.



      (18)   Attempt to use any playing field or other area which
has been reserved for use by some other person, firm, corporation or group.



      (19)   Attempt to gain entry to a special event without paying
the required admission fee.



§ 200-5. Parking of motor vehicles.



   No owner or driver shall cause or permit a vehicle to stand outside
designated parking spaces, except for a reasonable time to take up or
discharge passengers or equipment. No motor vehicle shall be parked in said
park areas from 1/2 hour after sunset until sunrise, except as otherwise
permitted by the Board of Park Commissioners.



§ 200-6. Enforcement.



   A.   The Board of Park Commissioners and park attendants shall, in
connection with their duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the
provisions of this chapter.



   B.   The Board of Park Commissioners and any park attendant shall
have the authority to eject from the park area any person or persons acting
in violation of this chapter.



   C.   The Board of Park Commissioners and any park attendant shall
have the authority to seize and confiscate any property, thing or device in
the park, or used, in violation of this chapter.



   D.   This chapter shall also be enforced by the Police Department of
the Town of Hammonton.



§ 200-7. Permit Fees.



[Added 3-26-2018 by Ord. No. 010-2018]



   Hammonton Town Park(s) and Recreation Area(s) permit fees by category:



   A.   Category I, II, III, IV are permitted for use at no charge.



   B.   Category V and VI:



      (1)   Field use: $50 per hour per field/three-hour block
minimum.



      (2)   Field use with/lights: $100 per hour per
field/three-hour block minimum.



   C.   Category VII:



      (1)   Field use: $100 per hour per field/three-hour block
minimum.



      (2)   Field use with/lights: $200 per hour per
field/three-hour block minimum.



§ 200-8. Field scheduling.



[Added 3-26-2018 by Ord. No. 010-2018]



   A.   The first step to securing a park and/or recreation area is to
complete a use of facility application. The allocation of park(s) and
recreation area(s) will be determined by the Director of Parks and Recreation
according to the priority of use established in Permits Section, Permits, and
provided that the criteria listed are met.



      (1)   The Department of Parks and Recreation may schedule
fields and facilities at any time for Town sponsored programs, events and
activities.



      (2)   Category II applicant's facility use of park(s) and
recreation area(s). Application for the spring and summer season (February 15
through August 31) is to be submitted by December 31. Field use approvals for
Category II will be voted upon at the January Recreation Commission meeting.



      (3)   Category II applicant's facility use of park(s) and
recreation area(s). Application for the fall season (September 1 through
November 30) is to be submitted by May 31. Field use approvals for Category
II will be voted upon at the June Recreation Commission meeting.



      (4)   All Categories III through VII applicants may submit a
facility use of park(s) and recreation area(s) application no more than 60
days prior to start date of use. Additionally, applications for facility use
of fields between April 1 and August 31 will be accepted up to January 31.
Permits will be issued for groups that apply according to category rankings.
Applications for facility use of park(s) and recreation area(s) between
September 1 and November 15 will be accepted up to June 30. Permits will be
issued for groups that apply according to category rankings and any policy
contained herein.



      (5)   Field use applications may be submitted past the dates
stated above, no later than seven business days prior to date of use
requested and will be considered based on remaining park(s) and recreation
area(s) availability.



      (6)   Restrictions include:



         (a)   Park(s) and recreation area(s) use permits will be
issued to all applicants in Categories III through VII between the dates of
April 1 and November 30 annually. No use outside of these dates for above
category groups will be allowed.



         (b)   All Hammonton Town park(s) and recreation area(s)
will be permitted for use a maximum of six days a week to ensure they receive
some rest and reduce wear and tear.



         (c)   Athletic fields may not be scheduled for more than
eight hours of use in a day. The Director of Parks and Recreation may make
exception to this rule in case of tournament play. During the months of July
and August, all athletic fields will be permitted for use no more than six
hours daily, with a maximum use of four consecutive hours. A mandatory rest
period of two hours will be imposed between approved use of the field(s) or
area(s).



         (d)   The Town will leave park(s) and recreation area(s)
use times open, un-scheduled and available for informal use by the general
public.



   B.   To minimize field wear and maintenance and ensure the safety of
participants, park(s) and recreation area(s) may be retired from play after
each season to allow rehabilitation/ regrowth of the turf. The Director of
Public Works, Director of Recreation or the Recreation Commission may close
any Hammonton Town park(s) and recreation area(s) for the upcoming season
based upon a review of conditions and required maintenance to ensure
playability. The Town may cancel individual activities on any given day
depending on weather and current park(s) and recreation area(s) conditions.
In case of permitted date of use, canceled due to weather or park(s) and
recreation area(s) conditions, the Director of Parks and Recreation will
assist the organization in obtaining one alternate date at no additional
cost, provided the date of park(s) and recreation area(s) use is not booked
previously by any another permitted group.



§ 200-9. Violations and penalties.



[Amended 3-26-2018 by Ord. No. 010-2018]



   Each and every violation shall be considered a separate violation. Any
person who is convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter within
one year of the date of a previous violation and who was fined for the
previous violation may be sentenced by the Court to an additional fine as a
repeat offender. The additional fine imposed as a repeat offender shall not
be less than the minimum or exceed the maximum fine provided herein, and same
shall be calculated separately from the fine imposed for the violation of
this chapter.



§ 200-10.  Construal of provisions.



   This chapter is in addition to and not in derogation of any other
ordinance involving or affecting any of the subject matters in this chapter.



§ 200-11. “Adopt-a-Park” program.



[Added 8-25-2014 by Ord. No. 017-2014]



   In order to promote greater public participation in the life of the
community and the operation of town facilities, there is hereby established
an "Adopt-a-Park" program, to be administered under the auspices of the
town's Park and Recreation Department.



   A.   Any individual citizen, group of citizens, family, civic
organization, or business may apply for sponsorship of a park or area of a
park within the town, taking responsibility for certain tasks aimed at
maintaining the park or area of said park in a clean, attractive, safe
fashion.  The Town Business Manager, in consultation with the Recreation
Leader, and the Board of Park Commissioners, shall develop an application
covering rules for the program, and shall recommend an appropriate
sponsorship fee structure to Mayor and Town Council for approval.



   B.   Approved sponsors commit to assisting the town's Public Works
Department in the care and maintenance of parks by performing, at least four
times each year, some or all of the following tasks, as appropriate for the
area adopted:



      (1)   Removing litter and recyclable materials.



      (2)   Clearing brush and invasive plants.



      (3)   Mulching trees and garden beds.



      (4)   Planting trees, shrubs and flowers.



      (5)   Painting and minor repair of facilities and equipment.



      (6)   Care and maintenance of playground equipment.



      (7)   Care and maintenance of walking trails and tracks.



   C.   The town will supply bags and other material that will be used
to maintain parks.  Sponsors will perform their cleanup with appropriate
clothing including rain gear and gloves.



   D.   Sponsors will be publicly recognized for their efforts through
the prominent placement of a sign, to be purchased and installed by the town,
declaring their sponsorship.



   E.   Upon signing a "Hold Harmless Agreement" with the Town of
Hammonton, all sponsorships shall be valid for a period of five years, and
shall be renewable, with the current sponsor having right of first refusal. 
Failure to agree to renew a sponsorship within a reasonable period of time
from the individual or group to assume sponsorship of the subject park.



   F.   Each sponsor shall agree, at a minimum, to the following
stipulations:



      (1)   To conduct all activities in a safe and responsible
manner.



      (2)   To comply with all park rules and regulations.



      (3)   To notify the town, through the Recreation Leader,
Business Administrator or Park Commission, regarding their decision to resign
or not renew the sponsorship in writing.



      (4)   To supply sufficient advance notice of scheduled work to
the Director of Public Works and the Recreation Leader.



      (5)   To assign a person in charge of volunteers.  This "crew
chief" will be responsible for signing volunteers in and out, as well as
ensuring that all volunteers comply with relevant safety requirements.



      (6)   To ensure that all volunteers under the age of 18 have
close and appropriate adult supervision at all times.



      (7)   To wear clothing (including shoes and gloves)
appropriate for the work and weather.



      (8)   To report any and all damage to park grounds or
facilities, and any accidents, to the Town Clerk within 24 hours of
occurrence.



      (9)   To sign a "Hold Harmless Agreement" with the Town of
Hammonton.



   G.   Individuals or groups that are unable to commit to actual work
on a park may provide funding or materials as an in-kind contribution. 
These donations will also qualify for recognition through sign placement,
although the term of acknowledgement shall carry a one-year term.



CHAPTER 202.
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton
8-23-1999 by Ord. No. 18-1999. Amendments noted where applicable.]



   § 202-1.   Title.



   § 202-2.   Purpose.



   § 202-3.   Prohibited acts.



   § 202-4.   Enforcement.



   § 202-5.   Violations and penalties.



   § 202-6.   Construal of provisions.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Curfew — See Ch. 119.



   Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 200.



§ 202-1. Title.



   This chapter shall be entitled "Peace and Good Order."



§ 202-2. Purpose.



   The purpose and intent of this chapter is to establish standards of
conduct for persons in public places and along town streets and sidewalks.



§ 202-3. Prohibited acts.



   A.   (Reserved) 1



1.   Editor's Note: Former § 202-3A, regarding consumption of alcoholic
beverages in a public place, was repealed 10-24-2011 by Ord. No. 19-2011.



   B.   (Reserved) 2



2.   Editor's Note: Former § 202-3B, regarding drunk or intoxicated
persons in a public place, was repealed 7-27-2009 by Ord. No. 14-2009.



   C.   No person shall solicit alms or contributions for any purpose
in public places or upon any town street or sidewalk.



   D.   No person shall disturb or interfere unreasonably with any
person or party occupying any area or participating in any public activity
under the authority of a permit in a public place, town street or sidewalk.



   E.   No person shall expose or offer for sale any article or thing,
nor shall he/she station or place any stand, car or vehicle for
transportation, sale or display of any such article or thing except as may be
permitted consistent with Chapter 204, Peddlers, Solicitors and Transient
Merchants.



   F.   No person shall paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign,
plaque or advertisement or inscription whatever, nor shall any person cause
or cause to be erected any sign whatever on any public land or upon any town
street or sidewalk.



   G.   (Reserved) 3



3.   Editor's Note: Former § 202-3G, regarding failure to obey a police
officer, town official, or employee, was repealed 10-24-2011 by Ord. No.
19-2011.



   H.   (Reserved) 4



4.   Editor's Note: Former § 202-3H, regarding loitering in a public
place, was repealed 10-24-2011 by Ord. No. 19-2011.



   I.   (Reserved) 5



5.   Editor's Note: Former § 202-3I, regarding prostitution, was repealed
10-24-2011 by Ord. No. 19-2011.



§ 202-4. Enforcement.



   This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department of the Town of
Hammonton.



§ 202-5. Violations and penalties.



   Any person or persons found to be violation of a provision of this
chapter or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant hereto in the
Hammonton Municipal Court, upon conviction shall be subject to one or more of
the following: a fine of not more than $1,000, imprisonment for a period not
to exceed 90 days or a period of community service not to exceed 90 days.



§ 202-6. Construal of provisions.



   This chapter is in addition to and not in derogation of any other
ordinance, statute or regulation involving or affecting any of the subject
matters in this chapter.



CHAPTER 204.
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton as
indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]



ARTICLE I.
Noncommercial Solicitation



   § 204-1.   Purpose.



   § 204-2.   Term defined.



   § 204-3.   Application and license requirement.



   § 204-4.   Hours of noncommercial solicitation.



   § 204-5.   Violations and penalties.



ARTICLE II.
Soliciting in Roadways



   § 204-6.   Purpose.



   § 204-7.   Filing of request.



   § 204-8.   Approval or denial of request.



   § 204-9.   Minors in roadways prohibited.



   § 204-10.   Compliance with state statutes.



   § 204-11.   Compliance of ordinance with state statutes.



   § 204-12.   Violations and penalties.



ARTICLE III.
Peddlers, Hawkers, Vendors, Solicitors, Canvassers, Food Trucks,
Door to Door Vendor and Seasonal Sales Vendors



   § 204-13.   Title.



   § 204-14.   Purpose.



   § 204-15.   Definitions.



   § 204-16.   (Reserved)



   § 204-17.   License required.



   § 204-18.   Application for seasonal sales vendor license.



   § 204-19.   Application for peddler, hawker, vendor, solicitor,
food truck vendor, door to door vendor, and canvasser license.



   § 204-20.   Investigation and issuance; hearing upon disapproval.



   § 204-21.   Fees.



   § 204-22.   Duration of license.



   § 204-23.   Revocation of license.



   § 204-24.   Enforcement.



   § 204-25.   Effect on existing licenses.



   § 204-26.   Violations and penalties.



   § 204-27.   Exceptions.



   § 204-28.   Food trucks prohibited.



   § 204-29.   All sales prohibited.



   § 204-30.   Appeal for food trucks.



Article I.
Noncommercial Solicitation



[Adopted 7-26-1993 by Ord. No. 18-1993]



§ 204-1. Purpose.



   During the past years there have been a number of lawsuits brought
against municipalities by noncommercial groups which seek to do door-to-door
solicitations. The federal courts have rendered, pursuant to the United
States Constitution and principles based on case law, that noncommercial
solicitations are distinguishable from commercial solicitation. It is the
purpose of this article to amend the town ordinance so that it complies with
federal law.



§ 204-2. Term defined.



" Noncommercial solicitation" is any individual, group, nonprofit
association, nonprofit corporation, charitable organization or like body that
solicits or canvasses the community for contributions for a nonprofit
organization or charitable cause.



§ 204-3. Application and license requirement.



   Noncommercial solicitation shall be allowed, pursuant to this article,
so long as the application is made pursuant to § 204-18 of this chapter,
except under no circumstances will the fingerprinting of noncommercial
solicitors or canvassers be required, and a license is issued pursuant to §
204-17. Nothing in this article shall prevent the Mayor and Council from
waiving the license fee required pursuant to this amendment.



§ 204-4. Hours of noncommercial solicitation.



   All noncommercial solicitation shall take place between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., unless the solicitor's or canvasser's presence is
expressly requested by the individual solicited by appointment.



§ 204-5. Violations and penalties.



   A person convicted of violating the provisions of this article shall be
subject to one or more of the following: a fine of not more than $1,000,
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days or a period of community
service not to exceed 90 days.



Article II.
Soliciting in Roadways



[Adopted 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 14-1997]



§ 204-6. Purpose.



   The Town of Hammonton shall permit charitable organizations as defined
in Section III of P.L. 1994, c.16 (N.J.S.A. 45:17A-20), to solicit
contributions in the roadways and highways of the Town of Hammonton in
accordance with the provisions contained herein.



§ 204-7. Filing of request.



   All charitable organizations herein who wish to solicit contributions
in the roadways and highways of the Town of Hammonton shall file a request
with the Town Clerk/Administrator and the Hammonton Police Department (Deputy
Chief of Police), specifying the following information:



   A.   Name of organization.



   B.   Address of organization.



   C.   Telephone number of organization.



   D.   Contact person of organization.



   E.   Location of proposed charitable solicitation.



   F.   Dates and times of proposed charitable solicitation.



   G.   If said request involves a county roadway and/or highway, a
copy of an authorization from the Atlantic County Board of Chosen Freeholders
to permit said charitable solicitation.



   H.   If said request involves a state roadway and/or highway, a copy
of an authorization from the State of New Jersey Commissioner of
Transportation to permit said charitable solicitation.



   I.   List of all proposed safety regulations, safety devices and
training for individuals who shall participate in the charitable solicitation
and/or a report as to the procedures to be used to ensure the safety of the
members of the public who will be traversing the roadways and/or highways of
the Town of Hammonton.



§ 204-8. Approval or denial of request.



[Amended 2-24-2014 by Ord. No. 003-2014]



   All applications submitted to the Town Clerk shall be forwarded to the
Police Chief for official police background check of all applicants. The
application so endorsed shall be forthwith returned to the Town Clerk.



§ 204-9. Minors in roadways prohibited.



   In no event shall any charitable organization requesting authorization
from the Town of Hammonton for said charitable solicitation use any
individual under the age of 18 years to perform any function or task
associated with the said charitable solicitation in any roadway.



§ 204-10. Compliance with state statutes.



   Any charitable organization requesting authorization from the Town of
Hammonton for said charitable solicitation shall comply with all the terms
and conditions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-60, as amended by P.L. 1997, Chapter 82,
approved April 30, 1997.



§ 204-11. Compliance of ordinance with state statutes.



   This article is adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-60, as amended by
P.L. 1997, Chapter 82, approved April 30, 1997.



§ 204-12. Violations and penalties.



   A person convicted of violating the provisions of this article shall be
subject to one or more of the following: a fine of not more than $1,000,
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days or a period of community
service not to exceed 90 days.



Article III.
Peddlers, Hawkers, Vendors, Solicitors, Canvassers, Food Trucks,
Door to Door Vendor  and Seasonal Sales Vendors



[Adopted 9-22-1997 by Ord. No. 18-1997; amended in its entirety 10-25-2004 by
Ord. No. 25-2004]



§ 204-13. Title.



[Amended 1-23-2017 by Ord. No. 001-2017]



   This article shall be entitled "Peddlers, Hawkers, Vendors, Solicitors,
Canvassers, Food Trucks, Door to Door Vendor and Seasonal Sales Vendors."



§ 204-14. Purpose.



   The purpose and intent of this article is to establish regulations
relative to intermittent, temporary and part-time sales of goods and
merchandise. This article also establishes regulations during specified
seasonal time periods, defined as Christmas, Valentine's Day, Easter, and
Mothers' Day, and to prohibit seasonal sales in all residential zone
classifications as set forth in the Zoning Code of the Town of Hammonton.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 175, Land Development. This article also prohibits
stationary vendors from selling merchandise and goods outdoors. This article
sets forth the application/approval process for seasonal sales vendors.
Furthermore, this article is to preserve Town aesthetics and zoning,
alleviate traffic congestion, protect against pedestrian and motor vehicle
accidents, and generally protect the health, safety and welfare of the public
of the Town of Hammonton.



§ 204-15. Definitions.



[Amended 1-23-2017 by Ord. No. 001-2017]



   As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:



   DOOR TO DOOR VENDOR



   Any person, whether or not a resident of the Town of Hammonton who
travels on foot and/or by vehicle to visit private homeowners to discuss or
hand out information that may result in a sale.



   FOOD TRUCK VENDOR



   Any person, whether or not a resident of the Town of Hammonton who
travels in a self sustained food truck to be parked at a specific location
(pre-approved by the Town Clerk and Police Chief) to sell food, approved by
Board of Health, to patrons.



   PEDDLER, HAWKER, AND VENDOR



   Any person, whether or not a resident of the Town of Hammonton, either
by foot, by vehicle, or by any matter, means or method, who shall go from
house to house, place to place, or street to street, conveying or
transporting goods, products, wares, merchandise, food or drink, or any
product thereof, offering or exposing the same for sale, or making sales and
delivering articles to purchasers, or who engages in any of the foregoing
activities from a stationary location on the street or other public place.



   SOLICITOR or CANVASSER



   Any person, whether or not a resident of the Town of Hammonton, who
goes from place to place or street to street, whether on foot or by
conveyance of any kind, nature or sort, soliciting, taking or attempting to
take orders for the sale of services, goods, wares, merchandise, food or
drink or any products thereof, or property of any kind or nature whatsoever,
for future performance or delivery, whether or not such individual has,
carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such order, and
whether or not he is collecting advance payments on such sales or orders, or
who engages in any of the foregoing activities from a stationary location on
the street or other public place.



   SEASONAL SALES VENDOR



   A person who sells goods and/or merchandise for a specified, limited
purpose and period of time, at a location owned by and/or leased by the
person.



   NONPROFIT SEASONAL SALES VENDOR



   Any nonprofit, religious, charitable, educational, civic or veteran
organization or fire company which is located within the boundaries of the
Town of Hammonton and sells goods and merchandise at a specific location
either owned by the nonprofit organization or having the written consent of
the owners of the property to conduct seasonal sales activities within the
Town of Hammonton.



   MERCHANDISE (peddler, hawker, vendor, solicitor, or canvasser)



   Includes all goods, wares, foods, fruits, vegetables, farm products,
beverages, food products, books, magazines, periodicals, arts, crafts, and
all kinds of articles of personal property for personal and/or domestic use.



   MERCHANDISE (seasonal sales vendor)



   Includes Christmas trees, Christmas wreaths, Christmas grave blankets,
Christmas arts and crafts, Valentine flowers, Easter flowers, Easter baskets,
Mothers' Day flowers, Mothers' Day baskets, and other article of arts and
crafts related to the seasonal sales activity for these specific days.



   PERSON



   Any individual, partnership, partner, corporation or corporations or
similar business entity.



   SEASONAL SALES TIME PERIOD



   A specific time period to sell goods and/or merchandise as follows:



   A.   Christmas: a total time period not to exceed 31 days in the
month of December, including Christmas Day.



   B.   Valentine's Day: a time period not to exceed seven days in the
month of February, including Valentine's Day.



   C.   Easter: a time period not to exceed 14 days, including Easter.



   D.   Mother's Day: a time period not to exceed seven days, including
Mother's Day, in the month of May.



§ 204-16. (Reserved)



   [Editor’s note: Former § 204-16, Fixed location sales prohibited;
exception, was repealed 1-23-2017 by Ord. No. 001-2017]



§ 204-17. License required.



[Amended 1-23-2017 by Ord. No. 001-2017]



   It shall be unlawful for any hawker, peddler, vendor, solicitor,
canvasser, food truck vendor, door to door vendor, and seasonal sales vendor,
as defined herein, to engage in activity within the Town of Hammonton without
first obtaining a license in accordance with provision of this article.



§ 204-18. Application for seasonal sales vendor license.



   Any activities involving the sale of merchandise as defined under
"merchandise (seasonal sales vendor)" in this article shall be required to
obtain a seasonal sales license. Applicants for a licenses under this article
shall file a sworn application with the Town Clerk, in duplicate. Complete
applications for seasonal sales licenses must be submitted 30 days prior to
the actual specified time period for conducting a seasonal sales activity. An
application determined to be incomplete upon review shall be returned to the
applicant. The following information shall be required and sworn to:



   A.   Name, address, and telephone number of the organization and/or
business applying for a license under the provisions of this section.



   B.   Name, address, telephone number and description of those
individuals to be employed by and engaged in a seasonal sales activity.



   C.   The block and lot location of the property to be utilized in
conducting a seasonal sales activity.



   D.   Social security numbers and driver's license numbers of
individuals of the organization and/or business, engaged in the seasonal
sales.



   E.   Social security numbers and driver's license numbers of
individuals engaged in seasonal sales for the organization and/or business
applying for a license to conduct said activities.



   F.   The length of time for which the right to do business is
desired by the organization and/ or business applying for the license, as per
§ 204-15 of this article, which defines seasonal sales period.



   G.   Photographs of the individuals employed by the organization
and/or business applying for a license, taken within 60 days immediately
prior to the filing of the application.



   H.   Fingerprints of the individuals employed by the organization
and/or business applying for the license, obtained by the Chief of Police.



   I.   A statement indicating whether or not the individuals employed
by the organization and/or business applying for a license have been
convicted of any crime, disorderly persons offense or violation of any
municipal ordinance, as well as describing the nature of the events and the
punishment or penalty assessed therefor.



   J.   A list of previous licenses issued by the Town of Hammonton and
other licenses which have been applied for and issued by other municipalities.



   K.   A statement that the time of seasonal sales shall be between
the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.



   L.   Submission of a property survey of the lot(s) to be utilized to
be prepared by a New Jersey licensed professional engineer or surveyor. A
hand-drawn sketch plat may be submitted in lieu of a survey plat, as
determined by the Town Clerk. The purpose of the survey plat and/or sketch
plat is to determine if the proposed use of the property location is
sufficient for the intended purpose of conducting seasonal sales. The
following information must be set forth on the survey and/or sketch plat
submitted:



      (1)   Location of and quantities of merchandise to be stored
and displayed on the lot(s).



      (2)   Location of on-site parking, as well as off-site parking
associated with the site location.



      (3)   Location of curb cut access to indicate proper ingress
and egress of the site to evaluate and prevent traffic hazards, congestion or
excessive interference with normal traffic movements on adjacent public
streets.



      (4)   Location of Temporary signs in accordance with
regulations set forth in the Zoning Code of the Town of Hammonton.



   M.   A statement that no temporary signs advertising the seasonal
sales activity shall be placed on any tree, telegraph, electric, light or
public utility pole or upon rocks or other natural features located within
the public right-of-way; a statement that all temporary signs shall be
located on the site.



   N.   A statement that no more than four temporary signs shall be
created, and that temporary signs shall not exceed six square feet in area
nor exceed four feet in height.



   O.   A statement that temporary signs may not be erected prior to 48
hours of the designated seasonal sales activity and must be removed within 48
hours after the time period stated and licensed for conducting a seasonal
sales activity.



   P.   A statement that no sign shall be erected that is of such
character, form, shape or color that it imitates or resembles any official
traffic sign, signal or device, or that has any characteristics which are
likely to confuse or dangerously distract the attention of the operator of a
motor vehicle on a public street.



   Q.   A statement that temporary signs shall be kept in a proper
state of repair, in accordance with the requirements of the Town's Building
Code, Property Maintenance Code, and other pertinent regulations. Signs which
fall into such a state of disrepair as to become unsightly or to pose a
threat to public safety may be removed by the Town at the owner's expense
under proper notification by the Town.



   R.   A statement that no temporary sign shall be erected within or
project over the right-of-way of any public street or sidewalk. No temporary
signs placed on the site shall be located in such a fashion that would affect
the site visibility of the motoring public as determined by the Chief of
Police or his designee.



   S.   A statement as to how the site shall be maintained during the
designated time period, as well as a statement indicating how trash, refuse
and other materials will be disposed of other than through normal solid waste
collection services provided by the Town of Hammonton. All debris, materials,
trash, etc., must be removed from the site within 48 hours following the
expiration of the license issued by the Town of Hammonton.



   T.   A certification from the Town of Hammonton Tax Collector that
all taxes have been paid and are current on the site.



   U.   Proof of registration with the New Jersey Division of Taxation
and a copy of a valid certificate of authority to collect sales taxes.



§ 204-19. Application for peddler, hawker, vendor, solicitor, food truck
vendor, door to door vendor, and canvasser license.



[Amended 1-23-2017 by Ord. No. 001-2017]



   Applicants for a license for a peddler, hawker, vendor, solicitor, food
truck vendor, door to door vendor, and canvasser under this article shall
file with the Town Clerk/Administrator an application, in duplicate, on forms
to be provided by the Town Clerk/Administrator, that shall provide the
following information, all of which shall be sworn to:



   A.   Name, address and telephone number of the organization and/or
business applying for a license under the provisions of this section. The
applicant(s) must be the registered owner of the food truck, cart, vehicle or
other conveyance, the person named on Tax ID, the person named on certificate
of insurance and the person conducting the sale and he/she must be present at
all times.  Any person who has provided false information on their
application or any person who has caused another person to provide false
information on their application, will be subject to a local fine of
$1,000.00.



   B.   Name, address, telephone number and description of those
individuals to be employed by and engaged in peddling, hawking, soliciting,
food truck vending, door to door vending, or canvassing. The applicant(s)
must be the registered owner of the food truck, cart, vehicle or other
conveyance, the person named on Tax ID, the person named on certificate of
insurance and the person conducting the sale and he/she must be present at
all times.  Any person who has provided false information on their
application or any person who has caused another person to provide false
information on their application, will be subject to a local fine of
$1,000.00.



   C.   The place or places of residence of the organization and/or
business applying for a license, as well as those individuals engaged by the
organization and/or business in conducting peddling, hawking, vending,
soliciting and canvassing activities.



   D.   Social security numbers and driver's license numbers of
individuals of the organization and/or business engaged in the activities of
peddling, hawking, vending, soliciting and canvassing.



   E.   Social security numbers and driver's license numbers of
individuals engaged in peddling, hawking, vending, soliciting and canvassing
for the organization and/or business applying for a license to conduct said
activities.



   F.   A brief description of the nature of the business, the goods to
be sold and the name and addresses of the principal office of the business as
well as the name and address of the agent designated to receive service of
process in the State of New Jersey of said organization and/or business
applying for a license under this article. The applicant shall also certify
that no merchandise being sold violates or otherwise infringes on any
trademark, copyright or official licensing rights of any other individual or
entity, and that the peddler, hawker, vendor, solicitor and/or canvasser
engaging in the sale of trademarked, copyrighted and/or licensed merchandise
shall present at the time of application, and maintain at the location of
sale, satisfactory written proof that it is an authorized seller of the
merchandise and/or that it has purchased the merchandise from a licensed
vendor. 



[Amended 9-13-2010 by Ord. No. 18-2010]



   G.   The length of time for which the right to do business is
desired by the organization and/or business applying for the license.



   H.   Current photo identification of each applicant is required.



   I.   Applicant shall submit a certificate of insurance to be
approved by the Town of Hammonton's Risk Management Consultant.



   J.   Veteran applicant shall submit proof of his/her New Jersey
Residency, State Issued Peddler License, Card #2765 Department of Defense
Status DAV/PERMANENT to be subject to veteran exception status.



   K.   The individuals employed by the organization and/or business
applying for a license shall be fingerprinted at the request of the Chief of
Police.



   L.   A statement indicating whether or not the individuals employed
by the business applying for a license have been convicted of any crime,
disorderly persons offense or violation of any municipal ordinance, as well
as describing the nature of the events and the punishment or penalty.



   M.   Whether or not orders are to be solicited or taken for future
delivery of goods or performance of services by the organization and/or
business applying for a license.



   N.   The organization and/or business applying for a license shall
list previous licenses issued by the Town of Hammonton as well as other
municipalities wherein licenses have been applied for and issued by those
municipalities.



   O.   All vending units shall not be permitted to be in use and shall
be off the streets and sidewalks of the Municipality during the period from
9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. daily.  Door to door sales are to be conducted
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.



   P.   Proof of registration with the New Jersey Division of Taxation
and a copy of a valid certificate of authority to collect sales taxes.



   Q.   Detailed map with street names and Block and Lot location where
food truck will be parked.



§ 204-20. Investigation and issuance; hearing upon disapproval.



[Amended 1-23-2017 by Ord. No. 001-2017]



   A.   Upon receipt of such application, the original thereof shall be
referred immediately by the Town Clerk to the Chief of Police of the Town,
who shall cause to be made such investigation of the applicant's business as
he deems necessary for the protection of the public welfare.



   B.   Such investigation shall be completed within 21 days after
receipt of such application; and said Chief shall endorse thereupon his
approval or disapproval and, if disapproved, his reasons therefor, and he
shall immediately notify the applicant that his application has been
disapproved.  The application so endorsed shall be forthwith returned to the
Town Clerk.  When the application is approved by the Police Chief, the
applicant shall be issued a license and a parking sticker for the specified
approved parking place in the case of a food truck, cart or other
conveyance.  When approving parking place the Police Chief shall take into
consideration all laws including but not limited to those pertaining to
intersections and traffic flow in the requested area.  All licenses issued
under Chapter 204 shall expire one year from date of issuance. 



[Amended 2-24-2014 by Ord. No. 003-2014]



   C.   If the application has been disapproved by the Chief of Police,
such applicant may file with the Town Clerk a request in writing for a
hearing on the ruling of the Chief of Police, and the Mayor and Town Council
shall then set a time and place for a hearing on such request, which hearing
shall be within 14 days after receipt of the written request therefor. At
such hearing the applicant shall have full and ample opportunity to present
facts and circumstances to support the issuance of a license in accordance
with the application, and the Mayor and Town Council shall then decide
whether the applicant should receive such license.



   D.   If the applicant has been approved by the Chief of Police, he
shall endorse his approval thereupon and shall promptly return it to the Town
Clerk, who, upon payment of the prescribed license fee as hereinafter set
forth, shall execute and deliver the license to the applicant. The Town Clerk
shall keep a record of all licenses issued, the fee received and of all
complaints made, if any, concerning such licensee.



§ 204-21. Fees.



[Amended 1-23-2017 by Ord. No. 001-2017]



   A.   Registration fee. Each individual applicant, even if all
working for same business, for a seasonal sales vendor license or a peddler,
hawker, vendor, solicitor, canvasser, food truck and door to door license
shall be required to pay a non-refundable fee of $100.00 to the Town Clerk
for police investigation for each person who will be utilizing license and
each vehicle, food truck or other conveyance that will be used during the
license term.



   B.   License fee. The Town's license fee for the issuance of a
license hereunder shall be as follows:



      (1)   Peddler, hawker, vendor, solicitor, canvasser, food
truck and door to door annual license fee:  $500.00 per person making sales
and per food truck, vehicle or other conveyance used to make sales.



      (2)   Seasonal sales vendor: $300.



§ 204-22. Duration of license.



[Amended 1-23-2017 by Ord. No. 001-2017]



   A seasonal sales license and a peddler, hawker, vendor, solicitor, food
truck, door to door vendor, and canvasser license shall be for a period of
one year. A separate license shall be applied for each seasonal sales
activity. Licenses shall not be transferable and must be surrendered after
expiration before a new license and/or registration can be issued for each
seasonal sales activity.



§ 204-23. Revocation of license.



   A.   Licenses issued under this article may be revoked by the Chief
of Police or his designee after reasonable notice and hearing for any of the
following reasons:



      (1)   Misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for the license and registration of individuals engaged by the
organization.



      (2)   Misrepresentation or false statement made in the cause
of carrying on activities regulated herein.



      (3)   Conviction of any crime or disorderly persons offense
involving moral turpitude.



      (4)   Conducting business in an unlawful manner and in
violation of any provision of this article or in such a manner as to
constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to health, safety
or general welfare of the public.



   B.   The revocation of a license shall be grounds for nonissuance of
a license for a period not to exceed two years.



   C.   Notice of hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in
writing setting forth the grounds of complaint and the time and place of
hearing. Such notice shall be served personally upon the licensee by means of
a summons, or by mail, postage prepaid, to the licensee at the address given
by the licensee in making application, at least five days prior to the date
set for a hearing in accordance with the provisions of this article. The
hearing will be held within 30 days of issuance of the notice of revocation.



§ 204-24. Enforcement.



   It shall be the duty of any police officer or code enforcement official
of the Town of Hammonton to enforce the provisions of this article.



§ 204-25. Effect on existing licenses.



[Amended 1-23-2017 by Ord. No. 001-2017]



   Any license which is operating under a current license term (to expire
one year from date of issuance) shall remain in full compliance under prior
law until the license expires at which time a new application with all
regulations contained herein must be made and approved.



§ 204-26. Violations and penalties.



   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not more than $1,000 or be
imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both. Each day that a violation
shall exist shall be construed as a separate offense.



§ 204-27. Exceptions.



[Amended 1-23-2017 by Ord. No. 001-2017]



   A.   This article shall not be construed as to apply to the selling
of any item or article at wholesale to dealers of such articles or items, or
to the delivery of milk, eggs, bread, butter, newspapers, or to other
articles or items of food or merchandise of a type which are generally
considered as household necessities and that are commonly delivered to a
house at intervals of a week or less.



   B.   A veteran with proper credentials is not subject to payment of
fees or location of sale restrictions but is subject to police investigation
and all other sections herein.  The veteran making application must be the
registered owner of the food truck, cart or vehicle or other conveyance, the
person named on Tax ID, the person named on certificate of insurance and the
person conducting the sale and he/she must be present at all times.  Any
person using a veteran to make application on their behalf, will be guilty of
a crime in the fourth degree per N.J.S.A. 45:24-9  and subject to a local
fine of $1,000.00.



   C.   Nonprofit groups.



      (1)   Any nonprofit religious, charitable, educational,
political, civic or veterans' organization, society, association or club
desiring to sell any item or merchandise as defined in § 204-15 for a
religious, charitable, patriotic, educational, civil or philanthropic purpose
shall be exempt from the provisions of §§ 204-17 and 204-19 of this
article, provided there is a filed, sworn application, in writing, with the
Town Clerk, either by the individual if done on an individual basis, or by
the one in charge thereof if being done on a group basis by numerous
individuals as agents or employees, who shall give the following information:



         (a)   Name of the individual or organization and the
purpose of the cause for which the permit is sought.



         (b)   Names and addresses of the individual officers and
directors or trustees of the organization and the addresses of such
organization.



         (c)   The location or locations of the property to be
utilized in conducting the sales activity, if applicable.



         (d)   The length of time anticipated to conduct the
activity.



         (e)   Proof of permission to use the property or
location.



         (f)   A sketch plan of the site where the activity is to
be conducted in order for the Town to determine the safety of the location.



         (g)   Compliance with § 204-18M through R on use of
temporary signs.



         (h)   A statement that the site will be maintained
properly during the activity and that any trash and/or refuse will be removed
and properly disposed of within 48 hours following use of the site.



         (i)   Submission of proof of nonprofit status under
state regulations and Internal Revenue Service regulation.



      (2)   Upon submission of the requirements found in Subsection
C(1) above, and upon being satisfied that such person is a bona fide
representative of such an organization or that such organization, as
aforesaid, is bona fide, and that the agents or representatives who shall
conduct the transactions are approved representatives, the Town Clerk shall
issue a permit, without charge to such organization, association or
corporation, to operate in the Town. Such organization shall supply its
agents, representatives or employees with a badge or ribbon containing the
names of such organization, which shall be worn and conspicuously displayed
on the front of the clothing of such agent, representative or employee.



   D.   Any person attending a special event held in the Town of
Hammonton shall be exempt from the requirements herein, however, will be
required to comply with any and all rules and regulations of the individual
group sponsoring the event.  All event coordinators and veteran attendees
shall be subject to N.J.S.A. 45:24-9.  The Municipal Clerk shall notify the
event coordinator of this law upon Mayor and Council's approval of the
special event.



   E.   Per N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 any licensee who shall sell or transfer
such license shall be guilty of a crime of the fourth degree and punished
accordingly.



§ 204-28. Food trucks prohibited. 



[Added 1-23-2017 by Ord. No. 001-2017]



   Food trucks shall be prohibited at all times in the following zones: 
HB, DT1, DT3, DT4, GW1, GW2, GW3 but shall be permitted on private property
not located in those zones and on farms so long as the property owner has
given their permission.



§ 204-29.  All sales prohibited.2 



[Added 1-23-2017 by Ord. No. 001-2017]



   All peddlers, hawkers, vendors, solicitors, canvassers, food truck, and
door to door sales are prohibited on municipal owned property.



2.   Editor’s Note: Former Article IV, §§ 204-30 —204-37, Special
Event Vendor Permit, was repealed 2-24-2014 by Ord. No. 003-2014.



§ 204-30.  Appeal for food trucks. 



[Added 2-26-2018 by Ord. No. 007-2018]



   A.    Town Council shall herein decide requests for variance relief
from § 204-28.



   B.    In passing upon such applications, Town Council shall consider
all relevant factors, including, but not limited to:



      (1)   The suitability of the location for food trucks;



      (2)   Any danger to life and property;



      (3)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
food truck to the community;



      (4)    The necessity for the food truck to be at that location;



      (5)   The availability of alternative locations for the
proposed food truck;



      (6)   The compatibility of the proposed food truck with
existing and anticipated development; and



      (7)   The safety of access to the property where the food
truck is to be located.



   C.    Upon consideration of the factors set forth above in §
204-30(B) and the purposes of this section, Town Council may attach such
conditions to the granting of a variance as it deems necessary to further the
purposes of this section.



   D.    The affirmative vote of the majority of the full authorized
membership of Town Council shall be necessary to grant requests for variances
under this section.



CHAPTER 211.
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton
4-8-1985 by Ord. No. 6-1985; amended in its entirety 3-14-1988 by Ord. No.
6-1988. Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.]



ARTICLE I.
Property Maintenance Code



   § 211-1.   Adoption of standards.



   § 211-2.   Certificates of occupancy; inspections.



   § 211-3.   Certificate of continued occupancy inspection fee for
change of ownership or occupancy for commercial properties.



   § 211-4.   Construal of provisions.



ARTICLE II.
Penalties



   § 211-5.   Purpose.



   § 211-6.   Definitions.



   § 211-7.   Complaints.



   § 211-8.   Notices.



   § 211-9.   Health hazard violations.



   § 211-10.   Violations and penalties.



   § 211-11.   Enforcement.



   § 211-12.   Rights retained by municipality.



   § 211-13.   Liens.



ARTICLE III
Adoption of Standards



   § 211-14.   Definitions.



   § 211-15.   Registration requirements.



   § 211-16.   Access to vacant properties.



   § 211-17.   Responsible owner or agent.



   § 211-18.   Fee schedule.



   § 211-19.   Requirements of owners of vacant/abandoned properties.



   § 211-20.   Violations and penalties.



ARTICLE IV
Registration and Maintenance of Real Property by Mortgagees



   § 211-21.   Purpose and intent.



   § 211-22.   Definitions.



   § 211-23.   Applicability.



   § 211-24.   Establishment of a registry.



   § 211-25.   Registration of abandoned real property.



   § 211-26.   Maintenance requirements.



   § 211-27.   Security requirements.



   § 211-28.   Public nuisance.



   § 211-29.   Violations and penalties.



   § 211-30.   Inspections for violations.



   § 211-31.   Additional authority.



   § 211-32.   Opposing, obstructing enforcement officer; penalty.



   § 211-33.   Immunity of enforcement officer.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 115.



   Fences and barriers — See Ch. 137.



   Hazardous fire conditions — See Ch. 144, Art. I.



   Housing standards — See Ch. 165.



   Junkyards — See Ch. 172.



   Littering — See Ch. 184.



   Abandoned refrigerators — See Ch. 214.



   Solid waste — See Ch. 241.



   Snow and ice removal — See Ch. 247, Art. II.



   Trees — See Ch. 267.



Article I.
Property Maintenance Code



§ 211-1. Adoption of standards.



[Amended 3-26-2004 by Ord. No. 11-2001; 2-25-2008 by Ord. No. 4-2008;
5-28-2013 by Ord. No. 008-2013]



   A.   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the
office of the Town Clerk of the Town of Hammonton and the office of the
Building Official/Code Enforcement Officer, being marked and designated as
International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 edition, as published by the
International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Property
Maintenance Code of the Town of Hammonton in the State of New Jersey for
regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property,
buildings and structures, by providing the standards for supplied utilities
and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure
that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use, and the
condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use,
and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing
for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all
of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
Property Maintenance Code on file in the office of the Hammonton Construction
Code Official, are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if
fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in Subsection C of this section.



   B.   To the extent that any other regulation or ordinance requires
more strict standards than exists in the International Property Maintenance
Code 2006, then the more strict standards shall apply within the Town of
Hammonton.



   C.   The following sections are hereby revised:



      (1)   In Section 101.1 insert: "Town of Hammonton."



      (2)   In Section 103.5 insert: "Such fees are on file with the
Construction Code Official of the Town of Hammonton."



      (3)   In Section 302.4: insert: "six inches."



      (4)   In Section 304.14 insert: "April 1 through October 1."



      (5)   Delete Section 404.4.1 in its entirety and replace with
the following language:



 

 

404.4.1 Room area. Every living room shall contain at least 120 square feet
of floor area. Every bedroom occupied by one person shall contain at least 70
square feet of floor area. Every bedroom occupied by more than one person
shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for each occupant thereof.




 



      (6)   Delete Section 404.5 in its entirety and replace with
the following language and subsections:



         404.5 Overcrowding. The number of persons occupying a
dwelling unit shall not create conditions that, in the opinion of the
Construction Code Official or his designee, endanger the life, health, safety
or welfare of the occupants. Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more
occupants than permitted by the minimum area requirements of Table 404.5.



 


Table 404.5 Minimum Area Requirements



 

[Minimum Area (square feet)]




Space

 

1-2 Occupants

 

3-5 Occupants

 

6-8 Occupants

 

9 or More Occupants



Living room
 

No requirement

 

120

 

150

 

225



Dining room
 

No requirement

 

80

 

150

 

200




 



 


Space

 

1 Occupant

 

2 or More Occupants



Bedrooms
 
70 square feet
 
Additional 50 sq. feet per occupant*


*No more than 4 occupants per any bedroom.



 



         404.5.1 Sleeping area. The minimum occupancy area required
by Table 404.5 shall not be included as a sleeping area in determining the
minimum occupancy area for sleeping purposes. All sleeping areas shall comply
with Sections 404.4 and 404.5. For health and fire safety reasons, no more
than 4 persons may occupy any one bedroom, regardless of the square footage
requirements of such room. Under no circumstances shall any sleeping area be
permitted in a basement unless the basement, in the opinion of the
Construction Code Official or his designee, contains adequate emergency
escape openings sufficient under fire safety standards, and otherwise
complies with all requirements in the International Property Maintenance Code
for sleeping and living areas.



         404.5.2 Combined spaces. Combined living room and dining
room spaces shall comply with the requirements of Table 404.5 if the total
area is equal to that required for separate rooms and if the space is located
so as to function as a combination living room/dining room.



      (7)   Section 602.3 insert "October 1 through April 15."



      (8)   Section 602.4 insert "October 1 through April 15."



§ 211-2. Certificates of occupancy; inspections.



   Responsibilities of owners of all properties used for residential
purposes, as well as their agents and prospective occupants, shall be as
follows:



   A.   No owner or his/her agent shall sell, rent, transfer, grant,
lease, let, mortgage with right of occupancy or otherwise dispose of the
ownership or occupancy, whether or not for a consideration and whether such
disposal of ownership or occupancy is temporary or permanent, of any
dwelling, apartment unit, condominium, duplex or triplex unit, hotel, motel,
rooming house, rooming unit, boardinghouse or premises on which the building
is located and is used for human occupancy, unless a certificate of
occupancy, certifying that the building and premises are in compliance with
all other ordinances of the Town of Hammonton, shall first be obtained from
the Code Enforcement Officer of the town. Such certificate of occupancy shall
be granted or denied within 10 days from the date of the application for the
same.



   B.   The Code Enforcement Officer shall cause to be prepared
appropriate application forms for such certificate of occupancy, which forms
shall be available at the office of the Code Enforcement Officer.



   C.   The Code Enforcement Officer shall also cause to be prepared
appropriate forms of such certificate of occupancy.



   D.   Fees.



[Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 5-2011]



      (1)   The fee for each inspection of a condominium or town
home shall be $60.



      (2)   The fee for each inspection of all other residential
dwellings shall be $75.



      (3)   All references to certificates of occupancy shall be
construed as references to certificates of continued occupancy.



   E.   Where preoccupancy inspections are performed by other agencies,
the findings of such surveys shall be deemed acceptable to the requirements
of this code. In such cases, the occupancy certificate shall be issued upon
presentation of pertinent documents, free of handling costs.



§ 211-3. Certificate of continued occupancy inspection fee for change of
ownership or occupancy for commercial properties.



[Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 5-2011]



   A.   No owner or his/her agent shall sell, rent, lease or otherwise
dispose of the ownership or change the occupancy of any property or portion
thereof utilized for commercial purposes without first obtaining a
certificate of continued occupancy from the Code Enforcement Officer of the
Town of Hammonton.



   B.   The fee for each certificate of continued occupancy shall be
$90.



   C.   Each commercial use within a building or structure or upon the
property shall constitute a separate commercial use subjecting same to an
inspection and fee.



§ 211-4. Construal of provisions.



[Amended 2-25-2008 by Ord. No. 4-2008]



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect any suit or
proceeding pending in any court, unless any of the violations contained
therein are ongoing violations which would be subject to the provisions of
this chapter.



Article II.
Penalties



[Added 5-22-1989 by Ord. No. 18-1989]



§ 211-5. Purpose.



   It is deemed to be in the public interest and necessary for the
enforcement of Article I of this chapter that penalty provisions be inserted
covering said violations and classifying the same for purposes of said
penalties. It is the belief of the Mayor and Council that failure to have
penalties in an ordinance relating to violations of said code makes said
ordinance ineffectual as an instrument protecting the public from those who
would violate the provisions of said code.



§ 211-6. Definitions.



   As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:



   HEALTH HAZARD VIOLATION



   Any violation involving a residential property having no water, no
bathroom facilities, no means of heating the premises to a minimum of 65°
between October 1 and May 15 of each year or no electricity in the residence.
In cases of commercial properties, a backed up sewer facility shall be
considered a health hazard violation.



   IMMEDIATE FAMILY



   Parents, grandparents, children, grandchildren and brothers and sisters
of the owner of record of property. Editor's Note: The former definition of
"major renovations," which immediately followed this definition, was repealed
2-25-2008 by Ord. No. 4-2008.



   RENTED SINGLE-FAMILY HOME



   A single-family home occupied by anyone other than the owner of the
premises, his or her spouse and/or members of the immediate family.



   SECOND OFFENDER



   An individual who has previously been convicted in the Hammonton
Municipal Court of a violation of the International Property Maintenance Code
where said violation affects the identical property when owned by the same
individual, his or her spouse or a member of his or her immediate family.



[Amended 2-25-2008 by Ord. No. 4-2008]



   THIRD OFFENDER



   An individual who has two prior convictions in the Hammonton Municipal
Court of a violation of the International Property Maintenance Code where
said violation affects the identical property when owned by the same
individual, his or her spouse or a member of his or her immediate family.



[Amended 2-25-2008 by Ord. No. 4-2008]



§ 211-7. Complaints.



[Amended 2-25-2008 by Ord. No. 4-2008]



   No complaints shall be brought until an individual has received written
notice from the Construction Official and Zoning Officer, or their authorized
representative, of a violation of this code and until the time periods set
forth under § 211-8 hereof have passed as such relate to the particular
violation.



§ 211-8. Notices.



[Amended 2-25-2008 by Ord. No. 4-2008]



   Notices shall be given in accordance with the International Property
Maintenance Code.



§ 211-9. Health hazard violations.



[Amended 2-25-2008 by Ord. No. 4-2008]



   Any violation not repaired within 24 hours after the owner is notified
shall result in a complaint issuing in the Hammonton Municipal Court. Each
day the health hazard violation continues after the day of notice shall be
considered a separate offense by the Court.



§ 211-10. Violations and penalties.



[Amended 2-25-2008 by Ord. No. 4-2008]



   A.   Any person violating the provisions of the Property Maintenance
Code of the Town of Hammonton, after having been convicted by any court of
competent jurisdiction, shall be subject to the following penalties:



      (1)   For the first offense, a fine of not more than $750.



      (2)   For a subsequent violation, a fine of up to $1,000
and/or imprisonment up to 90 days.



   B.   Each day that a violation continues, after due notice has been
given, shall be deemed a separate offense.



§ 211-11. Enforcement.



[Amended 2-25-2008 by Ord. No. 4-2008]



   A.   The Construction Code Official or his designee and all
authorized members of their departments shall have the right to enforce this
chapter.



   B.   The Construction Code Official or his designee shall have the
right to extend the notice period before said individual or entity is cited
with a criminal violation, upon the showing of just cause.



   C.   The Construction Code Official or his designee and all
authorized members of their department shall direct those actions necessary
to cause the violation to be terminated and abated. The actual cost of such
termination, which shall include the cost for terminating and abating the
violation, obtaining title information, advertising and recording any liens
imposed hereunder, shall constitute a lien on the property in accordance with
Section 211-13. [Added 5-28-2013 by Ord. No. 007-2013]



§ 211-12. Rights retained by municipality.



   A.   Nothing in this chapter shall impair or limit the right, if
any, of the Hammonton Municipal Court to order the violator to make such
repairs as are required by the code.



   B.   Nothing in this chapter shall restrict or limit the right of
the town to seek such remedies as are necessary in order to effectuate
compliance with said code through actions brought in courts of competent
jurisdiction by the town.



   C.   Nothing in this chapter shall restrict the rights, where such
exist, of the County Board of Health, the Construction Official or the Zoning
Officer to cause a premises to be closed and vacated where authorization for
such action appears in any ordinance or state law.



   D.   It shall be unlawful for any person to oppose, obstruct or
resist any Town of Hammonton Building Official / Code Enforcement Official in
the discharge of his or her duties as provided in this article.  [Added
5-28-2013 by Ord. No. 007-2013]



   E.   Any Town of Hammonton/ Code Enforcement Official shall be
immune from prosecution, whether civilly or criminally, as the result of any
reasonable, good faith trespass upon property while in the discharge of
duties imposed by this section. [Added 5-28-2013 by Ord. No. 007-2013]



§ 211-13. Liens. 



[Added 5-28-2013 by Ord. No. 007-2013]



   A.    A copy of the request for payment of the cost of abating a
violation(s) shall be served on the violator at his or her last known address
and the violator shall have 15 days from the receipt of the request within
which to pay all costs described in the request. Service of the request for
payment may be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is:



      (1)   Delivered personally;



      (2)   Sent by certified or first class mail addressed to the
last known address; or



      (3)   If the notice is returned showing the letter was not
delivered, a copy posted in a conspicuous place in or about the property or
structure affected by such notice.



   In the event a violator fails or refuses to pay all costs incurred by
the town that are associated with terminating or abating a violation, such
costs will be imposed as a lien against the subject real property.



ARTICLE III
Adoption of Standards



[Adopted 9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 019-2015]



§ 211-14. Definitions.



   As used in this article, the following terms shall have the same
meanings indicated:



   ABANDONED PROPERTY — Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-81, an abandoned
property is defined as follows: Any property in the Town of Hammonton,
including, but not limited to, residential, commercial and/or industrial that
has not been legally occupied for a period of six months and which meets any
one of the following additional criteria may be deemed to be abandoned
property upon a determination by the public officer that:



   A.   The property is in need of rehabilitation in the reasonable
judgment of the public officer, and no rehabilitation has taken place during
that six-month period;



   B.   Construction was initiated on the property and was discontinued
prior to completion, leaving the building unsuitable for occupancy, and no
construction has taken place for at least six months as of the date of a
determination by the public officer pursuant to this section;



   C.   At least one installment of property tax remains unpaid and
delinquent on that property in accordance with Chapter 4 of Title 54 of the
Revised Statutes as of the date of the determination by the public officer
pursuant to this section; or



   D.   The property has been determined to be a nuisance by the public
officer in accordance with Section 5 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A.
55:19-82). A property which contains both residential and nonresidential
space may be considered abandoned pursuant to P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A.
55:19-78 et seq.) so long as 2/3 or more of the total net square footage of
the building was previously legally occupied as residential or commercial
space and none of the residential or commercial space has been legally
occupied for at least six months at the time of the determination of
abandonment by the public officer and the property meets the criteria of
either Subsection A or Subsection D of this definition.



   OWNER — Shall include the title holder, any agent of the title holder
having authority to act with respect to a vacant/abandoned property, any
foreclosing entity subject to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51 (P.L.
2008, c. 127, Section 17, as amended by P.L. 2009, c. 296), or any other
entity determined by the Town of Hammonton to have authority to act with
respect to the property.



   VACANT PROPERTY — Any building used or to be used as a residence,
commercial or industrial structure which is not legally occupied or at which
substantially all lawful construction operations or occupancy has ceased, and
which is in such condition that it cannot legally be reoccupied without
repair or rehabilitation, including but not limited to any property meeting
the definition of "abandoned property" in N.J.S.A. 55:19-54, 55:19-78,
55:19-79, 55:19-80 and 55:19-81; provided, however, that any property where
all building systems are in working order, where the building and grounds are
maintained in good order, or where the building is in habitable condition,
and where the building is being actively marketed by its owner for sale or
rental, shall not be deemed a vacant property for purposes of this article.



§ 211-15. Registration requirements.



   Effective 30 days after adoption of this Ordinance, the owner of any
vacant property, as defined herein, shall, within 30 calendar days after the
building becomes vacant property or within 30 calendar days after assuming
ownership of the vacant property, whichever is later, or within 10 calendar
days of receipt of notice by the municipality, file a registration statement
for such vacant property with the Code Enforcement Official on forms provided
by the town for such purposes. Failure to receive notice by the municipality
shall not constitute grounds for failing to register the property.



   A.   Each property having a separate block and lot number as
designated in official records of the municipality shall be registered
separately.



   B.   The registration statement shall include the name, street
address, telephone number, and e-mail address (if applicable) of a person 21
years or older, designated by the owner or owners as the authorized agent for
receiving notices of code violations and for receiving process in any court
proceeding or administrative enforcement proceedings on behalf of such owner
or owners in connection with the enforcement of any applicable code; and the
name, street address, telephone number, and e-mail (if applicable) of the
firm and the actual name(s) of the firm's individual principal(s) responsible
for maintaining the property. The individual or representative of the firm
responsible for maintaining the property shall be available by telephone or
in person on a 24-hour-per-day, seven-day-per-week basis. The two entities
may be the same or different persons. Both entities shown on the statement
must maintain offices in the State of New Jersey or reside within the State
of New Jersey.



   C.   The registration shall remain valid for one year from the date
of registration, except for the initial registration, which shall be prorated
through December 31. The owner shall be required to renew the registration
annually as long as the building remains a vacant and/or abandoned property
and shall pay a registration or renewal fee in the amount prescribed in §
211-18 of this article for each vacant property registered.



   D.   The annual renewal shall be completed by January 1 each year.
The initial registration fee shall be prorated for registration statements
received less than 10 months prior to that date.



   E.   The owner shall notify the Code Enforcement Official within 30
calendar days of any change in the registration information by filing an
amended registration statement on a form provided by the Code Enforcement
Official for such purpose.



   F.   The registration statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of
the statements therein contained in any administrative enforcement proceeding
or court proceeding instituted by the Borough against the owner or owners of
the building.



§ 211-16. Access to vacant properties.



   The owner of any vacant property registered under this article shall
provide access to the Borough to conduct exterior and interior inspections of
the building to determine compliance with municipal codes, upon reasonable
notice to the property owner or the designated agent. Such inspections shall
be carried out on weekdays during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., or
such other time as may be mutually agreed upon between the owner and the
Borough.



§ 211-17. Responsible owner or agent.



   A.   An owner who meets the requirements of this article with
respect to the location of his or her residence or workplace in the State of
New Jersey may designate himself or herself as agent or as the individual
responsible for maintaining the property.



   B.   By designating an authorized agent under the provisions of this
section, the owner consents to receive any and all notices of code violations
concerning the registered vacant property and all process in any court
proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding brought to enforce code
provisions concerning the registered building by service of the notice or
process on the authorized agent. Any owner who has designated an authorized
agent under the provisions of this section shall be deemed to consent to the
continuation of the agent's designation for the purposes of this section
until the owner notifies the Borough in writing of a change of authorized
agent or until the owner files a new annual registration statement.



   C.   Any owner who fails to register vacant/abandoned property under
the provisions of this article shall further be deemed to consent to receive,
by posting on the building, in plain view, and by service of notice at the
last known address of the owner of the property on record within the town by
regular and certified mail, any and all notices of code violations and all
process in an administrative proceeding brought to enforce code provisions
concerning the building.



§ 211-18. Fee schedule.



The initial registration fee for each building shall be $500. The fee for the
first renewal is $1,500, and the fee for the second renewal is $3,000. The
fee for any subsequent renewal beyond the second renewal is $5,000.



   Vacant Property Registration Fee Schedule



 

Type
 
Fee


Initial registration
 
$500


First renewal
 
$1,500


Second renewal
 
$3,000


Subsequent renewal
 
$5,000



 



§ 211-19. Requirements of owners of vacant/abandoned properties.



   The owner of any building that has become vacant/abandoned property,
and any person maintaining or operating or collecting rent for any such
building that has become vacant, shall, within 30 days thereof:



   A.   Enclose and secure the building against unauthorized entry as
provided in the applicable provisions of the Town Code or as set forth in the
rules and regulations supplementing those codes; and



   B.   Post a sign affixed to the building indicating the name,
address and telephone number of the owner, the owner's authorized agent for
the purpose of service of process, and the person responsible for day-to-day
supervision and management of the building, if such person is different from
the owner holding title or authorized agent. The sign shall be of a size and
placed in such a location so as to be legible from the nearest public street
or sidewalk, whichever is nearer, but shall be no smaller than eight inches
by 10 inches; and



   C.   Secure the building from unauthorized entry and maintain the
sign until the building is again legally occupied or demolished or until
repair or rehabilitation of the building is complete; and



   D.   Ensure that the exterior grounds of the structure, including
yards, fences, sidewalks, walkways, rights-of-way, alleys, retaining walls,
attached or unattached accessory structures, and driveways, are
well-maintained and free from trash, debris, loose litter, and grass and weed
growth; and



   E.   Continue to maintain the structure in a secure and closed
condition, keep the grounds in a clean and well-maintained condition, and
ensure that the sign is visible and intact until the building is again
occupied, demolished, or until repair and/or rehabilitation of the building
is complete.



§ 211-20. Violations and penalties.



   A.   Any person who violates any provision of this article or the
rules and regulations issued hereunder shall be fined not less than $100 and
not more than $1,000 for each offense. Every day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. Fines assessed under this
article shall be recoverable from the owner and shall be a lien on the
property.



   B.   For purposes of this section, failure to file a registration
statement within 30 calendar days after a building becomes vacant property or
within 30 calendar days after assuming ownership of a vacant property,
whichever is later, or within 10 calendar days of receipt of notice by the
municipality, and failure to provide correct information on the registration
statement, or failure to comply with the provisions of such provisions
contained herein, shall be deemed to be violations of this article.



   C.   To the extent that the town incurs any costs or expends any
funds in the enforcement of this Ordinance, the town shall have the option of
assessing the tax bill by adding the sums so expended to the tax bill of the
registered property owner or requiring restitution of those expenditures in
any court proceeding provided in this subchapter.



ARTICLE IV.
REGISTRATION AND MAINTENANCE OF REAL PROPERTY BY MORTGAGEES.



[Adopted 4-18-2016 by Ord. No. 006-2016]



§ 211-21. Purpose and intent.



   It is the town's purpose and intent to establish a process to address
the deterioration and blight of neighborhoods caused by an increasing amount
of abandoned, foreclosed or distressed real property located within the Town
of Hammonton, and to identify, regulate, limit and reduce the number of
abandoned properties located within the town.  It is with  further intent
to participate in the County-wide registration program established by the
Atlantic County Improvement Authority as a mechanism to protect neighborhoods
from becoming blighted due to the lack of adequate maintenance and security
of abandoned and foreclosed properties.



§ 211-22. Definitions.



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Article IV,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning.



   ABANDONED REAL PROPERTY — means any real property located in the Town
of Hammonton, whether vacant or occupied, that is in default on a mortgage,
has had a list pending filed against it by the Lender holding a mortgage on
the property, is subject to an ongoing foreclosure action by the Lender, is
subject to an application for a tax deed or pending tax assessors lien sale,
or has been transferred to the Lender under a deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
The designation of a property as "abandoned" shall remain in place until such
time as the property is sold or transferred to a new owner, the foreclosure
action has been dismissed, and any default on the mortgage has been cured.



   ACCESSIBLE PROPERTY/STRUCTURE — means a property that is accessible
through a comprised breached gate, fence, wall, etc. or a structure that is
unsecured and/or breached in such a way as to allow access to the interior
space by unauthorized persons.



   APPLICABLE CODES — means to include, but not be limited to, the Town
of Hammonton Zoning Code, the  Town of Hammonton Code, and the New Jersey
Building Code.



   BLIGHTED PROPERTY — means:



      (a)   Properties that have broken or severely damaged windows,
doors, walls, or roofs which create hazardous conditions and encourage
trespassing; or



      (b)   Properties whose maintenance is not in conformance with
the maintenance of other neighboring properties causing a decrease in value
of the neighboring properties; or



      (c)   Properties cited for a public nuisance pursuant to the
Town of Hammonton Code; or



      (d)   Properties that endanger the public's health, safety, or
welfare because the properties or improvements thereon are dilapidated,
deteriorated, or violate minimum health and safety standards or lack
maintenance as required by the Town of Hammonton Code and Zoning Codes.



   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — means any law enforcement officer, building
official, zoning inspector, code enforcement officer, fire inspector or
building inspector, or other person authorized by the Town of Hammonton to
enforce the applicable code(s).



   OWNER — means any person, legal entity or other party having any
ownership interest whether legal or equitable, in real property.  This term
shall also apply to any person, legal entity or agent responsible for the
construction, maintenance or operation of the property involved.



   PROPERTY MANAGEMENT COMPANY — means a local property manager,
property maintenance company or similar entity responsible for the
maintenance of abandoned real property.



   VACANT — means any building or structure that is not legally occupied.



§ 211-23. Applicability.



   These sections shall be considered cumulative and not superseding or
subject to any other law or provision for same, but rather be an additional
remedy available to the Town of Hammonton above and beyond any other state,
county or local provisions for same.



§ 211-24. Establishment of a registry.



   Pursuant to the provisions of this § 211-24, the Town of Hammonton
shall participate in the County-wide registration program cataloging each
abandoned property within the town, containing the information required by
this article.



§ 211-25. Registration of abandoned real property.



   A.   Any mortgagee who holds a mortgage on real property located
within the Town of Hammonton shall perform an inspection of the property to
determine vacancy or occupancy, upon default by the mortgagor.  The
mortgagee shall, within 10 days of the inspection, register the property with
the Town of Hammonton Code Enforcement Officer, or designee, on forms or
website access provided by the Town of Hammonton, and indicate whether the
property is vacant or occupied.  A separate registration is required for
each property, whether it is found to be vacant or occupied.



   B.   If the property is occupied but remains in default, it shall be
inspected by the mortgagee or his or her designee monthly until (1) the
mortgagor or other party remedies the default, or (2) it is found to be
vacant or shows evidence of vacancy at which time it is deemed abandoned, and
the mortgagee shall, within 10 days of that inspection, update the property
registration to a vacancy status.



   C.   Registration pursuant to this section shall contain the name of
the mortgagee and the server, the direct mailing address of the mortgagee and
the server, a direct contact name and telephone number for both parties,
facsimile number and e-mail address for both parties, tax lot and block for
the property, and the name and 24 hour contact telephone number of the
property management company responsible for the security and maintenance of
the property.



   D.   A non-refundable annual registration fee per property, in
accordance with § 211-18, shall accompany the registration form or website
registration.



   E.   All registration fees must be paid directly from the mortgagee,
servicer, trustee, or owner.  Third party registration fees are not allowed
without the consent of the Town of Hammonton and/or its authorized designee.



   F.   This section shall also apply to properties that have been the
subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the
beneficiary of a mortgage involved in the foreclosure and any properties
transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale.



   G.   Properties subject to this section shall remain under the
annual registration requirement, and the inspection, security and maintenance
standards of this section as long as they remain vacant or in default.



   H.   Any person or legal entity that has registered a property under
this section must report any change of information contained in the
registration within 10 days of the change.



   I.   Failure of the mortgagee and/or owner to properly register or
to modify the registration form from time to time to reflect a change of
circumstances as required by this article is a violation of the article and
shall be subject to enforcement.



   J.   Pursuant to any administrative or judicial finding and
determination that any property is in violation of this article, the Town of
Hammonton may take the necessary action to ensure compliance with and place a
lien on the property for the cost of the work performed to benefit the
property and bring it into compliance.



§ 211-26.  Maintenance requirements.



   A.   Properties subject to this article shall be kept free of weeds,
overgrown brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials,
any accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, notices, except those
required by federal, state or local law, discarded personal items including,
but not limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, printed
material or any other items that give the appearance that the property is
abandoned.



   B.   The property shall be maintained free of graffiti or similar
markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that
matches the color of the exterior structure.



   C.   Front, side, and rear yards, including landscaping, shall be
maintained in accordance with the applicable code(s) at the time registration
was required.



   D.   Yard maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, grass,
ground covers, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock
or bark or artificial turf/sod designed specifically for residential
installation.  Acceptable maintenance of yards and/or landscape shall not
include weeds, gravel, broken concrete, asphalt or similar material.



   E.   Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, watering,
irrigation, cutting and mowing of required ground cover or landscape and
removal of all trimmings.



   F.   Pools and spas shall be maintained so the water remains free
and clear of pollutants and debris and shall comply with the regulations set
forth in the applicable code(s).



   G.   Failure of the mortgagee and/or owner to properly maintain the
property may result in a violation of the applicable code(s) and issuance of
a citation or Notice of Violation in accordance with § 211-20(A) and §
211-20(C).  Pursuant to a finding and determination by the Town of Hammonton
Enforcement Official, or a court of competent jurisdiction, the Town of
Hammonton may take the necessary action to ensure compliance with this
section.



   H.   In addition to the above, the property is required to be
maintained in accordance with the applicable code(s).



§ 211-27. Security requirements.



   A.   Properties subject to these sections shall be maintained in a
secure manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons.



   B.   A "secure manner" shall include, but not be limited to, the
closure and locking of windows, doors, gates and other openings of such size
that may allow a child to access the interior of the property or structure. 
Broken windows, doors, gates and other openings of such size that may allow a
child to access the interior of the property or structure must be repaired. 
Broken windows shall be secured by reglazing of the window.



   C.   If a mortgage on a property is in default, and the property has
become vacant or abandoned, a property manager shall be designated by the
mortgagee to perform the work necessary to bring the property into compliance
with the applicable code(s), and the property manager must perform regular
inspections to verify compliance with the requirements of this article, and
any other applicable laws.



§ 211-28. Public nuisance.



   All abandoned real property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance,
the abatement of which pursuant to the police power is hereby declared to be
necessary for the health, welfare and safety of the residents of the Town of
Hammonton.



§ 211-29. Violations and penalties.



   Any person, firm, partnership, company or corporation who shall violate
any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
the violations and penalties set forth in § 211-20(A) and § 211-20(C).  In
addition to the penalties set forth in this § 211-29, the Town of Hammonton
shall also be entitled to collect any registration fees due and owing
pursuant to § 211-18.



§ 211-30. Inspections for violations.



   Adherence to this article does not relieve any person, legal entity or
agent from any other obligations set forth in any applicable Town of
Hammonton code(s), which may apply to the property. Upon sale or transfer of
title to the property, the owner shall be responsible for all violations of
the applicable code(s) and the owner shall be responsible for meeting with
the Town of Hammonton Code Enforcement Official within 45 days for a final
courtesy inspection report.



§ 211-31. Additional authority.



   A.   If the enforcement officer has reason to believe that a
property subject to the provisions of this article is posing a serious threat
to the public health, safety and welfare, the enforcement officer may
temporarily secure the property at the expense of the mortgagee and/or owner,
and may bring the violations before the Town of Hammonton's Code Enforcement
Official as soon as possible to address the conditions of the property.



   B.   The Town of Hammonton Code Enforcement Official shall have the
authority to require the mortgagee and/or owner of record of any property
affected by this section, to implement additional maintenance and/or security
measures including, but not limited to, securing any and all doors, windows
or other openings, employment of an on-site security guard or other measures
as may be reasonably required to help prevent further decline of the property.



   C.   If there is a finding that the condition of the property is
posing a serious threat to the public health, safety and welfare, then the
Town of Hammonton Code Enforcement Official may direct the town to abate the
violations and charge the mortgagee with the cost of the abatement.



   D.   If the mortgagee does not reimburse the town for the cost of
temporarily securing the property, or of any abatement directed by the Code
Enforcement Official, within 30 days of the town sending the mortgagee the
invoice, then such amount, together with an administrative fee of $500 to
address the town's administrative expenses, shall be a lien against the
property and recorded and collected as provided by the statutes of the State
of New Jersey. 



§ 211-32.  Opposing, obstructing enforcement officer; penalty.



   Any person, firm, partnership, company or corporation that opposes,
obstructs or resists any enforcement officer or any person authorized by this
article in the discharge of duties as provided in this article shall be
subject to the penalties as set forth in § 211-29. 



§ 211-33.  Immunity of enforcement officer.



Any enforcement officer or any person authorized by the town to enforce the
sections here within shall be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for
reasonable, good faith entry upon real property while in the discharge of
duties imposed by this article.



CHAPTER 213.
REDEVELOPMENT PLAN



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton
3-22-2004 by Ord. No. 5-2004; amended 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 24-2011.
Amendments noted where applicable.]



   § 213-1.   Findings.



   § 213-2.   Definitions.



   § 213-3.   Adoption of plan.



   § 213-4.   Contents.



   § 213-5.   State criteria.



   § 213-6.   Overlay zoning district.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Land development — See Ch. 175.



§ 213-1. Findings.



   The Mayor and Council in the Town of Hammonton find that areas in the
town are in need of redevelopment and rehabilitation, as defined by N.J.S.A.
40A:12A-3, and as recommended by the Hammonton Planning Board on December 10,
2003, and adopted by the Board by resolution on December 17, 2003.



§ 213-2. Definitions.



   The Town of Hammonton adopts all definitions as stated in N.J.S.A.
40A:12A-3 and all definitions found in the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A
40:55D-1 et seq.



§ 213-3. Adoption of plan.



   A Redevelopment Plan is adopted in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-7.



§ 213-4. Contents.



   The Redevelopment Plan shall be comprised of all maps and plans as
designated in the Redevelopment Area Analysis and Redevelopment Area Plan,
dated December 2002 and revised December 2003 and the Strategic Redevelopment
and Smart Growth Plan dated February 2003 and revised December 2003, which is
incorporated herein by reference.



§ 213-5. State criteria.



   The Planning Board of the Town of Hammonton has determined that all
criteria as set forth in N.J.S.A 40A:12A-7 and N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-5 has been
met by the Redevelopment Plan described in § 213-4 of this chapter, and the
Mayor and Council adopts same in full.



§ 213-6. Overlay zoning district.



   The Redevelopment Plan shall constitute an overlay zoning district
within the redevelopment area as described by N.J.S.A 40A:12A-7.



CHAPTER 214.
REFRIGERATORS, ABANDONED



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton
9-13-1971 by Ord. No. 10-1971 as Ch. 105 of the 1971 Code; amended in its
entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Amendments noted where applicable.]



   § 214-1.   Abandonment prohibited.



   § 214-2.   Removal of doors required.



   § 214-3.   Violations and penalties.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Littering — See Ch. 184.



   Property maintenance — See Ch. 211.



   Trash collection — See Ch. 241, Art. II.



§ 214-1. Abandonment prohibited.



   No person shall leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place
accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox,
refrigerator or any other container of any kind which has an airtight door or
lock which may not be released for opening from the inside of such icebox,
refrigerator or container.



§ 214-2. Removal of doors required.



   No person shall leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place
accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox,
refrigerator or any other container of any kind which has an airtight snap
lock or other device thereon without first removing the snap lock or doors
from such icebox, refrigerator or container.



§ 214-3. Violations and penalties.



   Any person, firm or corporation violating any section of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to one or more of the following: a
fine of not more than $1,000, imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days
or a period of community service not to exceed 90 days.



CHAPTER 216.
RENTAL PROPERTY



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council 4-4-2007 by Ord. No.
5-2007. Amendments noted where applicable.]



ARTICLE I.
Landlord and Tenant Responsibilities; Enforcement



   § 216-1.   Responsibilities of occupants and owners/landlords.



   § 216-2.   Notice of violation; subsequent violations.



   § 216-3.   Violations and penalties.



ARTICLE II.
Definitions; Registration and Licensing



   § 216-4.   Definitions.



   § 216-5.   Registration required.



   § 216-6.   Registration upon change in occupancy; term; initial
registration provisions.



   § 216-7.   Registration forms; filing; contents.



   § 216-8.   Registration form indexing and filing; license to be
posted.



   § 216-9.   Amendments.



   § 216-10.   Periodic inspections.



   § 216-11.   Access for inspections and repairs; complaints.



   § 216-12.   Occupancy of unregistered or unlicensed unit prohibited.



   § 216-13.   Issuance of license; revocation.



   § 216-14.   Fees.



   § 216-15.   Owner to provide registration form to occupants and
tenants.



   § 216-16.   Maximum number of occupants; posting.



   § 216-17.   Payment of taxes and other charges as precondition for
registration and license.



   § 216-18.   Other rental unit standards.



   § 216-19.   Occupancy standards.



   § 216-20.   Revocation of license; procedure.



   § 216-21.   Violations and penalties.



Editor's Note: Former Ch. 216, Rental Property, adopted 9-25-2006 by Ord. No.
19-2006, was repealed 4-4-2007 by Ord. No. 4-2007.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Animals — See Ch. 82.



   Housing standards — See Ch. 165.



   Peace and good order — See Ch. 202.



   Property maintenance — See Ch. 211.



   Rent control — See Ch. 217.



   Solid waste — See Ch. 241.



Article I.
Landlord and Tenant Responsibilities; Enforcement



§ 216-1. Responsibilities of occupants and owners/landlords.



   A.   The intention of this chapter is to regulate improper behavior
by occupants of residential rental premises within the Town of Hammonton.
This chapter establishes a procedure to be followed by landlords/owners in
the event that their tenants, or the tenant's invitees, guests and/or their
pets, engage in any disorderly conduct, nuisance, offensive language or other
behaviors or conduct which is a violation of any state or federal statute,
regulation or any provision of the Town of Hammonton Municipal Code.



   B.   In no event shall landlords/owners be personally responsible
for the behavior of their tenants, regardless of whether that behavior occurs
on or about the rental premises or off premises. However, in the case of
improper behavior occurring on or about the rental premises, landlord/owners
shall follow the procedure outlined below or be subject to the prescribed
penalties for failure to follow those procedures.



§ 216-2. Notice of violation; subsequent violations.



   A.   Upon the occurrence of any violation by an occupant of a
residential rental premises within the Town of Hammonton or their invitees,
guests and/or their pets which results in the issuance of a written warning
or summons to those individuals, the landlord or owner of the property shall
be placed on notice by receiving written notification of said violation via
certified mail, return receipt requested, from the person so designated by
the Town Councilpersons to forward said notice. Said notice shall generally
inform the landlord and/or owner of the nature of the violation and the date
upon which said violation occurred. Said notice shall also require the
landlord to provide the tenant with notice via certified mail, return receipt
requested, or by personal delivery to cease said behavior and to provide the
designated municipal official with proof that it has done so. Said notice
shall also state that a third violation by the tenant of this article shall
result in said landlord and/or owner being cited and otherwise charged with a
violation of this article, which may result in a hearing on said violation to
be heard in the Town of Hammonton Municipal Court.



   B.   Upon a tenant receiving a third warning/summons (notice of
which shall also be provided via certified mail, return receipt requested, to
landlord), then said landlord and/or owner may be cited for violation of this
article and noticed for a hearing to be held in the Town of Hammonton
Municipal Court unless the landlord provides proof within 30 days that it has
commenced and in good faith prosecuted an action for eviction in
Landlord/Tenant Court. The Municipal Court action shall be stayed pending
conclusion of the eviction action, the results of which shall be provided to
the Town's designated representative within five days of conclusion by the
landlord/owner providing a written certification to the Town of the final
resolution. The landlord's provision of such proof shall result in a
dismissal of the action hereunder, regardless of the outcome in
Landlord/Tenant Court, assuming same was prosecuted by the landlord to
conclusion, but shall not relieve landlord of its obligation to file a future
eviction action in the event of a subsequent violation of this article by the
same tenant.



   C.   For purposes of determining the number of warning/summons
received by any tenant, the said Tenant shall be relieved of one
violation/summons for each twelve-month period in which that tenant receives
no warning or summons.



§ 216-3. Violations and penalties.



   Any landlord/owner who shall violate the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not to exceed $750 for a first
offense and up to $1,000 for any subsequent conviction.



Article II.
Definitions; Registration and Licensing



§ 216-4. Definitions.



   Unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the following
words or phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meaning:



   AGENT



   The individual or individuals designated by the owner as the person(s)
authorized by the owner to perform any duty imposed upon the owner by this
article. The term does not necessarily mean a licensed real estate broker or
salesperson of the State of New Jersey, as those terms are defined by
N.J.S.A. 45:15-3; however, such term may include a licensed real estate
broker or salesperson of the State of New Jersey, if such person designated
by the owner as his agent is so licensed.



   APARTMENT OR DWELLING



   Any apartment, cottage, bungalow, any room or rooms in a
rooming/boardinghouse or other dwelling unit, consisting of one or more rooms
occupying all or part of a floor or floors in a building, whether designed
with or without housekeeping facilities for dwelling purposes and
notwithstanding whether the apartment be designed for residence, for office
or the operation of any industry or business or for any other type of
independent use. Each dwelling unit shall contain no more than one kitchen or
cooking facility.



   DWELLING UNIT



   Any room or rooms or suite or apartment, including any room or rooms in
a rooming/boardinghouse, whether furnished or unfurnished, which is occupied
or intended, arranged or designed to be occupied for sleeping or dwelling
purposes by one or more persons, including but not limited to the owner
thereof or any of his servants, agents or employees, and shall include all
privileges, services, furnishings, furniture, equipment, facilities and
improvement connected with use or occupancy thereof. Each dwelling unit shall
contain no more than one kitchen or cooking facility.



   LICENSE



   The license issued by the Town Clerk or designee attesting that the
rental unit has been properly registered in accordance with this article.



   LICENSEE



   The person to whom the license is issued pursuant to this article. The
term "licensee" includes within its definition the term "agent", where
applicable.



   OWNER



   Any person or group of persons, firm, corporation or officer thereof,
partnership, association or trust who owns, operates, exercises control over,
or is in charge of a rental facility.



   OWNER-OCCUPIED



   A portion of a rental facility, dwelling, commercial unit or dwelling
unit shall be considered owner-occupied if the owner makes his primary
residence therein. A person may have only one primary residence in the Town.



   PERSON



   An individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, trust or
other legal entity, or any combination thereof.



   RENTAL FACILITY



   Every building, group of buildings or a portion thereof consisting of
less than three dwelling units which has sleeping facilities for less than 25
occupants, kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to be a place where
living accommodations are supplied, whether furnished or unfurnished, for pay
or other consideration, to one or more individuals.



   RENTAL UNIT



   A dwelling unit or commercial unit which is available by lease, rental
or otherwise to persons other than the owner. "Rental unit" shall not include
that portion of a rental facility, dwelling, commercial unit or dwelling unit
that is owner-occupied.



   RENT OR RENTED



   Occupied by any person or persons other than the owner, regardless of
whether there is a written or oral agreement and regardless of whether the
owner receives consideration for the occupancy.



   TENANCY



   Occupancy of the unit by one or more tenants.



   TENANT



   Occupant in a unit by other than the owner.



§ 216-5. Registration required.



   All rental units shall hereafter be registered with the Town Clerk or
designee of the Town of Hammonton, or such other person as designated by the
Town Council, on forms which shall be provided for that purpose and which
shall be obtained from the Town Clerk or designee. Such registration shall
occur on an annual basis, as provided herein.



§ 216-6. Registration upon change in occupancy; term; initial registration
provisions.



   The landlord/owner shall inform the Town in writing upon any change in
occupancy of the premises and shall supply at that time the information
required by § 216-19 below. Each rental unit shall be registered with each
change in occupancy. The initial license term shall commence on May 1, 2007,
and shall be valid for one year, at which time it shall expire and a new
registration shall be required. The initial registration shall occur on May
1, 2007. Any lease which has been executed prior to the adoption of this
article shall not be affected, but the rental unit must nevertheless be
registered, inspected and licensed in accordance with this article. No rental
unit shall hereafter be rented unless the rental unit is registered and
licensed in accordance with this article.



§ 216-7. Registration forms; filing; contents.



   Without in any way intending to infringe upon the requirements of
N.J.S.A. 46:8-28, all rental units shall be registered and licensed, as
provided herein. Every owner shall file with the Town Clerk or designee of
the Town of Hammonton, or such other person as designated by the Town
Council, a registration form for each unit contained within a building or
structure, which shall include the following information:



   A.   The name and address of the record owner or owners of the
premises and the record owner or owners of the rental business, if not the
same persons. In the case of a partnership, the name and addresses of all
general partners shall be provided, together with the telephone numbers for
each of such individuals, where such individual may be reached both during
the day and evening hours.



   B.   If the address of any record owner is not located in the Town
of Hammonton or in Atlantic County, the name and address of a person who
resides in Atlantic County and who is authorized to accept notices from a
tenant and to issue receipts therefor and to accept service of process on
behalf of the record owner.



   C.   The name and address of the agent of the premises, if any.



   D.   The name and address, including the dwelling unit number of the
superintendent, janitor, custodian or other individual, employed by the owner
or agent to provide regular maintenance service, if any.



   E.   The name, address and telephone number of an individual
representative of the owner or agent or the owner, if domiciled in Atlantic
County, who may be reached or contacted at any time in the event of an
emergency affecting the premises or any unit of dwelling space therein,
including such emergencies as the failure of any essential service or system
and who has the authority to make emergency decisions concerning the building
and any repair thereto or expenditure in connection therewith.



   F.   The name and address of every holder of a recorded mortgage on
the premises.



   G.   If fuel oil is used to heat the building and the landlord
furnishes the heat in the building, the name and address of the fuel oil
dealer servicing the building and the grade of fuel oil used.



   H.   As to each rental unit, a specification of the exact number of
sleeping rooms contained in the rental unit. In order to satisfy the
requirement of this provision, an owner shall submit a floor plan, which
shall become part of the application and which shall be attached to the
registration form when filed by the Town Clerk or designee.



   I.   Such other information as may be prescribed by the Town of
Hammonton.



   J.   The information referenced in Subsections A through G hereof
may be provided by attaching the landlord registration statement mandated by
N.J.S.A. 46:8-28 certifying that the information contained therein remains
true and accurate or, in the event of any change, amend said registration
certificate accordingly.



§ 216-8. Registration form indexing and filing; license to be posted.



   The Town Clerk or designee shall index and file the registration forms.
In doing so, the Town Clerk or designee shall follow the mandates of N.J.S.A.
46:8-28.1, as amended and supplemented, so that the filing of the
registration form will simultaneously satisfy the registration requirements
of N.J.S.A. 46:8-28 to the extent that it applies to the property being
registered and will also satisfy the registration requirements of this
article. The owner shall post the license in a conspicuous location in the
dwelling.



§ 216-9. Amendments.



   Every person required to file a registration form pursuant to this
article shall file an amended registration form within 20 days after any
change in the information required to be included thereon. No fee shall be
required for the filing of an amendment, except where the ownership of the
premises is changed.



§ 216-10. Periodic inspections.



   A.   Each rental unit shall be inspected once every twelve-month
period.



   B.   Such inspections shall be performed by such person, persons or
agency duly authorized and appointed by the Town of Hammonton, and
inspections made by persons or an agency other than the duly authorized and
appointed person, persons or agency of the Town of Hammonton shall not be
used as a valid substitute.



   C.   Such inspection shall be for the purpose of determining zoning
ordinance compliance and, to the extent applicable, to determine if the
property complies with the Property Maintenance Code, Uniform Construction
Code, BOCA Maintenance Code, Housing Code and/or Building Code and/or Uniform
Fire Safety Act.



   D.   Unsatisfactory inspection. In the event that the inspection(s)
of a rental unit does not result in a satisfactory inspection, such property
shall not thereafter be registered, nor shall a license issue, and the owner
of the property or his agent shall not lease or rent such property, nor shall
any tenant occupy the property, until the necessary corrections have been
made so as to bring the property and rental unit into compliance with the
applicable code and the property is thereafter subsequently inspected,
registered and licensed. In the event that the property is occupied when such
conditions are discovered, all such corrections shall be made within 30 days,
and if not made within that time period, the owner shall be deemed in
violation of this article, and every day that the violation continues shall
constitute a separate and distinct violation, subject to the penalty
provisions of this article. The owner, however, shall be permitted to apply
for extension of time to make repairs or corrections so as to comply with
this article, for good cause shown.



   E.   The owner of any property which is subject to an inspection
every five years by the State of New Jersey, Department of Community Affairs,
Division of Codes and Standards, Bureau of Housing Inspections shall be
permitted to provide the local inspection officer with a copy of a
satisfactory report from that agency in lieu of being required to participate
in the local inspection program in the year in with the state inspection
occurred. For each year thereafter, the property shall be subject to local
inspection hereunder (with the exception of any future year wherein a state
inspection occurs consistent with the provisions of this section).



[Added 12-21-2009 by Ord. No. 29-2009]



§ 216-11. Access for inspections and repairs; complaints.



   A.   The inspection officers are hereby authorized to make
inspections to determine the condition of rental facilities, rental units and
rooming/boardinghouses, in order that they may promote the purposes of this
article to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the occupants of
rental facilities, rental units and rooming/boardinghouses and of the general
public. For the purposes of making such inspections, the inspecting officers
are hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey rental facilities, rental
units and rooming/boardinghouses at all reasonable times. The owner or
occupant of every rental facility, rental unit and rooming/boardinghouse
shall give the inspecting officer free access to the rental facility, rental
unit and rooming/boardinghouse at all reasonable times for the purpose of
such inspections, examinations and surveys.



   B.   Every occupant shall give the owner of the rental facility,
rental unit and rooming/boardinghouse access to any part of such rental
facility, rental unit and rooming/boardinghouse at all reasonable times for
the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect
compliance with the provisions of this article or any lawful order issued
pursuant thereto.



   C.   Complaints. Within 10 days of receipt of a bona fide complaint
alleging a reported violation of this article, an inspecting officer shall
conduct an inspection as hereinbefore provided.



   D.   Nothing contained within this section shall relieve the said
inspector from providing the landlord/owner and tenant/occupant with such
prior notice, if any, as required by current laws and/or regulations of the
State of New Jersey.



§ 216-12. Occupancy of unregistered or unlicensed unit prohibited.



   No person shall hereafter occupy any rental unit, nor shall the owner
permit occupancy of any rental unit within the Town of Hammonton, which is
not registered and licensed in accordance with this article.



§ 216-13. Issuance of license; revocation.



   Upon the filing of a completed registration form and payment of the
prescribed fee, the owner shall be entitled to the issuance of a license
renewable on May 1 of the next calendar year. Such license may be revoked
upon receipt of an unsatisfactory inspection not corrected in accordance with
the procedures outlined hereinabove. A registration form shall be required
for each rental unit, and license shall issue to the owner for each rental
unit, even if more than one rental unit is contained in the property.



§ 216-14. Fees.



   At the time of the filing of the registration form and prior to the
issuance of a license, the owner or agent of the owner must pay a fee in
accordance with the following:



   A.   Annual registration fees:



[Amended 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 7-2011]



      (1)   For one to seven non-owner-occupied units at one
location: $50 per unit.



      (2)   For eight to 25 non-owner-occupied units at that same
location: $40 per unit.



      (3)   For 26 or more non-owner-occupied units at the same
location: $30 per unit.



   B.   A reinspection fee as follows:



      (1)   First reinspection: no charge;



      (2)   Second reinspection: $15 per unit;



      (3)   Third reinspection: $30 per unit; and



      (4)   Fourth or subsequent reinspection: $50 per unit.



   C.   If the owner of the property is a senior citizen who resides in
a unit of the property and rents out the remaining unit and would otherwise
qualify under the State of New Jersey property tax deduction under N.J.S.A.
54:4-8.41, there shall be no fee.



   D.   If any fee is not paid within 30 days of its due date, a late
fee surcharge of $30 will be assessed.



§ 216-15. Owner to provide registration form to occupants and tenants.



   Every owner shall provide each occupant or tenant occupying a rental
unit with a copy of the registration form required by this article. This
particular provision shall not apply to any hotel, motel or guesthouse
registered with the State of New Jersey, pursuant to the Hotel and Multiple
Dwelling Act, as defined in N.J.S.A. 55:13A-3. This provision may be complied
with by posting a copy of the license in a conspicuous place within the
rental unit(s).



§ 216-16. Maximum number of occupants; posting.



   A.   The maximum number of occupants shall be posted in each rental
unit. It shall be unlawful for any person, including the owner, agent,
tenant, to allow a greater number of persons than the posted maximum number
of occupants to sleep in or occupy overnight the rental unit for a period
exceeding 21 days. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to
the penalty provisions hereof.



   B.   In the event the Town's authorized representatives have a
reasonable basis to conclude that the occupancy limit for a particular unit
is being exceeded, it shall provide notice of that fact to the landlord, who
shall investigate and thereafter certify by its sworn signature, on forms to
be supplied by the Town, that it has corrected any violation and that, to the
best of this knowledge, no current violation exists.



§ 216-17. Payment of taxes and other charges as precondition for
registration and license.



   No rental unit may be registered and no license shall issue for any
property, containing a rental unit, whose taxes, water, sewer or other
municipal assessments are more than two quarters in arrears. If
landlord/owner provides the Town with a repayment plan, in writing,
certifying its intention to eliminate said arrearages, the Town may issue a
conditional license revocable upon landlord/owner's failure to comply with
said plan.



§ 216-18. Other rental unit standards.



   All dwelling units shall be maintained in accordance with the Uniform
Construction Code and the BOCA National Property Maintenance Code.



§ 216-19. Occupancy standards.



   A.   In the event the Town has a reasonable basis to believe that
the occupancy limit is being exceeded, the Town's designated representative
shall contact the landlord, who shall use his/her best efforts to obtain and
provide to the Town the name of each permitted occupant of the dwelling. It
shall be a violation of this chapter for any other person(s) to reside in
said premises, and repeated occupancy violations by a tenant shall subject
the tenant and landlord to the requirements and penalties set forth in
Article I of this chapter.



   B.   Nuisance prohibited. No rental facility shall be conducted in a
manner which shall result in any unreasonable disturbance or disruption to
the surrounding properties and property owners or of the public in general,
such that it shall constitute a nuisance, as defined in the ordinances of the
Town of Hammonton.



   C.   Compliance with other laws. The maintenance of all rental
facilities and the conduct engaged in upon the premises by occupants and
their guests shall at all times be in full compliance with all applicable
ordinances and regulations of the Town of Hammonton and with all applicable
state and federal laws. However, any landlord licensed in accordance with
this article shall not be subject to the Hammonton certificate of occupancy
ordinance as annual compliance with this chapter shall waive the need for a
CCO.



   D.   Penalties. Any landlord, subject to Article I, §§ 216-1 and
216-2 above, tenant or other person violating the provisions of this section
shall be subject to the penalty provisions hereof. Each day the violation
remains uncorrected after the 30th day (or such agreed-upon extension per §
216-10) of receiving notice shall be deemed as separate and distinct
violations subject to the penalty provisions of this chapter.



§ 216-20. Revocation of license; procedure.



   A.   Grounds. In addition to any other penalty prescribed herein, an
owner, subject to Article I, §§ 216-1 and 216-2 above, may be subject to
the revocation or suspension of the license issued hereunder upon the
happening of one or more of the following:



      (1)   Conviction of a violation of this article in the
Municipal Court or any other court of competent jurisdiction.



      (2)   Determination of a violation of this article at a
hearing held.



      (3)   Continually renting the unit or units to a tenant or
tenants who are convicted of a violation of the Noise Ordinance of the Town.



      (4)   Continually permitting the rental unit to be occupied by
more than the maximum number of occupants as defined in this article.



      (5)   Maintaining the rental unit or units or the property in
which the rental unit is a part in a dangerous condition likely to result in
injury to person or property.



   B.   Procedure; written complaint; notice; hearing.



      (1)   Prior to a complaint being filed pursuant to the terms
of this section, the Town's designated representative shall provide a written
warning to the landlord that a revocation complaint shall be issued unless
the issues forming the basis for same are addressed and corrected within 30
days of issuance of the warning notice.



      (2)   A complaint seeking the revocation or suspension of a
license may be filed by any one or more of the following: Director of Public
Safety, Chief of Police, Construction Code Official, Housing Inspector, the
Zoning Enforcement Officer or any other persons or office authorized to file
such complaint. Such complaint shall be in writing and filed with the Town
Clerk or designee. The complaint shall be specific and shall be sufficient to
apprise the licensee of the charges, so as to permit the licensee to present
a defense. The individual(s) filing the complaint may do so on the basis of
information and belief and need not rely on personal information.



      (3)   Upon the filing of such written complaint, the Town
Clerk or designee shall immediately inform the Town Council, and a date for a
hearing shall be scheduled, which shall not be sooner than 10 nor more than
30 days thereafter. The Town Clerk or designee shall forward a copy of the
complaint and a notice, as to the date of the hearing, to the licensee and
the agent, if any, at the address indicated on the registration form. Service
upon the agent shall be sufficient.



      (4)   The hearing required by this section shall be held
before the Town Council, unless, in its discretion, the Town Council
determines that the matter should be heard by a Hearing Officer, who shall be
appointed by the Town Council. If the matter is referred to a Hearing
Officer, such officer shall transmit his findings of fact and conclusions of
law to the Town Council within 30 days of the conclusion of the hearing. The
Town Council shall then review the matter and may accept, reject or modify
the recommendations of the Hearing Officer based on the record before such
Hearing Officer. In the event that the matter is not referred to a Hearing
Officer and is heard by the Town Council, then the Town Council shall render
a decision within 30 days of the conclusion of the hearing. Following the
hearing, a decision shall be rendered dismissing the complaint, revoking or
suspending the license, or determining that the license shall not be renewed
or reissued for one or more subsequent license years.



      (5)   A stenographic transcript shall be made of the hearing.
All witnesses shall be sworn prior to testifying. The strict rules of
evidence shall not apply, and the evidential rules and burden of proof shall
be that which generally controls administrative hearings.



      (6)   The Town Solicitor or his designee shall appear and
prosecute on behalf of the complainant in all hearings conducted pursuant to
this section.



   C.   Defenses. It shall be a defense to any proceeding for the
revocation, suspension or other disciplinary action involving a rental
license by demonstrating that the owner has taken appropriate action and has
made a good faith effort to abate the conditions or circumstances giving rise
to the revocation proceeding, including but not limited to the institution of
legal action against the tenant(s), occupant(s) or guests for recovery of the
premises, eviction of the tenant(s) or otherwise.



§ 216-21. Violations and penalties.



   Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction in the Municipal Court of the Town of Hammonton, or such other
court having jurisdiction, be liable to a fine not exceeding $750 for a first
offense and not exceeding $1,000 for any subsequent violation.



CHAPTER 217.
RENT CONTROL



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton
10-25-1976 by Ord. No. 19-1976. Amendments noted where applicable.]



   § 217-1.   Definitions and word usage.



   § 217-2.   Establishment of rents; increases.



   § 217-3.   Information supplied to Board and tenant by owner.



   § 217-4.   Formula for establishment of ceiling rent.



   § 217-5.   Establishment of ceiling rent by Board; rent increases.



   § 217-6.   Basis for determining need for emergency rent increase.



   § 217-7.   Grant of emergency rent increase; monitoring of
situation.



   § 217-8.   Maintenance of standards by owner; petition by tenant.



   § 217-9.   Additional charge for capital improvements or increased
service.



   § 217-10.   Leases.



   § 217-11.   Determination of rental housing emergency.



   § 217-12.   Establishment of base rent for certain preexisting
apartments.



   § 217-13.   Coin-operated devices; payment of gratuity by tenant.



   § 217-14.   Inadvertent overcharge by owner; refund.



   § 217-15.   Late charges in relation to maximum or ceiling rent.



   § 217-16.   Increase under certain leases; escalation clause.



   § 217-17.   Retaliation by owner or tenant due to provisions.



   § 217-18.   Resolution of complaints or petitions; jurisdiction of
Board.



   § 217-19.   Notification to tenants of Board's decision.



   § 217-20.   Powers of Board; representation of counsel by owner or
tenant.



   § 217-21.   Violations and penalties.



   § 217-22.   Conflict with state law or other municipal ordinances.



   § 217-23.   Extension of moratoriums.



   § 217-24.   Market adjustment for individual unit when vacated.



   § 217-25.   Partial repeal.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Rent Control Board — See Ch. 6, Art. IV.



§ 217-1. Definitions and word usage.



   A.   Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:



   APARTMENT



   That portion of a complex rented or offered for rent for living and
dwelling purposes, to one individual or family unit, together with all
privileges, services, equipment, facilities and improvements connected with
the use or occupancy of such portion of the complex.



   BASE RENT



   The average of those sums of money paid per month by tenants to a
single landlord in a single complex, under leases or rental agreements as of
January 21, 1975, for rental of apartments of similar size, number of
bedrooms and amenities, or that average sum at which one such apartment then
vacant was offered for rental.



   CEILING RENT



   That rent which is produced as the result of the modification of the
base rent in accordance with § 217-4 hereof.



   COMPLEX



   That building or structure or group of adjacent or contiguous buildings
or structures rented or offered for rent by one owner and which consist of
four or more apartment units therein.



   CONSUMER PRICE INDEX



   The United States consumer price index for the Philadelphia
Metropolitan Region, as published by the United States Department of Labor,
Bureau of Labor Statistics.



   LEASE



   That written agreement which creates and establishes the relationship
between landlord and tenant for a term of more than one month and consists of
all terms and conditions thereof.



   MAXIMUM RENT



   That rent which is produced by the operation of § 126-6 hereof.
Editor's Note: Section 126-6 refers to former § 126-6, Limit on rent
increase; exception, which was repealed 8-26-1991 by Ord. No. 18-1991.



   OWNER



   That person, corporation, partnership, trust or other entity which owns
and/or operates an apartment complex.



   RENT



   That sum of money payable under a lease or rental agreement as
consideration for the right to use and occupy an apartment.



   RENTAL AGREEMENT



   That agreement, other than a lease, whether written or oral, that
establishes a relationship of landlord and tenant for successive monthly
periods.



   RENT CONTROL BOARD



   The administrative body consisting of five individuals appointed and
acting in accordance with Chapter 6, § 6-26.



   TENANT



   That individual who holds or possesses an apartment and has the right
to use and occupy same in accordance with a lease or rental agreement.



   B.   Word usage. References herein to persons which appear in the
masculine singular shall be deemed to include the feminine and plural, as the
context may require.



§ 217-2. Establishment of rents; increases.



   Establishment of rents between an owner and a tenant to whom this
chapter is applicable shall hereafter be governed by the provisions of this
chapter. No rent may be charged or collected for any apartment in excess of
the ceiling rent which may be lawfully charged hereunder. No agreement
between any owner and tenant shall be deemed to constitute a waiver by the
tenant of any of his rights under this chapter. Any provision in any lease
which shall provide for the payment of any amount of additional rent by
virtue of any increase in any expense of the landlord, unless otherwise
specifically authorized hereunder, shall be unenforceable, but shall not void
the entire lease.



§ 217-3. Information supplied to Board and tenant by owner.



   Each owner of a complex in the Town of Hammonton shall, by affidavit,
provide the Rent Control Board with the base rents for each apartment therein
within 20 days from and after the effective date of this chapter. Such base
rents shall be deemed to have been properly established and to be
controlling, unless the Board, within 20 days after receipt of said
affidavit, objects to the same or to any portion thereof by serving written
notice upon the owner stating its objection. With and in support of said
affidavit, the owner shall submit such appropriate documentary evidence to
verify the same as the Rent Control Board may reasonably require. In addition
to the foregoing, each owner shall provide to each of its tenants within 20
days from and after the effective date of this chapter, by serving written
notice thereof, the following information:



   A.   The base rent for the tenant's apartment as reported by the
owner of the Rent Control Board.



   B.   The ceiling rent for the tenant's apartment.



   C.   The maximum rent for the tenant's apartment.



   D.   The earliest date upon which any owner may increase the
tenant's rent.



   E.   Any increase due to retroactivity which is permitted under
Chapter 6, Article IV, Rent Control Board, relating to the maximum rental to
be charged there under.



§ 217-4. Formula for establishment of ceiling rent.



   The ceiling rent shall be the product of calculation by which the base
rent is multiplied by a factor equal to the percentage by which the consumer
price index for January 21, 1976, is increased over the consumer price index
for January 21, 1975.



§ 217-5. Establishment of ceiling rent by Board; rent increases.



   On or before February 15, 1977, and on February 15 of each and every
year thereafter while this chapter remains in effect, the Rent Control Board
shall ascertain the percentage change in the consumer price index for the
period of January 21, 1975, and January 21 of the year being considered, and
thereupon it shall establish a new ceiling rent which shall be based upon the
percentage change in the consumer price index so ascertained during said
period. No rent increase assessed against a tenant in occupancy of an
apartment on the January 21 applicable shall exceed 15% of the rent then in
effect.



§ 217-6. Basis for determining need for emergency rent increase.



   Any owner shall be entitled to an emergency rent increase upon petition
to the Rent Control Board if said Board, after a public hearing on the
petition, makes the following findings of fact:



   A.   That the apartment complex and each apartment therein, when
properly, efficiently and economically operated, without allowance for
compensation to the owner for services rendered in connection with the
operation thereof, and exclusive of any calculation of depreciation or
obsolescence, is failing to cover the costs of operation and the debt service
involved in maintaining said complex.



   B.   For the purpose of determining whether the debt service is
being covered by the schedule of rents employed for said apartment complex or
particular apartments therein, no debt service shall be considered that is in
excess of an amount equal to 80% of the assessed value of the apartment
complex as such appears on the tax assessment rolls of the Town of Hammonton,
nor shall any term of years be considered in determining whether debt service
is being met that is less than 20 in number.



   C.   In determining whether operating expenses are being met, it
shall be necessary for the owner to provide a statement from a certified
public accountant as to the actual operating expenses, with said statement
broken down into each category and verified as to each category of operating
expenses by said certified public accountant.



   D.   That the foregoing calculation is based upon occupancy which
produces rent equal to 95% of the gross pro forma rent roll of the complex at
the highest lawful rents then applicable.



§ 217-7. Grant of emergency rent increase; monitoring of situation.



   Upon a finding by the Rent Control Board that an owner is entitled to
an emergency rent increase pursuant to § 217-6 hereinabove, the Rent Control
Board shall permit an increase sufficient to produce the return called for in
§ 217-6A hereinabove, the increase as to each apartment affected to become
effective on the latter of the date of grant, or the expiration date of the
lease or rental agreement then in effect. The Rent Control Board shall retain
jurisdiction over each such case and shall monitor each such case quarterly,
and should the Rent Control Board, subsequent to its decision to grant an
emergency rent increase and after a further public hearing, determine that
the complex, when properly, efficiently and economically operated, can return
to its owner the proper percentage derived in accordance with § 217-6A
hereinabove without the emergency rent increase; or determine that the grant
of said emergency rent increase was based, in whole or part, upon the
submission of information by the owner that was materially inaccurate or
incomplete, then said emergency rent increase shall, at the Board's option,
be modified or terminated and rescinded.



§ 217-8. Maintenance of standards by owner; petition by tenant.



   A.   Any and all amounts of maximum rent and ceiling rent determined
in accordance with this chapter shall be deemed to have been predicated upon
the continuation by the owner of the same services, amenities, conveniences
and facilities in the complex and each apartment therein as the owner
provided, without further compensation, under the lease or rental agreement
in effect on and as of January 21, 1976. The foregoing shall not be deemed to
have been breached by a failure or breakdown, provided that the owner uses
due diligence and dispatch and good faith in repairing or remedying the same.



   B.   Upon the breach of the owner's obligation as set forth in
Subsection A hereof, any tenant affected, either for himself or on behalf of
the class of all tenants similarly affected, may petition the Rent Control
Board for an appropriate reduction in rents. The Rent Control Board, after
hearing testimony at a public hearing, shall enter a finding determining
whether there shall be a reduction in the ceiling and maximum rents for the
complex so affected, which finding shall include such reduction in the rental
value as shall be determined by the Board's sole discretion and the effective
date thereof.



§ 217-9. Additional charge for capital improvements or increased service.



   The owner may petition an additional charge to be added to the maximum
rent and ceiling rent for the provision of substantial capital improvements
or increases in services. The owner shall notify each tenant by certified
mail of the total cost of the proposed or completed capital improvement or
increase in services, the average cost per apartment of the improvement and
the amount of the additional charge being sought from each tenant. The owner
seeking such an additional charge shall petition for the same from the Rent
Control Board, which shall determine, after public hearing, whether said
improvement or increase in services is substantial and whether the proposed
additional charge is fair and equitable; and, upon its finding to such
effect, it shall permit such increase to take effect as it deems to be fair
and equitable in the circumstances. For the purpose hereof, the replacement
by an owner of worn, obsolete or deteriorated appliances, equipment,
structures or facilities shall not be deemed a capital improvement. If an
owner and a tenant shall mutually agree on substantial and extraordinary
improvements to be made to a single apartment for the sole use and benefit of
a single tenant, said owner and tenant may file a joint petition with the
Rent Control Board, setting forth the nature of the improvements and the
additional rent, agreed upon between them. The Rent Control Board shall
approve said additional rent increase if it finds the same to be reasonable
and fair and equitable as between the owner and tenant after full disclosure
by the owner of all material facts relating to the nature, cost and quality
of same.



§ 217-10. Leases.



   The maximum and ceiling rents provided herein contemplate the existence
of valid and binding annual leases. Nothing herein contained shall be
construed to forbid an owner from establishing a schedule to apply only as to
leases which are made for terms of less than one year. No owner, without just
cause, may refuse the bona fide offer of a tenant to enter into or renew an
annual lease at the maximum or ceiling rent, nor shall any owner be required
to enter into any lease or rental agreement for a term less than one year or
to provide the aforesaid options. In the event that the Rent Control Board
shall determine that an owner shall have willfully, and without just cause,
refused to offer a one-year lease while offering to rent to the same tenant
on the terms hereinabove described in this section, the same shall constitute
a violation of this chapter, and the Rent Control Board shall certify the
same to the office of the Attorney General of New Jersey. Any tenant with an
annual lease or a lease for a greater term who holds over after the term
expires and who has refused an offer of a new annual lease shall not be
subject to the maximum or ceiling rents for the holdover period.



§ 217-11. Determination of rental housing emergency.



   The Rent Control Board shall determine the number of apartments located
within the Town of Hammonton, the number of apartments occupied or vacant,
the number of apartments then under construction and the population of the
town at its most recent census, and it shall certify the same to the Town
Clerk/Administrator not more than 120 days from and after the effective date
of this chapter. Annually thereafter, the Rent Control Board shall make such
further investigation as may be required to determine the number of
apartments then in the Town of Hammonton, the number of apartments which are
then occupied or vacant, the number of apartments which have then been newly
constructed within the previous year and the number then under construction,
the population of the Town of Hammonton at its then most recent census and
the number of apartments then, per capita, in the Town of Hammonton. The
findings of such investigation shall be filed with the Town
Clerk/Administrator. When the Board shall determine that the number of
apartments available for rental in the Town of Hammonton, per capita, has
increased by 100% over the number of apartments, per capita, determined to be
in existence as of 120 days after the effective date of this chapter, the
Board shall certify to the governing body that a rental housing emergency no
longer exists.



§ 217-12. Establishment of base rent for certain preexisting apartments.



   If an apartment which is existing when this chapter is adopted shall
not have been in the rental market on January 21, 1975, the Rent Control
Board shall determine the fair market value of such apartment as of January
21, 1975, and such established fair market value shall constitute the base
rent for such apartment.



§ 217-13. Coin-operated devices; payment of gratuity by tenant.



   A.   Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to establish a ceiling
or limitation on the price of any coin-operated machine or device located at
any complex, provided that the goods or services sold in connection therewith
were not previously offered without charge as part of the rental of an
apartment.



   B.   Any landlord who shall receive from a prospective tenant any
sum of money which constitutes a gratuity or a fee paid by the prospective
tenant as consideration for entering into a lease shall be required to deduct
such sum of money from the annual ceiling rent which may be charged for one
year's occupancy of the apartment in accordance with the terms of this
chapter.



§ 217-14. Inadvertent overcharge by owner; refund.



   A.   If an owner shall have discovered that he has, by inadvertence
or mistake, made a charge in excess of the highest rent permissible under
this chapter, the owner may, if no complaint shall theretofore have been made
to the Rent Control Board by any tenant on account thereof, cure such
inadvertence or mistake by tendering to each tenant affected thereby a refund
of such charge with interest thereon at the rate of 9% per annum.



   B.   Should the Rent Control Board determine that a violation has
occurred pursuant to Subsection A hereinabove and that the same shall not
have been cured, the Rent Control Board shall certify such violation to the
Town Solicitor, who shall, on behalf of each and every tenant thereby
affected, sue the owner for damages, costs and fees in connection with such
litigation. The Town Solicitor shall be entitled to take such other action as
may be deemed necessary in accordance with the foregoing.



   C.   No owner or his agent, employee or servant, shall be liable for
an unlawful act hereunder, unless such unlawful act shall clearly afford
monetary benefit to the owner.



§ 217-15. Late charges in relation to maximum or ceiling rent.



   The assessment and collection of late charges for more than a ten-day
delinquency, interest, costs or other penalties which may be assessed in
connection with a tenant's neglect, failure, delay or refusal to pay rent
when it becomes due under the terms of a lease or rental agreement or
otherwise to comply with the terms thereof shall not constitute charges in
excess of the maximum or ceiling rents; both the applicability of such
charges may be contested at law by the tenant. Assessment and collection of a
late charge for delinquency of less than 10 days in any rental payment shall
be added to the rent charged for the apartment, to determine whether the
owner has exceeded the maximum or ceiling rent. Nothing in this section shall
inhibit the right of either the owner or the tenant to seek such remedies at
law as may be available to him, whether such remedies include a dispossession
or other actions at law, it being the intent of this section merely to make a
determination as to whether or not an owner is exceeding the maximum or
ceiling rents as defined herein.



§ 217-16. Increase under certain leases; escalation clause.



   Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to permit an owner to increase
rent during the term of any lease which is in effect on the date this chapter
becomes effective. In the event that any lease shall provide an escalation
clause permitting such increase during the term of this lease, the provisions
of such lease shall govern to the extent that such provisions are not in
conflict with this chapter.



§ 217-17. Retaliation by owner or tenant due to provisions.



   Neither the owner nor the tenant shall take any harassing or
retaliatory action each as to the other as a result of this chapter and its
enforcement.



§ 217-18. Resolution of complaints or petitions; jurisdiction of Board.



   When it shall receive notice of the existence of a dispute within its
jurisdiction, the Rent Control Board shall first attempt to resolve by
conciliation any complaint or petition filed either by the owner or by the
tenant, without the necessity of a public hearing. In the event that the Rent
Control Board shall be unable to resolve any such compliant or petition, then
the terms of the ordinance shall govern the disposition of such complaint or
petition. The Rent Control Board shall have the absolute power to reject any
complaint or petition if it determines that the Board has no jurisdiction to
act upon the subject matter of such complaint or petition.



§ 217-19. Notification to tenants of Board's decision.



   All decisions rendered by the Rent Control Board shall be made in
writing and shall be sent to all tenants who are paying rent at the apartment
which involves the complaint or petition heard by the Rent Control Board, at
the expense of the owner involved.



§ 217-20. Powers of Board; representation of counsel by owner or tenant.



   The Rent Control Board shall have the right to elect officers, to
establish its rules of order and to establish the forms, rules and procedures
to be followed in connection with all proceedings of the Rent Control Board.
The Board shall have the power to issue and promulgate such rules and
regulations as it deems necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter,
which rules and regulations shall have the force of law until revised,
repealed or amended from time to time by the Rent Control Board in the
exercise of its discretion, provided that such rules and regulations are
filed with the Town Clerk/Administrator. An owner or a tenant may appear
before the Rent Control Board with or without the representation of counsel.



§ 217-21. Violations and penalties.



   A.   All violations of this chapter, other than those set forth in
Subsection B as hereinafter stated, shall be considered violations of a
municipal ordinance which may be prosecuted by any affected party in the
Municipal Court of the Town of Hammonton and would subject the person
violating any provision of this chapter to one or more of the following: a
fine of not more than $1,000, imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days
or a period of community service not to exceed 90 days. For the purpose of
this section, each apartment within a complex in which a violation is found
to exist shall be considered a separate violation.



   B.   Any individual who files with the Rent Control Board
documentation containing a material misstatement of fact or who makes a
verbal misrepresentation to the Rent Control Board shall be subject to one or
more of the following: a fine of not more than $1,000, imprisonment for a
period not to exceed 90 days or a period of community service not to exceed
90 days. All violations of this section shall be prosecuted by the Hammonton
Municipal Court by and in the name of the Rent Control Board only.



§ 217-22. Conflict with state law or other municipal ordinances.



   Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to preempt and/or supersede
any of the statutes of the State of New Jersey or any health, housing and/or
zoning codes, ordinances, laws or regulations which may now or hereafter
govern apartments in the Town of Hammonton, all of which are deemed to be
outside the jurisdiction of the Rent Control Board.



§ 217-23. Extension of moratoriums.



   Those moratoriums imposed by Ordinance No. 21-1975 as extended by
Ordinance No. 2-1976 Editor's Note: See Ch. 6, Art. IV, Rent Control Board.
and by Ordinance No. 17-1976 are hereby extended to the effective date of
this chapter, subject to all of the terms and conditions set forth within
said aforementioned ordinances.



§ 217-24. Market adjustment for individual unit when vacated.



[Added 7-23-2001 by Ord. No. 25-2001]



   A.   An individual unit within a rent controlled complex may receive
relief from rent control restrictions concerning the amount of rent by
determining and fixing a rent determined by the owner to be market value,
subject, however, to the following conditions:



      (1)   An individual unit within a complex must be vacant and
not subject to an enforceable lease.



      (2)   The individual unit must be registered with the Rent
Control Board and inspected by the Code Enforcement Officer of the Town of
Hammonton, who shall certify that the individual unit has been inspected and
a certificate of continued occupancy (CCO) has been issued.



      (3)   Pay all applicable fees for the issuance of a continued
certificate of occupancy.



      (4)   The base rent of the individual unit shall remain at the
same level as all other units within the rent controlled complex.



   B.   Effect on complex definition. The temporary relief and removal
of a unit from rent control for the purpose of adjusting to market value
shall not effect the definition and jurisdiction of the complex as defined
herein from rent control. A complex subject to rent control shall continue to
be subject to rent control notwithstanding this section.



§ 217-25. Partial repeal.



[Added 4-28-2008 by Ord. No. 14-2008]



   The provisions of this chapter shall no longer apply to any lease or
rental agreement entered into on or after the effective date of this
amendment. Those leases and rental agreements shall hereinafter be known as
"market leases" and/or "market rental agreements," as appropriate, and rents
established there under shall no longer be limited by the provisions of
Chapter 217. Any leases or rental agreements in existence prior to the
effective date of this amendment shall continue to be subject in all respects
to the provisions of Chapter 217. However, upon the termination of occupancy
by a tenant whose rent was previously governed by Chapter 217, the rental cap
formerly provided by Chapter 217 shall cease to exist. Nothing contained
herein shall change the status of any deed restricted affordable rental units
heretofore or subsequently established in the Town of Hammonton.



CHAPTER 220.
SATELLITE EARTH STATIONS



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton
4-14-1986 by Ord. No. 7-1986. Amendments noted where applicable.]



   § 220-1.   Definitions.



   § 220-2.   Administration of provisions.



   § 220-3.   Procedure for placement.



   § 220-4.   Plan details.



   § 220-5.   Design standards.



   § 220-6.   Fees.



   § 220-7.   Violations and penalties.



   § 220-8.   Appeals.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 115.



   Land development — See Ch. 175.



§ 220-1. Definitions.



   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:



   SATELLITE EARTH STATION



   Any apparatus, building or structure which is designed for the purpose
of receiving television, radio, microwave, satellite or similar signals in
connection with what is commonly referred to as "dish-type antennas."



§ 220-2. Administration of provisions.



   The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the
Construction Code Official of the Town of Hammonton.



§ 220-3. Procedure for placement.



   A.   Any property owner or person or entity in possession of
property shall submit to the Construction Code Official, prior to the
placement of a satellite earth station, a plan showing the size of the
satellite earth station, the proposed location of the same on the subject
premises and such other information as may be required herein.



   B.   The Construction Code Official shall review said plan and
render a decision within 20 days of the submission of said plan or within
such further time as may be consented to by the property owners or person in
possession of property.



§ 220-4. Plan details.



   The plan shall be drawn on a map to a scale not smaller than one inch
equals 40 feet and not larger than one inch equals 10 feet and shall include
and show the following information.



   A.   The name and address of the applicant and the owner, and the
name, address and title of the person or entity preparing the plan and
accompanying data, and the date of preparation and the dates of each
revision, where applicable.



   B.   An appropriate place for the signature of the Construction Code
Official.



   C.   The lot and block numbers of the lot(s), from the Tax Map of
the Town of Hammonton, and the length and bearings of the lot lines of the
proposed project.



   D.   The location, names and pavement and right-of-way widths of all
existing and proposed streets abutting the lot or lots in question; the
property lines of all abutting properties, together with the names and
addresses as disclosed on the Tax Map and tax rolls of the Town of Hammonton
as of the date of the application; and the location of existing buildings
within 200 feet of the site in question.



   E.   All existing buildings and structures and all accessory
buildings or structures on the lot, if any, with dimensions showing present
and finished grade elevations at all corners.



   F.   All existing and proposed setback dimensions and landscape
areas and trees of six-inch caliper on the site affected by the proposed
apparatus.



   G.   Existing and proposed plantings to provide screening for noise,
glare and aesthetics.



   H.   Any and all other information necessary to meet any of the
requirements of this chapter not listed above.



§ 220-5. Design standards.



   A.   The diameter of satellite earth station antennas (parabolic
dish) shall not be greater than four meters.



   B.   The maximum height of antennas and mounting structures,
measured vertically from the highest point of the antennas when positioned
for operation, shall not be greater than four meters above the ground, unless
said height would cause unnecessary cutting of trees, in which event, the
antenna may be installed at a height not greater than six meters, with the
approval of the Construction Official.



   C.   In all zoning districts, satellite earth stations shall be
installed only on the ground level.



   D.   No ground level satellite earth station shall be closer than 15
feet to any side property line and no closer than 15 feet to any rear
property line.



   E.   Ground level satellite earth stations shall be located in the
rear yard only.



   F.   Every satellite earth station shall be effectively and
permanently screened by a special planting or fence, in accordance with
Chapter 137 of the Code of the Town of Hammonton entitled "Fences and
Barriers," as approved by the Construction Code Official, which shall be
maintained in good condition so that said satellite earth station shall not
be readily visible from any adjacent property or public street.



   G.   Power and control signal cables from or to the satellite earth
station shall be underground and installed in accordance with the appropriate
Building Code, if any. Editor's Note: See Ch. 115, Construction Codes,
Uniform.



§ 220-6. Fees.



   The application fee for a permit to install a satellite earth station
shall be $25. In addition, the applicant shall deposit the sum of $100 to
cover the cost of review sources deemed necessary by the Construction Code
Official, such as the Town Engineer, Town Solicitor or other town personnel.
The Treasurer of the Town of Hammonton shall place the deposit in a trust
account and shall charge all disbursements for said review services. Any
unused portion of the deposit shall be returned to the applicant. If the cost
of review services exceeds the amount of deposit, sufficient additional funds
shall be deposited before any permit shall be issued.



§ 220-7. Violations and penalties.



   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, for each
and every violation thereof and for each and every day that said violation
continues to be in existence, be subject to one or more of the following: a
fine of not more than $1,000, imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days
or a period of community service not to exceed 90 days, at the direction of
the Municipal Court Judge of the Town of Hammonton.



§ 220-8. Appeals.



   The Construction Code Official of the Town of Hammonton is hereby
designated as the public officer charged with the enforcement of the terms of
this chapter. All complaints for alleged violation of any terms of this
chapter shall be submitted, in writing, to said Construction Code Official.
All appeals from the decision of the Construction Code Official shall be made
to the Zoning Board of Adjustment of the Town of Hammonton.



CHAPTER 223.
SEWER CAPACITY, RESERVATION FOR



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton
6-13-1988 by Ord. No. 10-1988. Amendments noted where applicable.]



   § 223-1.   Findings.



   § 223-2.   Automatic allocation of reservation.



   § 223-3.   Application procedure.



   § 223-4.   Priority of allocating remaining capacity; hearing.



   § 223-5.   Term of reservation; extensions.



   § 223-6.   Prerequisites to endorsement of applications for dry
connections.



   § 223-7.   Annual fee to maintain reservation.



   § 223-8.   Fees.



   § 223-9.   Violations and penalties.



   § 223-10.   Notarized statement from industrial and commercial
users.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Development review — See Ch. 175, Art. VIII.



   Sewers — See Ch. 226.



§ 223-1. Findings.



   There is hereby determined as a fact to be a public need for the
allocation of capacity of the remaining capacity of the Hammonton Sewer
Treatment Plant it being understood that the present flow of approximately
900,000 gallons, plus the projected flow of all developments which have
applied for approvals within the Town of Hammonton, as well as those entitled
to hooking up to the sewer under assessment of benefit procedures, will
approximate the plant capacity of 1,600,000 gallons when such are on line,
and thus it is determined to be in the public interest that a procedure be
established reserving capacity, with priorities established as between those
seeking such capacity.



§ 223-2. Automatic allocation of reservation.



   A.   Reservations of capacity by operation of law shall be as
follows:



      (1)   Any property owner who has been assessed benefits under
an assessment of benefits procedure for the providing of sewer lines by
his/her property and for which measure an appropriating ordinance has been
duly enacted by the Town of Hammonton shall be entitled, without application
being made for a reservation of capacity or without payment of any of the
fees set forth in § 223-8, to an automatic allocation of capacity to the
extent equal to the number of lots that can be constructed by said individual
on the existing assessed frontage, which number of lots shall be determined
through dividing the assessed frontage by the minimum frontage requirements
for a building lot under Chapter 175, Land Development.



      (2)   Where any individual has a lot that fronts on an
existing sewer line and is required to tie into said sewer line upon
constructing a residence, said individual shall be entitled to an allocation
of capacity without applying for reservation or paying any of the fees set
forth in § 223-8 of this chapter.



   B.   Nothing in this chapter shall affect the obligation of any
individual to pay all charges required to hook up to the Hammonton sewer
system.



§ 223-3. Application procedure.



   A.   Any individual may apply for reservation of capacity at any
time after one of the following three events occurs:



      (1)   The subdivision has been classified and approved as a
minor subdivision.



      (2)   The major subdivision has received preliminary
subdivision approval by the Hammonton Planning Board.



      (3)   The commercial or industrial facility has received final
site plan approval from the Hammonton Planning Board.



   B.   Applications shall be filed in triplicate with the Construction
Office of the Town of Hammonton and shall enumerate the block and lot number
on the Tax Map, the size of the tract, the total number of lots and/or
residential units and/or the location of each commercial or industrial unit
for which site plan approval has been obtained, including the square footage
of each such unit.



   C.   Applications shall be accompanied by the fee required for the
first year's reservation of capacity.



   D.   The original of each application shall be retained by the
Construction Official, with the second copy being forwarded to the
Superintendent of the Hammonton Sewer Treatment Plant for his/her records.
The third copy shall be forwarded to the Chairperson of the Sewer Committee
of Town Council to be retained for its records.



   E.   The Sewer Committee and the Sewer Superintendent shall satisfy
themselves that the capacity exists to handle the application and that there
are no other applications which, when considered in conjunction with this
application, would bring the total reservation of capacity outstanding, plus
all existing flow, above the amount of 1,200,000 gallons. Should the
reservation requested, in conjunction with all other outstanding reservations
of capacity theretofore granted, along with the existing use of the plant,
bring the total projected impact on the plant over 1,200,000 gallons, said
application and all subsequent applications received shall be processed
pursuant to § 223-4 of this chapter.



§ 223-4. Priority of allocating remaining capacity; hearing.



   A.   The Town of Hammonton is under mandate to have plans in place
as to the upgrading of its sewer plant at such time as 80% of the capacity of
the plant is in place. Once 1,200,000 gallons of the sewer plant's capacity
is committed to existing users, those with automatic allocations under §
223-2 of this chapter and those who have secured reservations of capacity
under the procedure set forth in § 223-3, the remaining capacity shall be
allocated in accordance with the following priorities, with the priorities
being in the same order as set forth hereafter:



      (1)   Single-family homes.



      (2)   Minor residential subdivisions.



      (3)   Commercial facilities which do not produce a
high-density or high-impact effluent and whose effluent is consistent with
domestic sewage.



      (4)   Light industrial facilities whose use of sewage
facilities is limited to an effluent of equal or less strength than domestic
sewage.



      (5)   Major residential subdivisions.



      (6)   All multifamily housing of all types and descriptions,
including but not limited to apartments, townhouses, condominiums, triplexes
or any other residential application providing for more than two residential
family units on any single lot.



      (7)   All commercial uses who produce an effluent of greater
strength than domestic sewage.



      (8)   All industries that produce a flow with effluent of a
greater strength than domestic sewage.



   B.   Upon the total applications for reservation of capacity, plus
the existing uses and the automatic allocations set forth in § 223-2,
exceeding 1,200,000 gallons, said application shall be referred to the
special committee of Council consisting of the Sewer Committee, the Mayor and
the Sewer Superintendent, for the purpose of determining the category within
which the application falls and whether or not there is existing capacity for
that application. If it is determined by said committee that there is
insufficient capacity to accommodate the application at the time in question,
the applicant will be so notified and given an opportunity to come before the
committee at a duly constituted meeting, to be held not less than 30 nor more
than 60 days after said denial, at which time the applicant shall have the
opportunity to establish, by competent legal evidence, whether or not the
facility falls within the priority category under § 223-4 that it is
assigned by the committee or that the flow is such as would bring it within a
higher priority than that allocated to him/her. The decision of said
committee shall be made within 15 days after the hearing and submitted to the
applicant in writing.



§ 223-5. Term of reservation; extensions.



[Amended 10-10-1988 by Ord. No. 20-1988]



   All reservations of capacity shall be for a one-year period. Any
individual shall have a right to request not more than three annual
extensions of his/her reservation capacity upon paying the fee required for
each subsequent year. If the facility in question is not constructed within
four years from the reservation of capacity, said individual's name shall be
taken from the reservation list and said individual shall have to reapply as
a new applicant for a reservation of capacity, and the application shall only
be considered if he/she has the appropriate valid and then outstanding
approvals from the Planning Board of the Town of Hammonton.



§ 223-6. Prerequisites to endorsement of applications for dry connections.



[Added 10-10-1988 by Ord. No. 20-1988]



   The Town of Hammonton shall not endorse any application to the
Department of Environmental Protection for the right to commence construction
with dry connections, and interim sewage facilities, provided that the
construction is completed before the sewer ban is lifted, unless the
following prerequisites occur:



   A.   The applicant has received preliminary approval for either a
subdivision or site plan for the applicant's project.



   B.   The application for endorsement of a request to the Department
of Environmental Protection for permission to start construction with dry
connections, and with interim sewage facilities, should construction be
completed before the sewer ban is lifted, shall not be considered by the
Mayor and Council unless the applicant requesting said endorsement has
reserved sewer capacity under this chapter.



   C.   No request for such an endorsement of an application to the
Department of Environmental Protection as set forth in Subsection B shall be
considered unless the applicant has paid all fees set forth in § 223-8 of
this chapter for the current year and any prior years during which sewer
capacity has been reserved.



   D.   The interim sewage facilities referred to in Subsection B shall
not include any permission to install holding tanks where the application
involves a residential subdivision or an application for multifamily
construction.



§ 223-7. Annual fee to maintain reservation.



[Added 10-10-1988 by Ord. No. 20-1988]



   Should any applicant reserve capacity and pay the fees under § 223-8
hereof and receive permission to commence construction with dry connections
and should said individual fail to pay the annual maintenance fee as required
by § 223-8E for any period between the time that capacity is reserved and
that the individual is able to hook up after the removal of the ban on
hookups to the Hammonton Sewer Treatment Plant, said individual shall not be
permitted to hook up to the sewer treatment plant until all fees covering the
interim period from the year when reservation of capacity first occurred and
including that year in which the right to hook up is requested. The Sewer
Superintendent shall not permit the hookups unless a certification is
received from the Town Clerk/Administrator evidencing the fact that all
payments of the annual fees for reservation of capacity under § 223-8 have
been made.



§ 223-8. Fees.



   A.   No fee for allocation of capacity shall be required from any
individual qualifying under § 223-2A(1) and (2) of this chapter.



   B.   Every residential unit for which capacity is reserved shall be
responsible for payment upon filing of the application of a fee of $150 per
residential unit.



   C.   All light commercial and light industry applications shall be
responsible for paying a fee equal to .125 times the square footage of the
facility times 365, which fee shall be paid on an annual basis as long as the
capacity is reserved, commencing with the first application.



   D.   All commercial and/or industrial facilities providing an
effluent stronger than domestic sewage shall pay a fee each year for the
reservation of capacity equal to the computation of said applicant's
estimated pretreated strength and flow of its effluent, which amount shall be
determined according to the formulas set forth in Chapter 226, Sewers,
Article I, § 226-11.



   E.   Any applicant who requests either a one-year extension or two
one-year extensions of reservation of his/her capacity shall pay the same as
paid with the original application.



§ 223-9. Violations and penalties.



   Should any applicant, upon hooking up to the sewer plant, be determined
to have made a material misrepresentation on his or her application as to the
type of facility involved or the strength of the sewage effluent provided,
said individual shall be subject to one or more of the following: a fine of
not more than $1,000, imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days or a
period of community service not to exceed 90 days for every day that the
strength of the effluent is more than 110% of the strength estimated in the
application filed with the Construction Office with the projected fee for
said reservation. Said penalty may be imposed through a complaint brought by
the Sewer Plant Superintendent in the Hammonton Municipal Court, at which
time the applicant shall have the full right to be heard in accordance with
his or her due process rights.



§ 223-10. Notarized statement from industrial and commercial users.



   Any industrial or commercial user who wishes to reserve capacity must
file a notarized statement that its effluent will not provide heavy metals or
toxic organics into the Hammonton sewer system. Any misrepresentation under
this section shall be subject to the same penalties as hereinabove set forth.



CHAPTER 226.
SEWERS



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton as
indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable. Editor's
Note: Ordinance No. 5-2006 adopted Ch. 6, Art. VI, and provided for the
elimination of the Municipal Utilities Advisory Committee (MUAC). Per §
6-41, MUAC references, any references to the MUAC in this chapter shall be
construed as making reference to “Mayor and Council” or its water and
sewer subcommittee. ]



ARTICLE I.
Sewer Use and Rents



   § 226-1.   Definitions.



   § 226-2.   Sewer connection fees.



   § 226-3.   Connection fees in Southeast and Southwest Sewer
Projects.



   § 226-4.   Liability for connection payment.



   § 226-5.   Approval and pretreatment of industrial waste discharges.



   § 226-6.   Prohibited discharges.



   § 226-7.   Notice of accidental prohibited discharge.



   § 226-8.   Analysis and metering of industrial wastes.



   § 226-9.   Domestic sewage; rents.



   § 226-10.   Commercial and industrial sewage; rents.



   § 226-11.   Surcharges for industrial wastes.



   § 226-12.   Enforcement; violations and penalties.



   § 226-13.   Payment of rents.



   § 226-14.   Commencement of rents.



   § 226-15.   Succession of powers.



   § 226-16.   Time limit for appeals and requests for refunds for
bills and assessment.



ARTICLE II.
Oil and Grease Interceptors



   § 226-17.   Prohibited discharges.



   § 226-18.   Interceptors required; exception.



   § 226-19.   Interceptors required in wastewater lines for certain
establishments.



   § 226-20.   Type and capacity.



   § 226-21.   Maintenance of interceptors.



   § 226-22.   Removal of collected material.



   § 226-23.   Replacement.



   § 226-24.   Compliance.



   § 226-25.   Enforcement.



   § 226-26.   Violations and penalties.



ARTICLE III.
Mandatory Connection Requirement



   § 226-27.   Purpose.



   § 226-28.   Connection requirement.



   § 226-29.   Notice of availability.



   § 226-30.   Connection time frame.



   § 226-31.   Violations and penalties.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Water and sewer subcommittee — See Ch. 6, Art. VI.



   Reservation for sewer capacity — See Ch. 223.



   Sewage systems in trailer parks — See Ch. 264.



   Water — See Ch. 275.



Article I.
Sewer Use and Rents



[Adopted 9-13-1971 by Ord. No. 10-1971 as Art. I of Ch. 130 of the 1971 Code]



§ 226-1. Definitions.



   Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of
terms used in this article shall be as follows:



   BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND)



   The quantity of oxygen expressed in parts per million by weight,
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure for five days at 20° C. The standard laboratory
procedure shall be that found in the latest edition of Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water and Sewage published by the American Public Health
Association.



   DOMESTIC SEWAGE



   The normal water-carried household and toilet wastes from residences.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTES



   Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or form of energy rejected or
escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process or
from the development, recovery or processing of natural resources, as
distinct from sanitary sewage.



   MAYOR AND COMMON COUNCIL



   The group of elected officials acting as the governing body of the Town
of Hammonton.



   PARTS PER MILLION (PPM)



   The ratio of parts by weight of material under consideration to
1,000,000 parts by weight of sewage.



   PERSON



   Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or
group.



   PH



   The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration
expressed in moles per liter and indicates the degree of acidity or
alkalinity of a substance.



   SANITARY SEWAGE



   The normal water-carried wastes from business buildings, institutions,
commercial and industrial establishments.



   SEWER SYSTEM



   All facilities for collecting, treating and disposing of sewage.



   SLUG



   Any discharge of water, sewage or waste exceeding a concentration or
flow greater than five times that of the average twenty-four-hour discharge
from the person, which is discharged continuously for a period longer than 15
minutes.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS



   Solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in
water, sewage or other liquids and which are removable by laboratory
filtration.



   TOWN



   The Town of Hammonton.



   TOXIC SUBSTANCE



   Any poisonous substance.



§ 226-2. Sewer connection fees.



[Amended 11-26-1973 by Ord. No. 9-1973; 4-28-1980 by Ord. No. 11-1980;
3-23-1987 by Ord. No. 7-1987]



   A.   Where there are no sewer connections already made to the
curbline from the sewer, there is hereby imposed on the property owner the
following sewer connection fees for each additional connection to the
existing sewerage system of the Town of Hammonton for such connections from
the line of the sewer to the inside of the curbline or proposed curbline made
subsequent to the enactment of this article.



      (1)   Four-inch connection: $500.



      (2)   Six-inch connection: $550.



      (3)   Eight-inch connection: $650.



   B.   Such charge shall be paid to the Collector of Sewer Rents at
the time application is made for the connection to the sewer system.



   C.   In addition to those charges, rates and fees set forth within
this article, there shall be charged a sewer hookup fee for each additional
connection to the existing sewer system of the Town of Hammonton made
subsequent to the enactment of this article.



   D.   Connection and lateral construction fees.



[Added 5-23-1994 by Ord. No. 14-1994]



      (1)   Purpose. The Mayor and Council of the Town of Hammonton
has received from the Municipal Utilities Advisory Committee a correspondence
dated March 10, 1994, outlining their recommendation for connection fees and
lateral construction fees for the Sewer Department. Editor's Note: The Sewer
Department was inactivated 1-24-2011 by Ord. No. 3-2011. See now Ch. 53,
Department of Public Utilities; Superintendent of Public Works. It is the
expressed purpose of this section to adopt the recommendations of the
Municipal Utility Advisory Committee and to amend Chapter 226 of the Code of
the Town of Hammonton to conform with the recommendation.



      (2)   Connection fee.



         (a)   A property owner must pay to the Town of Hammonton
a fee for purposes of obtaining the right to have sewer service. Such fee
shall be titled "connection fee." The connection fee shall be paid for each
domestic consumer unit for each new and additional connection as defined
herein and shall be payable in advance to the Town of Hammonton Sewer
Department in accordance with the following unit schedule:



            [1]   Single-family homes: one domestic consumer
unit.



            [2]   Rented rooms, each room available for rent:
1/4 domestic consumer unit.



            [3]   Single-family with place of business,
including professional offices: 11/4 domestic consumer units.



            [4]   Hotel or apartment house (for each living
unit): one domestic consumer unit.



            [5]   Motel (for each living unit): 1/2 domestic
consumer unit.



            [6]   Apartments (for each living unit): one
domestic consumer unit.



            [7]   Schools (for each 30 pupils and faculty):
one domestic consumer unit.



            [8]   Churches: one domestic consumer unit.



            [9]   Clubs, societies, service organizations
(with bar and/or restaurant facilities: one additional unit): one domestic
consumer unit.



            [10]   Gymnasiums in schools, etc.: two domestic
consumer units.



            [11]   Public buildings (for each five employees):
one domestic consumer unit.



            [12]   Service stations without car wash
facilities: two domestic consumer units.



            [13]   Service stations with car washing
facilities: three domestic consumer units.



            [14]   Diner, tavern or restaurant one to 50
seating capacity (each additional 15 seating capacity or segment thereof):
one domestic consumer unit.



            [15]   Soda fountain and/or luncheonette (for
first 10 seating capacity): one domestic consumer unit; for each additional
20 seats or segment thereof: one domestic consumer unit.



            [16]   Laundromat or self-service laundry (for
each washer over 12 pounds capacity): one domestic consumer unit; for each
washer of not more than 12 pounds capacity: 1/2 domestic consumer unit.



            [17]   Supermarkets (for each five employees): one
domestic consumer unit.



            [18]   Drive-in restaurants (seating capacity
under 10): three domestic consumer units; seating capacity for additional 15
seats or fraction thereof: one domestic consumer unit.



            [19]   Business establishment, not otherwise
classified whether part of dwelling or not (for each 15 employees or segment
thereof):             one domestic consumer unit.



            [20]   Industrial plant (for each five employees):
one domestic consumer unit.



            [21]   Amusement park: five domestic consumer
units.



            [22]   Public recreational facilities: five
domestic consumer units.



            [23]   Bakery (with baking facilities, whether
part of dwelling or not): two domestic consumer units.



         (b)   The connection fee shall be $2,000 per domestic
consumer unit.



      (3)   Lateral construction fee.



         (a)   Where there are no sewer connections already made
to the curbline from the sewer, there is hereby imposed on the property owner
the following lateral construction fee for each connection to the existing
sewerage system of the Town of Hammonton. This lateral construction fee shall
be from the line of the sewer to the inside of the curbline or proposed
curbline. Fees shall be as follows:



            [1]   Four-inch connection: $500.



            [2]   Six-inch connection: $750.



            [3]   Eight-inch connection: $800.



         (b)   The cost of the lateral construction fees
specified above are the minimum charges. The Sewer Department Editor's Note:
The Sewer Department was inactivated 1-24-2011 by Ord. No. 3-2011. See now
Ch. 53, Department of Public Utilities; Superintendent of Public Works.
reserves the right to increase these charges depending upon the actual cost
of material and labor.



      (4)   Payment of fees. All charges and fees set forth in this
section shall be paid to the Collector of Sewer Rents at the time application
is made for the connection to the sewer system.



§ 226-3. Connection fees in Southeast and Southwest Sewer Projects.



[Added 5-11-1998 by Ord. No. 20-1998]



   A.   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to supplement Chapter
226, entitled Sewers, and address issues concerning connection fees for
residential uses affected by the extension of municipal sewer for the
Southeast and Southwest Projects and specifically the number of domestic
consumer units fees assessed to existing residential uses.



   B.   Definition. For the purpose of this section a residential use
shall be limited to existing single-family dwellings and those dwellings
which may have been modified by construction to include an apartment,
efficiency apartment or duplex use.



   C.   Applicable connection fee. Notwithstanding the existing
schedule of connection fees contained in § 226-2D, all residential uses
existing and occupied within the Southeast and Southwest Sanitary Sewer
Extension Projects as of the date when the projects commenced as defined by
this article are and shall be considered assessed one domestic consumer unit
for the purpose of connection and hookup fees.



§ 226-4. Liability for connection payment.



[Added 4-28-1980 by Ord. No. 11-1980; amended 3-23-1987 by Ord. No. 7-1987]



   In the event that any person(s), including a corporation, requests and
obtains the necessary permits to connect to the then existing sewerage system
and fails to complete said connection and/or fails to become a user of said
system within a period of one year commencing upon the approval of said
connection, said person(s) shall thereafter become liable for the payment of
said connection, as set forth within this article.



§ 226-5. Approval and pretreatment of industrial waste discharges.



   A.   Treatment of industrial wastes. The economy and desirability of
the combined treatment of industrial wastes and sanitary sewage is
recognized. However, not all types or quantities of industrial wastes can be
so treated. Hence, it shall be the established policy of the Town of
Hammonton to admit those types and quantities of industrial wastes that are
not harmful or damaging to the structures, processes or operation of the
sewage works or are not specifically prohibited by this article. It is also
recognized that to provide this service, additional facilities are required,
the cost of which must be borne by those persons receiving its benefits.



   B.   Approval required for industrial wastes. In order to control
the admission of industrial wastes, the discharge into the public sewers of
any waters or wastes having a five-day twenty-degree-centigrade BOD greater
than 300 parts per million; a suspended-solids content greater than 350 parts
per million; a chlorine demand greater than five parts per million; an
average daily flow greater than 2% of the average daily sewage flow at the
sewage treatment works; or any toxic substance shall be subject to the review
and approval of the Mayor and Common Council.



   C.   Pretreatment.



      (1)   Where required in the opinion of the Mayor and Common
Council, the owner shall provide at his/her expense such preliminary
treatment or handling as may be necessary to:



         (a)   Reduce BOD to 300 parts per million and suspended
solids to 350 parts per million; or



         (b)   Modify the objectionable characteristics or
constituents to come within the maximum limits provided for in § 226-5B; or



         (c)   Control the quantities and rates of discharge of
such waters or wastes over a twenty-four-hour day and a seven-day week.



      (2)   Plans, specifications and any other pertinent
information relating to proposed preliminary treatment or handling facilities
shall be submitted for the approval of the Mayor and Common Council, and no
construction of such facilities shall be commenced until approval is obtained
in writing.



   D.   No sewer user shall admit industrial wastes of any type defined
in § 226-5B above without first securing the approval of the Mayor and
Common Council. Any pretreatment facilities required under § 226-5C must be
completed within six months unless granted a further extension by Mayor and
Common Council as a result of undue hardship in constructing these
pretreatment facilities.



   E.   Approval required for significant industrial user (SIU). In
addition to the requirements as outlined in § 226-5B of the Hammonton Code,
any new-source significant industrial user, as defined by N.J.A.C. 7:14A-1 et
seq., shall obtain a state NJPDESA/SIU permit. This permit must be obtained
prior to commencing discharge into the Hammonton Waste Water Treatment Plant.
This requirement is an additional condition for approval under the
aforementioned section.



[Added 9-14-1992 by Ord. No. 32-1992]



   F.   Federal standards. Whenever the county, state or federal
government has adopted standards and limitations on any particular industrial
subcategory or has set pretreatment standards applicable to a particular
industrial subcategory, which is more stringent than the limitations imposed
by this article, the standards and limitations shall be the applicable
county, state or federal government standards and limitations.



[Added 9-14-1992 by Ord. No. 32-1992]



§ 226-6. Prohibited discharges.



   A.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any
stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
cooling water or unpolluted industrial or commercial process water into any
sanitary sewer.



   B.   Stormwater, surface drainage and unpolluted waters shall be
admitted to only such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers
or storm drains. Unpolluted process and cooling waters may, on written
application and approval by the Superintendent of Sewer Department, Editor's
Note: The Sewer Department was inactivated 1-24-2011 by Ord. No. 3-2011. See
now Ch. 53, Department of Public Utilities; Superintendent of Public Works.
be discharged to storm sewers or storm drains.



   C.   Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or
cause to be discharged any of the following described wastes or waters to any
public sewer:



      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than
160° F.



      (2)   Any water or waste containing more than 100 parts per
million by weight of fats, oils or greases.



      (3)   Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their
nature or quality may cause fire or explosion or be in any other way
injurious to persons, to the sewage works' structures or to the operation of
those works.



      (4)   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance which, either
singly or by interaction with other wastes, is capable of creating a public
nuisance or hazard to life or preventing entry into sewers for their
maintenance and repair.



      (5)   Any garbage that has not been comminuted or shredded.



      (6)   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal,
glass, bones, feathers, tires, plastic, wood, paunch manure, butcher's offal
or any other solids or viscous substances capable of causing obstruction to
the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the
sewerage system or the sewage treatment works.



      (7)   Any water or waste having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher
than 9.5 or having any corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazards to structures, equipment or personnel of the sewage works.



      (8)   Any water or waste containing any toxic substances in
quantities sufficient to interfere with the biochemical processes of the
sewage treatment works or that will pass through the sewage treatment works
and exceed the state or interstate requirements for the receiving stream.



      (9)   Any water or waste that contains cyanide in excess of a
concentration determined by multiplying 0.2 parts per million by the ratio of
the average flow in the receiving stream to the design flow of the sewage
treatment works.



      (10)   Any water or waste containing suspended solids of such
character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to
handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant.



      (11)   Any toxic radioactive isotopes, without special permit.



      (12)   Any water or waste that contains fluoride in excess of
a concentration determined by multiplying 0.2 parts per million by the ratio
of the average flow in the receiving stream to the design flow of the sewage
treatment works.



   D.   No statement contained in this article shall be construed as
prohibiting any special agreement or arrangement between the town and any
person whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be
admitted into the sanitary sewers for treatment by the town either before or
after pretreatment.



§ 226-7. Notice of accidental prohibited discharge.



[Added 8-23-1976 by Ord. No. 16-1976]



   Any person or persons who shall discharge or cause to be discharged any
prohibited discharge as defined within § 226-6 of this article, Prohibited
discharge, into any sanitary sewer of the Town of Hammonton shall comply with
the following requirements:



   A.   Any person, individual or corporation who shall claim that he,
she or it has accidentally discharged or caused to be discharged any
prohibited discharge as defined in § 226-6 into any sanitary sewer in the
Town of Hammonton shall immediately notify either the Town Engineer or the
Sewer Superintendent of the Town of Hammonton of said accidental discharge.



   B.   Should any individual fail to notify either the Town Engineer
or the Sewer Superintendent of the Town of Hammonton of a claim that there
has been an accidental prohibited discharge as defined in § 226-6 of this
article into the sanitary sewer of the Town of Hammonton within 30 minutes
after said person or his/her agents, servants or employees become aware of
said discharge, said individual shall be in violation of this article.



   C.   Any individual violating this section shall be liable to all of
the sanctions set forth in § 226-12A and B of this Chapter 226 of the Code
of the Town of Hammonton, which sanctions shall be invoked at the discretion
of the Sewer Superintendent. No action taken by the Sewer Superintendent
under § 226-12A of this article shall be a bar or defense to the bringing of
criminal sanctions under § 226-12B of this article.



§ 226-8. Analysis and metering of industrial wastes.



   A.   Survey data required.



      (1)   Within three months after the passage of this article,
all users of the sewage system who discharge industrial wastes to the public
sewers shall fill in and file with the Mayor and Common Council an industrial
waste questionnaire which shall furnish pertinent data, inclusive of quantity
of flow and an analysis of the water discharged to the sewage works.



      (2)   Similarly, any person desiring to make a new connection
to the sewage works for the purpose of discharging industrial wastes to the
public sewers shall fill in and file with the Mayor and Common Council an
industrial waste questionnaire which shall furnish pertinent or predicted
data, inclusive of quantity of flow and an analysis of the industrial waste
to be discharged into the sewage system.



   B.   Extension of time. Mayor and Common Council shall have the
right, upon showing of good cause, to grant an extension of time to comply
with the provisions of § 226-8A above.



   C.   Control manhole.



      (1)   Any person discharging industrial wastes into the
sewerage system shall construct and maintain a suitable control manhole or
manholes downstream from any treatment, storage or other approved works, to
facilitate observation, measurement and sampling of all wastes, including
domestic sewerage, from the person.



      (2)   The control manhole or manholes shall be constructed at
suitable and satisfactory locations and built in a manner approved by the
Superintendent of Sewage Treatment.



      (3)   The control manhole or manholes shall be equipped with
permanent-type volume-measuring devices of a type approved by the
Superintendent of Sewage Treatment. The manhole shall be installed by the
person discharging the waste, at his/her expense, and shall be maintained by
him/her so as to be safe, accessible and in proper operating condition at all
times.



      (4)   Plants for the construction of the control manhole or
manholes and all included devices shall be approved by the Mayor and Common
Council prior to the beginning of construction.



   D.   Measurement of flow.



      (1)   The volume of flow used in computing surcharges shall be
the metered water consumption of the person as shown in the records of meter
readings maintained by the Hammonton Water Department. Editor's Note: The
Water Department was inactivated 1-24-2011 by Ord. No. 3-2011. See now Ch.
53, Department of Public Utilities; Superintendent of Public Works.



      (2)   Where the person discharging wastes into the sewer works
of the town procures any part or all of his/her water supply from sources
other than the Hammonton Water Department, all or a part of which is
discharged into the sewerage system, the person discharging said waste shall
install and maintain at his/her expense sewer meters of a type approved by
the Mayor and Common Council for the purpose of determining the proper volume
of flow to be used.



   E.   Sewage metering.



      (1)   All persons discharging industrial wastes into the
sewage system of the Town of Hammonton shall have the privilege at their sole
discretion to install sewage meters for the specific purpose of determining
the volume of industrial waste or sanitary sewage entering the sewerage
system.



      (2)   These meters for determining the volume of flow of these
sewers shall be installed, owned and maintained by the property owners.
Following the installation of such meters and approval of the installation by
the town, such meters may not be removed without the approval of the Mayor
and Common Council.



   F.   Sewage sampling.



      (1)   The industrial wastes of each person discharging the
same into the sewerage system shall be subject to periodic inspection and a
determination of the character and concentration of said wastes. These
determinations shall be made quarterly or as often as may be deemed necessary
by the Mayor and Common Council or their authorized assistants, and a report
of the determinations shall be submitted to the Mayor and the Common Council.



      (2)   The installation, operation and maintenance of the
sewage-sampling facilities shall be assumed by the person discharging the
waste and shall be subject at all times to the approval of the Mayor and
Common Council. Access to the sewage-sampling location or locations shall be
available to the Mayor and Common Council or their duly authorized
representatives at all times. Due care shall be exercised in the collection
and preservation of all samples to ensure the preservation of the samples in
as nearly their natural state as possible. This includes the refrigeration of
all samples which will be analyzed by biochemical methods.



   G.   Analysis. The laboratory methods used in the examination of all
industrial waste shall be those set forth in the latest edition of Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage as published by the American
Public Health Association. However, alternate methods for the analysis of
industrial wastes may be used, subject to mutual agreement between the Mayor
and Common Council and the person.



§ 226-9. Domestic sewage; rents.



[Amended 11-26-1973 by Ord. No. 9-1973; 3-27-1978 by Ord. No. 8-1978;
12-19-1983 by Ord. No. 14-1983; 7-23-1984 by Ord. No. 15-1984; 3-23-1987 by
Ord. No. 6-1987; 2-22-1988 by Ord. No. 3-1988; 12-13-1993 by Ord. No.
28-1993; 12-19-1994 by Ord. No. 35-1994; 5-20-1996 by Ord. No. 9-1996]



   A.   Annual sewer rates. 



[Amended 5-24-1999 by Ord. No. 4-1999; 5-22-2000 by Ord. No. 13-2000;
5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 23-2001; 7-25-2005 by Ord. No. 29-2005; 5-14-2012 by
Ord. No. 8-2012; 3-23-2015 by Ord. No. 006-2015]



   (1)   To begin the billing cycle following adoption of Ord. No.
006-2015, the sewer rents for collection and treatment of all domestic sewage
discharged into the Hammonton Wastewater Treatment Facility by all dwellings
receiving water from the Hammonton Public Utilities Department 6 shall be an
annual charge based on the water consumption of the six month period
immediately preceding the date of said water meter reading, which reading
shall be made during the month of May of each given year, and shall be
computed in accordance with the following rate schedule:



   Annual Residential Sewer Rate



 


Water Consumption (cubic feet)

 

Fee



First 2,000 or less
 
$595.00 annually


From 2,001 to 4,000
 
$72.50 per 1,000 cubic feet


All usage in excess of 4,000
 
$37.50 per 1,000 cubic feet



 



      (2)   Should any sewer user having domestic or commercial
sewage collected or treated by the Sewer Department of the Town of Hammonton
7 having sources of water supply not provided by the Hammonton Public
Utilities Department or not having a meter that is acceptable to the Town and
in good working order at the time said meter is read or is to be read, then
that sewer domestic user shall be charged a flat rate of $695 and that sewer
commercial user shall be charged a rate of $830 for the collection of his or
her sewer for that particular year. These rates shall become effective the
billing cycle following adoption of Ord. No. 006-2015.



   B.   In case of a combination of two or more dwelling units,
households, flats, apartments or two or more families using separate cooking
and bathroom facilities in one dwelling having the use of the sewer system
through one sewer lateral, each and every such occupied dwelling unit,
household, flat, apartment of such family shall be charged the foregoing
minimum annual sewer rents or charges (as set forth in paragraph 1 above) the
same as if each such unit or family had a direct and separate connection to
the sewer system. Sewer rents and charges in excess of such minimum shall be
determined by dividing the total water consumed, as shown by the water
readings, by the number of occupied units or families using such single sewer
connection, and applying the above rate schedule to the quantity as
determined.



   C.   Beginning January 1, 1996, all persons legally and medically
declared totally disabled pursuant to the laws of the State of New Jersey,
and all persons who now qualify and who may hereafter qualify for the real
estate annual senior citizens' tax deduction of $250 pursuant to the Laws of
the State of New Jersey and who qualify and receive said tax deduction will
be entitled, upon application therefor, to an annual credit of $50 on their
annual domestic sewer rental. This credit shall only extend to one property
owned by any such citizen in the Town of Hammonton. Where premises are owned
by more than one such citizen, only one annual credit shall be allowed by the
provision of this article.



   D.   Any owner required to be connected to the sewage facilities of
the Town of Hammonton pursuant to § 226-28, that fails to connect to such
facilities within the time frame set forth in § 226-30, shall be charged
annual sewer rates in accordance with § 226-9(A-C) above.  It is determined
to be in the public interest that all owners required to connect to the
sewage facilities of the Town of Hammonton contribute towards the cost of
maintaining and operating such sewage facilities.



[Adopted 5-16-2016 by Ord. No. 008-2016]



§ 226-10. Commercial and industrial sewage; rents.



   To begin the billing cycle following adoption of Ord. No. 006-2015, the
sewer rents for collection and treatment of sanitary sewage discharged into
the Hammonton Wastewater Treatment Facility by all business buildings,
institutions and commercial establishments receiving water from the Hammonton
Public Utilities Department 3 shall be a semiannual charge based on the water
consumption of each six-month period and computed in accordance with the
following rate schedule:



[Amended 11-26-1973 by Ord. No. 9-1973; 3-27-1978 by Ord. No. 8-1978;
12-19-1983 by Ord. No. 14-1983; 7-23-1984 by Ord. No. 15-1984; 3-23-1987 by
Ord. No. 6-1987; 2-22-1988 by Ord. No. 3-1988; 12-13-1993 by Ord. No.
28-1993; 12-19-1994 by Ord. No. 35-1994; 5-20-1996 by Ord. No. 9-1996;
5-24-1999 by Ord. No. 4-1999; 5-14-2012 by Ord. No. 8-2012; 3-23-2015 by Ord.
No. 006-2015]



   Semi-Annual Commercial Sewer Rate



 


Water Consumption (cubic feet)

 

Fee



First 2,000 or less
 
$390.00


From 2,001 to 4,000
 
$47.50 per 1,000 cubic feet


All usage in excess of 4,000
 
$37.50 per 1,000 cubic feet



 



   B.   In cases where a combination of one or more dwelling units,
households, flats, apartments with stores, shops, offices or businesses or
industrial units has the use of the sewer system through one sewer lateral,
each and every occupied dwelling unit, household, flat, apartment, store,
shop, office or business or industrial unit shall be charged the foregoing
minimum semiannual sewer rents or charges, the same as if each such unit had
a direct and separate connection to the sewer system. However, any provision
of this article notwithstanding, no person shall be charged for a business or
office unit which is a part of his/her residence and which does not have
separate sewerage facilities within said unit unless the sewerage facilities
of the residence would reasonably be considered to be available to customers
of the business or office unit in light of the type of business activity
conducted therein or unless the business or office unit is operated by
someone other than a permanent resident of the residence attached thereto.
Sewer rents or charges in excess of such minimum shall be determined by
dividing the total water consumed, as shown by the meter readings, by the
number of occupied units.



   C.   All hospitals open to the general public of the Town of
Hammonton which have a maximum of 82 beds shall pay a sewer rent of $875 per
year.



[Amended 11-26-1973 by Ord. No. 9-1973]



   D.   Any owner required to be connected to the sewage facilities of
the Town of Hammonton pursuant to § 226-28, that fails to connect to such
facilities within the time frame set forth in § 226-30, shall be charged
annual sewer rates in accordance with § 226-10(A-C) above.  It is
determined to be in the public interest that all owners required to connect
to the sewage facilities of the Town of Hammonton contribute towards the cost
of maintaining and operating such sewage facilities.



[Added 7-25-2016 by Ord. No. 014-2016]



§ 226-11. Surcharges for industrial wastes.



   A.   Beginning January 1, 1966, the sewer rent for collection and
treatment of industrial wastes discharged into the sewer system by industrial
users shall be based upon a premium charge for extra-strength waste applied
as a factor against the charges for sanitary sewage computed in accordance
with § 226-10A. The premium charge shall be based on the following formula
for determination of the multiplication factor:







 



 

 

*Where these figures are less than 300 ppm in BOD or 350 ppm in suspended
solids or five ppm in chlorine demand, the value in the parentheses () shall
be equal to one.



 

**In cases where the suspended solids, in the opinion of the Mayor and Common
Council, do not represent the true characteristics of the solids loading, the
Mayor and Common Council reserves the right to use total solids instead of
suspended solids.




 



   B.   In cases where industrial users using the sewer system use
water supplied from any source and the water so supplied is not entirely
discharged into the sewer system, the measured flow to be used as a basis for
the computation of the sewer rent shall be determined as set forth in §
226-8D and E.



§ 226-12. Enforcement; violations and penalties.



   A.   Right to order violator to disconnect.



      (1)   The Sewer Superintendent shall have the right to serve
any sewer user with a complaint and notice to appear before the Mayor and
Common Council to show cause why he/she should not be ordered to disconnect
from the sewer system for violations of this article. Said complaint shall
specify the particular violations of this article with which the sewer user
is charged. Said notice shall provide for a hearing to be held before the
Mayor and Common Council in not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days from
the date of the serving of said complaint and notice.



      (2)   After hearing the charges contained within said
complaint and after having given the sewer user the right to be heard, the
Mayor and Common Council shall have the right, if it finds the sewer user to
be guilty of any violations as charged, to order the sewer user to comply
with the provisions of this article which he/she has been guilty of
violating, within 30 days of the date of said finding of guilt. The Mayor and
Common Council shall have the further right to order the sewer user to
disconnect from the sewer system at the end of said thirty-day period if the
sewer user has failed to comply with the order of the Mayor and Common
Council.



      (3)   The Mayor and Common Council shall have the further
right to extend the thirty-day period for such additional period of time as
it deems appropriate, upon a showing by the sewer user that said thirty-day
period imposes undue hardship.



   B.   Criminal sanctions.



      (1)   Any person or persons who shall admit into the public
sewers any industrial waste, as defined and set forth in § 226-8B of this
article, without securing the prior approval of the Mayor and Common Council
of the Town of Hammonton or any waste prohibited under § 226-9 of this
article shall be subject to prosecution in the Municipal Court of the Town of
Hammonton for the violation of this section of this article and shall, upon
being convicted of such violation, be subject to one or more of the
following: a fine of not more than $1,000, imprisonment for a period not to
exceed 90 days or a period of community service not to exceed 90 days. Each
day that said person or persons shall continue said violation shall be a
separate violation.



      (2)   Any person who shall tamper with any meter or other
device related to the determination of sewer rentals shall be considered a
disorderly person and shall be subject, upon conviction of such offense, to
the penalties provided in Subsection A above.



   C.   Interpretation of enforcement provisions. The imposition of the
sanctions set forth by § 226-12A shall be independent of the involving of
the punitive provisions of § 226-12B, and the prosecution of the violation
under either § 226-12A or B shall not be a bar or defense to the imposition
of a second prosecution under the other appropriate subsection.



§ 226-13. Payment of rents.



   All sewer rents shall be due and payable at the same time and in the
same manner and shall draw the same interest from the time they become due as
taxes upon real estate and shall be a lien upon the premises connected until
paid, and the Town of Hammonton shall have the same remedies for the
collection thereof, with interest, costs and penalties, as it has by law for
collection of taxes upon real estate.



§ 226-14. Commencement of rents.



   Every person or persons, corporation or corporations who shall
hereafter make connection to said system of sewers shall be charged for that
portion of the calendar year remaining, including full charge for the month
in which the connection is made.



§ 226-15. Succession of powers.



   Should an authority, commission or other autonomous entity be
established to operate and manage said sewer system of the Town of Hammonton,
said entity so created shall succeed to all the powers of the Mayor and
Common Council as set forth under this article.



§ 226-16. Time limit for appeals and requests for refunds for bills and
assessment.



[Added 10-26-1998 by Ord. No. 28-1998]



   A.   Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish a time
limit for appeals and requests for refunds for municipal water and sewer
bills and assessments.



   B.   Definition. For the purpose of this article a municipal water
and sewer bill or assessment shall include but not be limited to connection
fees, hookup fees, user fees, minimum and excess water and sewer readings
upon which bills are calculated.



   C.   Applicability. The limitations outlined herein shall be
applicable to all persons, organizations, partnerships, corporations, or any
legal entity which is owner of record or recipient of the municipal sewer or
water bills or assessments.



   D.   Time for appeals and requests for refund. Appeals and requests
for refund from municipal water and sewer bills and assessments shall be
taken within 180 days from the date when the bill or assessment first becomes
due. Any appeal or request for refund filed after the one-hundred-eighty-day
time for appeal shall be time barred.



   E.   Filing of appeal (place and manner). An appeal or request for
refund shall be considered timely made pursuant to this article when a
written request for appeal or refund is made and filed with the
Clerk/Administrator's office of the Town of Hammonton for Mayor and Council
consideration within the time period of 180 days.



Article II.
Oil and Grease Interceptors



[Adopted 6-22-1992 by Ord. No. 22-1992]



§ 226-17. Prohibited discharges.



   Nonbiodegradable oil and grease of a mineral or hydrocarbon origin and
any other nonbiodegradable substance shall not be discharged to the sewer
system.



§ 226-18. Interceptors required; exception.



   Oil and grease interceptors shall be installed when, to conform to
N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.3, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid waste
containing floatable biodegradable oil and/or grease in excessive amounts,
except that such interceptors shall not be required for private dwelling
units and in accordance with the provisions of the Plumbing Subcode.



§ 226-19. Interceptors required in wastewater lines for certain
establishments.



   Effective immediately, oil and grease interceptors, also known as
"grease traps," shall be installed in wastewater lines leading from all
drains handling oil and greasy waste, in all new and existing eating,
drinking and food preparation establishments, including but not limited to
those listed below, to intercept, separate and accumulate excessive amounts
of oil and grease for proper removal:



   A.   Restaurants and cafeterias.



   B.   Hotel/motel kitchens and full-service bars.



   C.   Factory cafeterias or restaurants.



   D.   Tavern kitchens.



   E.   Office and commercial building cafeterias.



   F.   Fast-food restaurants.



   G.   Hospital kitchens and cafeterias.



   H.   Private club restaurants and cafeterias.



   I.   Camp restaurants, cafeterias or kitchens.



   J.   School cafeterias.



   K.   Bakery kitchens.



   L.   Meat and seafood preparation stores.



   M.   Gas stations or service stations.



§ 226-20. Type and capacity.



   All interceptors shall be of a type or capacity as approved by the
Plumbing Subcode Official, including but not limited to Article VI of the
National Standard Plumbing Code, and shall be located outside so as to be
readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. The minimum size
tank shall be 750 gallons.



§ 226-21. Maintenance of interceptors.



   All installed interceptors shall be properly maintained by the owner of
the property where the interceptor is installed. The owner shall maintain
records of the dates and manner of disposal, and said records shall be
available for review by the Plumbing Subcode Official or other approved
official upon request. The owner is required to file quarterly reports
showing the date and manner of disposal and the dates of inspection and
maintenance. The reports must be filed in the Construction Official's office
at the Town Hall.



§ 226-22. Removal of collected material.



   The owner of the property where the interceptor is installed is
responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of all
collected material. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials shall
be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms.



§ 226-23. Replacement.



   Any replacement of an existing interceptor shall be as required by the
Plumbing Subcode Official in accordance with the provisions of this article
and the applicable provisions of the National Standard Plumbing Code and/or
the Uniform Construction Code.



§ 226-24. Compliance.



   A.   All establishments required to do so by virtue of this article
shall comply with the provisions of this article prior to any new sewer
connection being made or prior to continued use of the existing connection.
No certificate of occupancy shall issue if compliance is withheld.



   B.   Existing users not in compliance shall come into compliance
within 180 days from the effective date hereof. All new installation of
interceptors shall conform to existing law.



   C.   Existing establishments presently possessing operating oil and
grease interceptors shall have such installations inspected for adequacy,
capacity and location by the Plumbing Subcode Official or his/her designee.



§ 226-25. Enforcement.



   The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Hammonton Code
Enforcement Official or his/her designee.



§ 226-26. Violations and penalties.



   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or
fail to comply therewith or who shall violate or fail to comply with any
order or regulation made by this article and any person who may be employed
or assist in the commission of any such violation or violations shall, upon
conviction, be subject to one or more of the following: a fine of not more
than $1,000, imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days or a period of
community service not to exceed 90 days, and each day during which such
violation or violations shall continue or is allowed to exist shall
constitute separate and distinct offenses.



Article III.
Mandatory Connection Requirement



[Adopted 9-12-1994 by Ord. No. 25-1994]



§ 226-27. Purpose.



   It is deemed necessary and in the public interest to promote the
protection and maintenance of the public health and welfare. To accomplish
this purpose, owners of certain properties along the lines of sewer mains
that exist or may be constructed by the Town of Hammonton shall be required
to connect their houses or other buildings thereon to the sewer mains.



§ 226-28. Connection requirement.



   A.   The owner of every existing house, building or structure and
the owner of every house, building or structure hereafter to be constructed
or acquired, which may be occupied or used by human beings, located on a
street along the line of a sewer created pursuant to the provisions of the
Municipal and County Utilities Authorities Law, P.L. 1957, Chapter 183, as
amended and supplemented, or Title 40, Chapter 14B, of the Revised Statutes
of New Jersey, now or hereafter constructed or acquired in the Town of
Hammonton, where such house, building or structure is located not more than
200 feet from said sewer line. The owner of any structure on a lot which
boundary line is located at some point no more than 200 feet from said sewer
line must within one year after the date on which the service of such sewer
is made available to such house, building or structure, is required to
connect and hook up the sewerage facilities emanating from such house,
building or structure to such sewerage systems.



[Amended 6-9-1997 by Ord. No. 9-1997]



   B.   The owner of any structure on a lot the boundary line of which
is located at any point no more than 200 feet from said sewer line may appeal
the mandatory connection or hookup requirements of this article directly to
the Municipal Utilities Advisory Committee, which in turn will conduct a
hearing on the issue as expeditiously as practicable and report its
recommendations to the Mayor and Council of the Town of Hammonton. The Mayor
and Council of the Town of Hammonton shall without any further hearing:



      (1)   Adopt the recommendation; or



      (2)   Decline to adopt said recommendation; or



      (3)   Remand the matter to the MUAC for additional fact
findings and/or hearings; or



      (4)   Take such other action they may deem proper under the
circumstances.



   C.   Nothing herein is intended to limit or restrict any other
relief afforded a petitioner by ordinance or Statute.



   D.   If any such house, building or structure referred to in
Subsections A, B and C above shall be used for industrial or commercial
purposes, the owner thereof shall, within 30 days after the date on which the
services of such sewer are made available to such house or structure or prior
to the occupancy or use of such house, building or structure, whichever date
shall be later, install such facilities as are necessary to accept and
dispose of industrial wastes emanating there from and connect such facilities
with such sewerage systems, under and pursuant to the review and
recommendation of the counseling engineer of the Town of Hammonton.



§ 226-29. Notice of availability.



   A.   Notice of the availability of sewer service shall be given by
the Town Clerk/Administrator or the Town Clerk/Administrator's designated
representative after the his/her office receives a certification, in writing,
from the consulting engineer of a list or sites of such properties within the
Town of Hammonton as may be compelled to comply with the provisions of this
article.



   B.   Notice shall be served upon the owners of said properties
personally or by leaving the same at the usual place of abode with a member
of the family over the age of 18 years or, if such mode of service cannot be
effected, then by mailing a copy of said notice to said owner or owners, by
certified mail, addressed to him/her at said property or properties or at
his/her usual place of abode.



§ 226-30. Connection time frame.



[Amended 3-25-2002 by Ord. No. 13-2002]



   A.   Any owner required to connect to the sewer system shall be
given one year from the date of receiving notice, pursuant to this Article
III, to connect to the sewer system.



   B.   Any owner required to connect to the sewer system who has
installed a subsurface waste water disposal system 24 months prior to
receiving notice of availability shall be given three years from the date of
receiving notice of availability, providing the connection fee is paid within
one year of receiving notice.



§ 226-31. Violations and penalties.



[Amended 5-16-2016 by Ord. No. 008-2016]



   A.   Any person, association, partnership, company or corporation
who or which shall violate this article shall be subject to one or more of
the following: a fine of not more than $1,000, imprisonment for a period not
to exceed 90 days or a period of community service not to exceed 90 days for
every day that the mandatory connection is not made after the person,
association, partnership, company or corporation receives the appropriate
notice, issued in accordance with the provisions of this article, setting
forth the date that the connection must be made.



   B.   In addition to the penalties set forth in § 226-31(A) above,
any owner required to be connected to the sewage facilities of the Town of
Hammonton pursuant to § 226-28, that fails to connect to such facilities
within the time frame set forth in § 226-30, shall be provided written
notice in accordance with § 226-29(B) identifying the property required to
be connected, describing the required connection and stating that, unless
connection shall be completed within 30 days of service of notice, the Town
of Hammonton shall proceed to make the connection or cause it to be made. 
Upon the failure of the owner to make this required connection within the 30
day period, the Town of Hammonton shall make the connection or cause it to be
made and shall send an itemized bill/invoice for the cost of the connection
to the property owner.  This bill/invoice shall be payable within 30 days of
the town sending the owner the bill/invoice.  If the owner fails to pay the
bill/invoice within 30 days of the town sending the owner the bill/invoice,
then such amount, together with an administrative fee of $500 to address the
town's administrative expenses, shall be a lien against the property and
recorded and collected as provided by the statutes of the State of New
Jersey. 



 


Notes

6 
6.   Editor's Note: The Water Department was inactivated 1-24-2011 by Ord.
No. 3-2011. See now Ch. 53, Department of Public Utilities; Superintendent of
Public Works.

7 
7.   Editor's Note: The Sewer Department was inactivated 1-24-2011 by Ord.
No. 3-2011. See now Ch. 53, Department of Public Utilities; Superintendent of
Public Works.

3 
8.   Editor's Note: The Public Utilities Department was inactivated
1-24-2011 by Ord. No. 3-2011. See now Ch. 53, Department of Public Utilities;
Superintendent of Public Works.



CHAPTER 228.
(RESERVED)



[Former Ch. 228, Sex Offender Residency, adopted 9-26-2005 by Ord. No.
37-2005, was repealed 6-22-2009 by Ord. No. 13-2009.]



CHAPTER 230.
SLUDGE MANAGEMENT



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton
9-22-1997 by Ord. No. 19-1997; amended in its entirety 2-25-1998 by Ord. No.
12-1998. Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.]



   § 230-1.   Intent.



   § 230-2.   Definitions.



   § 230-3.   Applicability.



   § 230-4.   Spreading procedures.



   § 230-5.   Sludge management plan required.



   § 230-6.   Application for approval of sludge management plan.



   § 230-7.   Plan review and approval.



   § 230-8.   Inspections.



   § 230-9.   Fees and escrow deposits.



   § 230-10.   Violations and penalties.



   § 230-11.   Enforcement.



§ 230-1. Intent.



   A.   It is the intent of this chapter to regulate the application,
distribution and use of sludge and sludge-derived materials for the
protection of persons and property and for the preservation of public health,
safety and welfare of the Town of Hammonton and its inhabitants, and to
ensure that the use of sludge and sludge-derived products are utilized within
the Town of Hammonton in such a manner as to prevent the disruption of the
quiet enjoyment of the landowner in the town.



   B.   Any landowner, farmer, contractor, individual or corporation
who wishes to apply sludge or sludge-derived products to any lands, including
but not limited to farms, roads, and surfaces of dirt, sand or gravel, within
the Town of Hammonton shall be regulated by this chapter.



§ 230-2. Definitions.



   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:



   APPLICANT



   Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind that requests permission to apply sludge or
sludge-derived materials to any land or for any purpose in the Town of
Hammonton.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PLAN



   All or any methods used for the cultivation of land, growing crops or
animals which have been determined to be the best practicable method to be
used for the practice in question, as recommended by the Rutgers Cooperative
Extension of Atlantic County or the Natural Resources Conservation Service.



   CMP



   The Comprehensive Management Plan and amendments adopted by the
Pinelands Commission pursuant to Section 7 of the Pinelands Protection Act,
to be cited as N.J.A.C. 7:50-1 et seq.



   CONSERVATION PLAN



   A written plan that outlines and details those conservation practices
that will be incorporated and utilized to protect to the maximum extent
practicable all the natural resources on the land in question, in accordance
with the requirements of the Pinelands CMP, the Natural Resource Conservation
Service, the Cape Atlantic Soil Conservation District and the Town Council of
the Town of Hammonton or the Town Council's designees.



   FIELD



   A parcel of open ground suitable for pasturage or tillage which is an
active agricultural operation, located outside the Preservation Area Zone, in
common ownership and usually surrounded on one to four sides by a hedgerow,
stone wall, farm road or other demarcation separating it from like areas.



   LAND APPLICATION



   The controlled discharge of materials onto or into the soil surface or
any other surface in such a manner that the materials are treated by, become
incorporated into or are blended with the soil or other surface upon which
they are placed in conformance with N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.79(b).



   PH



   A measure of the relative acidity of a soil for the purpose of growing
crops.



   REPRESENTATIVE SAMPLE



   A sample that stands for and fairly corresponds to the whole and taken
in accordance with recognized sampling procedures as accepted by the USEPA
and the NJDEP.



   SOIL TEST



   A scientific analysis of the soil to determine the amounts of nutrients
which are available for use by the various crops which could be grown in the
soil in question.



   SLUDGE



   Solid residue and associated liquid resulting from physical, chemical
or biological treatment of wastewater. Sludge includes but is not limited to
sewer sludge and nonhazardous industrial/commercial wastewater sludge.



   SLUDGE-DERIVED MATERIAL



   Any solid or liquid material which contains sludge or sludge materials
in any amount whatsoever, as an additive or bulking agent or for any other
purpose. Sludge-derived materials may be, but are not limited to, sludge
added to lime, liming agents or comonts or kiln dusts, sludge added to wood
chips, sludge added to leaf compost or any composted materials or any soil
materials or sludge added to any other product in any amount. These products
must meet the requirements of "Process to Further Pathogens" as defined in 40
CFR 57 and Part 4-1 of the statewide Management Plan.



§ 230-3. Applicability.



   Use of sludge or sludge-derived products in quantities less than 25
pounds is not regulated by the Town of Hammonton; however, nothing in this
chapter shall be construed as relieving an applicant of complying with the
Pinelands application requirements and development standards set forth in
Chapter 175, Land Development, of the Code of the Town of Hammonton and in
N.J.A.C. 7:50-4 and 5.



§ 230-4. Spreading procedures.



   Sludge and sludge-derived material must:



   A.   Be thoroughly incorporated into the soil within 12 hours of
delivery for land application.



   B.   Not be applied between November 15 and April 1, nor to ground
that is frozen, covered with ice or snow, during or immediately after
precipitation, where water is ponding and/or is ponded on the surface, or in
areas that experience seasonal flooding.



   C.   Not be applied to fields of greater than six-percent slope,
unless applicant can provide satisfactory erosion protection.



   D.   Materials are not allowed to go septic if held in storage.



   E.   Due to objectionable odors, materials must be applied below the
surface of the lands and not be allowed to be surfacly applied.



   F.   Due to the sensitive nature of regional agricultural activities
no detectable levels of fecal coliform can be deposited into the town's
groundwater.



   G.   Be applied in a manner which creates no odor, without detection
instruments, outside the property line of each field on which the material is
being applied for longer than one twelve-hour period and creates no odor
which would unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property in
the Town of Hammonton.



   H.   Not be stockpiled or spread within 50 feet of property lines
except where property lines are part of the user's site.



   I.   Be spread only on sites on which a crop will be planted within
30 calendar days following the termination of the spreading.



   J.   Being applied to a parcel which is the site of an active
agricultural operation.



   K.   Be applied to benefit the agricultural operation.



   L.   Be applied according to the agronomic rate of application for
its intended purpose.



   M.   Be applied to a parcel which is located outside the
Preservation Area Zone.



   N.   Be applied in such a manner so as to ensure that no treatment
or processing occurs at the site of land application except as necessary to
meet the pathogen- or vector-attraction reduction requirements imposed by the
Department of Environmental Protection.



§ 230-5. Sludge management plan required.



   Effective September 1, 1997, it shall be a violation of this chapter
for any person to apply sludge or sludge-derived materials to land within the
Town of Hammonton without first having an approved sludge management plan in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter. The application of these
substances without an approved plan in place shall subject the landowner, and
the lessee if not the landowner, to fines and penalties set forth in this
chapter.



§ 230-6. Application for approval of sludge management plan.



   A.   Applications for approval to spread sludge and sludge-derived
materials on lands within the Town of Hammonton shall be submitted to the
Town Clerk/Administrator, or another person or organization designated by the
Town of Hammonton Town Council, 30 calendar days prior to the proposed first
date of land application. The necessary application forms will be supplied to
the applicant by the Town Clerk/Administrator. At least 10 calendar days
prior to the application date, the landowner or applicant shall give to the
Town Clerk/Administrator notice of the spreading event and all property
owners within 200 feet shall also be notified. A certified list of names
shall be available through the Tax Assessor's office. Failure of the
landowner or applicant to provide such notice shall result in revocation of
the permit and a fine pursuant to § 230-10 of this chapter.



   B.   An individual application shall be filed for each individual
farm under separate or partly separate ownership and for each use of the
sludge-derived material.



   C.   At minimum, the following information shall be provided:



      (1)   Name, address and telephone number of person applying
for approval to apply the sludge or sludge-derived product.



      (2)   Block and lot number, street address and approximate
number of acres of the land on which the sludge materials are to be applied,
and a notarized form from the landowner granting permission to apply the
sludge material to the land. Notice must be given to all property owners
within 200 feet within 10 calendar days of spreading.



      (3)   Name, address and telephone number of the owner of the
land on which the sludge materials are to be applied, and a notarized form
from the landowner granting permission to apply the sludge material to the
land.



      (4)   The name, address and telephone number of the person who
is to actually apply the sludge material to the land and a signed statement
by that person indicating that he or she shall apply the material in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter.



      (5)   A survey, plat, aerial photograph or map showing all
streams, springs, wetlands, open waters, sink holes or their areas where
sludge materials should not be applied and the buffers given to each area.



      (6)   If the sludge is being used as a fertilizer, liming
agent or soil enhancement, a soil analysis taken within the last 90 days on
each field upon which the applicant seeks approval to spread the sludge
materials.



      (7)   A statement indicating that the sludge or sludge-derived
material would be applied at a rate based on soil test results and nutrient
requirements of the crop to be produced as recommended by Rutgers Cooperative
Extension of Atlantic County.



      (8)   An accurate analysis of a representative sample of the
sludge-derived material the applicant is seeking to apply to land in the Town
of Hammonton showing the existing levels of nitrogen, potassium, phosphorus,
lead, mercury, cadmium, moisture content and any other substances requested
by the Town of Hammonton Council, or the Council's designees, including but
not limited to arsenic, chromium, copper, molybdenum, nickel, selenium,
thallium, zinc, as well as dioxin and pathogens. The precision and
sensitivity of the analysis for each substance or element tested will be
defined in the conservation plan as required by this chapter.



      (9)   A written plan that shows how the sludge materials will
be applied, which includes at a minimum all the restrictions described in
this chapter limiting the application of all sludge-derived materials.



      (10)   A conservation plan prepared in accordance with the
requirements of the United States Natural Resource Conservation Service that
indicates those best management practices that will be utilized to assure
that the sludge and sludge-derived materials will be, to the maximum extent
possible, prevented from creating any off-site pollution or nuisance problems.



      (11)   A Certification of Filing from the Pinelands Commission
issued pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.34.



§ 230-7. Plan review and approval.



   All applications shall be reviewed by the Town Council, or the
Council's designee, for completeness. No application shall be deemed complete
without receipt of Certificate of Filing from the Pinelands Commission
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.34. If it is determined that the plan and
accompanying documentation and plans meet the minimum acceptable criteria, a
written approval shall be issued to the applicant in a form approved by the
Town Council or the Council's designee within 30 days of submission of a
completed application. Any such approval shall be subject to the Pinelands
notice, review and decision requirements set forth in § 175-60 of Chapter
175, Land Development, of the Code of the Town of Hammonton.



§ 230-8. Inspections.



   The Council's designee shall be present and act as inspector during the
application of sludge-derived material. The inspector shall monitor the
amount of material being applied and shall keep a log of all deliveries of
the sludge-derived material to the site, which will include the name of the
person making the delivery, the weight of materials in the delivery, the
analysis of a representative sample of the materials to be applied to the
land as provided by the producer of the sludge-derived material, the amount
of materials applied on each approved field and such other information as the
Town Council or the Council's designee may request from time to time at the
site, and before the sludge-derived material is applied to the land, the
inspector may, at his or her discretion, have individual truckloads of the
sludge-derived materials sampled and later tested for various elements and
substances.



§ 230-9. Fees and escrow deposits.



   A.   Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
application fee of $100 and an escrow deposit of $500, in accordance with
procedures established by the Town Council.



   B.   The applicant is responsible for all costs associated with the
review of each application, which costs will be taken from the escrow
account. Such costs may include but are not limited to engineers, consultants
or other persons necessary, in the opinion of the Town Council or the
Council's designee, for the approval of the application. The applicant is
responsible for all expenses incurred in connection with the on-site
inspection as the sludge-derived material is applied to the land.



§ 230-10. Violations and penalties.



   A.   The spreading of any amount of regulated sludge or
sludge-derived products without written approval in accordance with the
procedures outlined in this chapter is a violation of this chapter.



   B.   Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with this chapter shall immediately and without
notice be subject to one or more of the following: a fine of not more than
$1,000, imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days or a period of
community service not to exceed 90 days per 100 acre plot, or less, in
violation in Municipal Court. Each and every violation that continues shall
be considered a separate violation and will be subject to additional fines
not to exceed the above per 100 acre plot, or less, per day. In addition to
these penalties a stop-work order shall be issued by the appropriate town
authority until the violations are remedied.



§ 230-11. Enforcement.



   It shall be the duty of the Zoning/Code Enforcement Officer to enforce
this chapter.



CHAPTER 233. PROHIBITION OF THE USE OF TOBACCO OR TOBACCO-RELATED PRODUCTS
UPON PROPERTY OWNED BY THE TOWN OF HAMMONTON



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton as
indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]



   § 233-1.   Definitions.



   § 233-2.   Prohibition.



   § 233-3.   Signage.



   § 233-4.   Enforcement.



   § 233-5.   Violations and penalties.



[Adopted 4-26-1989 by Ord. No. 13-1989; 7-24-1995 by Ord. No. 17-1995;
12-15-2014 by Ord. No. 036-2014]



§ 233-1. Definitions.



   For purposes of this article, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:



   ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE — The use of an electronic device that can
be used to deliver nicotine or other substances to the person inhaling the
device, including, but not limited to, an electronic cigar, cigarette,
cigarillo, or pipe.



   MUNICIPAL PROPERTY — All land, buildings, or other improvements
owned, leased, rented,  and/or operated by the Town of Hammonton, and/or
occupied by employees of the Town of Hammonton which are open to the public
or to which the public may be invited or otherwise have access. These shall
include all areas designated as town parks without reservation.



   SMOKING — The burning of, inhaling from, exhaling the smoke from, or
the possession of a lighted cigar, cigarette, cigarillo, pipe, or any other
matter or substance that contains tobacco.



   TOBACCO PRODUCT — Any product containing tobacco or nicotine,
including but not limited to cigars, cigarettes, cigarillos, pipe tobacco,
snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, bidis, kreteks, snus, and electronic
cigarette cartridges.



§ 233-2. Prohibition.



   No person shall engage in smoking or the use of tobacco products while
on the grounds upon which are constructed municipal buildings and
improvements, including contiguous properties owned, leased, rented, and/or
operated by the Town of Hammonton regardless of whether any municipal
building or improvement is constructed thereupon. This shall include all
areas designated as town parks, without reservation.



§ 233-3. Signage.



   The Town Administrator shall post and maintain appropriate signage
throughout all municipal buildings and upon or on all town-owned property
advising all persons regarding the prohibiting of smoking upon said property.



§ 233-4. Enforcement.



   A.   This article shall be enforced by the Police Department, Parks
Commission, Recreation Supervisor, Town Administrator, or any other person
charged with the enforcement of ordinances of the Town of Hammonton.



   B.   It shall be unlawful to hinder, obstruct, molest, willfully
oppose, verbally abuse, or otherwise interfere with any person authorized to
enforce the requirements of this article.



   C.   Citizens may bring complaints against violators of this article.



§ 233-5.  Violations and penalties.



   A.   Any individual violating the provisions of this article shall
be subject to the following:



      (1)   A fine of not less than $50 but not exceeding $100 for
the first offense;



      (2)   A fine of not less than $100 but not exceeding $200 for
a second offense;



      (3)   A fine of not less than $200 but not exceeding $500 for
a third offense;



      (4)   A fine of not less than $500 but not exceeding $1,000,
and mandatory community service of not less than 40 hours and not exceeding
160 hours, for offenses beyond the third offense.



   B.   All such complaints arising from an alleged violation of this
article shall be prosecuted in the Hammonton Municipal Court.



CHAPTER 241.
SOLID WASTE



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton as
indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]



ARTICLE I.
Convenience Station



   § 241-1.   Establishment; permits.



   § 241-2.   Hours of operation.



   § 241-3.   Entry by authorized persons.



   § 241-4.   Acceptable materials.



   § 241-5.   Nonresidential users.



   § 241-6.   Appliances prohibited.



   § 241-7.   Nontransferable permit.



   § 241-8.   Violations and penalties.



   § 241-9.   through § 241-16. (Reserved)



ARTICLE II.
Trash Collection



   § 241-17.   Purpose.



   § 241-18.   Definitions.



   § 241-19.   Responsibility for collection and disposal.



   § 241-20.   Preparation for collection; interference.



   § 241-21.   Collection times.



   § 241-22.   Collection requirements.



   § 241-23.   Containers to be set out during specified times.



   § 241-24.   Restrictions on collectors.



   § 241-25.   Placement for collection.



   § 241-26.   Trash transported from outside municipality prohibited.



   § 241-27.   Refusal to collect.



   § 241-28.   Violations and penalties.



ARTICLE III.
Recycling



   § 241-29.   Title.



   § 241-30.   Definitions.



   § 241-31.   Program established.



   § 241-32.   Administration of program.



   § 241-33.   Separation of recyclables; placement for collection.



   § 241-34.   Leaves.



   § 241-35.   Alternative collection of recyclables.



   § 241-36.   Collection by unauthorized persons prohibited.



   § 241-37.   Inclusion in development plans.



   § 241-38.   Multifamily dwellings.



   § 241-39.   Exclusions.



   § 241-40.   Recycling Coordinator.



   § 241-41.   Enforcement.



   § 241-42.   Jurisdiction of Municipal Court.



   § 241-43.   Violations and penalties.



ARTICLE IV.
Fees for Solid Waste Removal



   § 241-44.   Purpose.



   § 241-45.   Fees imposed; stickers; application and use.



   § 241-46.   Construction waste.



   § 241-47.   Senior citizen discount.



ARTICLE V
Permit Procedures for Construction Dumpsters



   § 241-48.   Definitions.



   § 241-49.   Application/permit procedures.



   § 241-50.   Construction dumpster locations.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Littering — See Ch. 184.



   Property maintenance — See Ch. 211.



   Human waste for crop fertilization — See Ch. 134, Art. I.



   Abandoned refrigerators — See Ch. 214.



Article I.
Convenience Station



[Adopted 4-23-2001 by Ord. No. 16-2001 Editor's Note: This ordinance also
repealed former Art. I, Dumps and Dumping, adopted 2-24-1986 by 2-1986, as
amended. ]



§ 241-1. Establishment; permits.



   A.   There is herein established by the governing body of the Town
of Hammonton a convenience station located at the site of the former
municipal dump. This convenience station shall be open and available for the
use of Hammonton residents only who have obtained a registration card/permit
issued by the office of the Treasurer of the Town of Hammonton.



   B.   A permit will issue upon establishing residency within the Town
of Hammonton, and each permit shall be valid for a period of one year
beginning January 1 of each year and expiring on December 31 of the same year.



§ 241-2. Hours of operation.



   The Hammonton convenience station shall be open to qualified permit
holders between such hours and on such days as may be established by the
Hammonton Highway Department with due notice thereof being posted at the
entrance of the convenience station in such manner as to be clearly visible
to any person using the facility.



§ 241-3. Entry by authorized persons.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to enter the convenience station
and utilize the same unless they are a holder of a valid permit issued by the
Town of Hammonton.



§ 241-4. Acceptable materials.



   Materials accepted at the convenience station shall be determined by
the governing body within their sole discretion. At no time may any explosive
or other dangerous or poisonous substance, chemical or other material likely
to cause injury to persons or the environment be acceptable at the Hammonton
convenience station. No tires of any kind or size shall be accepted at any
time.



§ 241-5. Nonresidential users.



   The convenience station shall not be available or utilized by any
commercial generator within the Town of Hammonton. "Commercial generator"
shall be defined and include but not be limited to contractors of any nature
or businesspersons generating solid waste as part of their business activity,
agricultural production business and office and professional businesses.



§ 241-6. Appliances prohibited.



   A.   No person shall be permitted to utilize the Hammonton
convenience station for disposal of any appliance, including but not limited
to refrigerators, ice makers, air conditioners, dehumidifiers and any other
appliance containing a refrigerant unless a prepaid sticker issued by the
Town of Hammonton is affixed to the item presented for disposal. A
refrigerant disposal sticker may be obtained from the Town of Hammonton upon
payment of a $10 per item intending to be disposed of at the convenience
station.



   B.   A refrigerant removal sticker is also required for any
appliance requiring refrigerant removal for curbside pickup on days of bulky
waste collection.



§ 241-7. Nontransferable permit.



   A.   No permit issued by the Town of Hammonton for use at the
Hammonton convenience station may be assigned, loaned or transferred to any
other person or resident of the Town of Hammonton.



   B.   Any violation of this provision shall cause a revocation of the
permit and forfeiture of the ability to utilize the Hammonton convenience
station for the balance of the calendar year in which the permit is issued.



§ 241-8. Violations and penalties.



   Unless otherwise provided by law or statute, any person violating any
of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a
penalty of not less than $100 nor more than $500 for each offense.



§ 241-9. through § 241-16. (Reserved)



Article II.
Trash Collection



[Adopted 2-24-1986 by Ord. No. 5-1986]



§ 241-17. Purpose.



   The purpose of this article is to regulate and control the collection
of solid wastes within the Town of Hammonton.



§ 241-18. Definitions.



   For purposes of this article, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:



   ASHES



   The residue from fires used for cooking foods and heating fires within
residential units.



   BRUSH



   Branches and twigs not to exceed three inches in diameter, five feet in
length and 50 pounds in weight that can be handled by one person.  Brush
does not include trees.



[Added 7-25-2016 by Ord. No. 013-2016]



   BULK ITEMS



   Any large, heavy and/or bulky household appliances, furniture and
furnishings which cannot easily and safely be placed in the common collection
vehicle used for removal of solid waste within the Town of Hammonton.



   CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS



   Any scrap lumber, metal, earth, sand, brick, stone, plaster, roofing
and siding material and other debris of a similar nature which accumulates
and is incidental to the construction or renovation of homes, buildings,
public works or other projects.



   GARBAGE



   Any animal or vegetable waste solids resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking or consumption of foods, but not including human wastes.



   HAZARDOUS WASTE



   All waste which is deemed to be chemical waste, hazardous waste or
infectious waste, as defined by N.J.A.C. 7:26-1.4, and which shall include,
but not be limited to, wastes which are flammable, corrosive or explosive or
which, by themselves or in combination with other wastes, would be hazardous
to life or property.



   NONRESIDENTIAL USER



   Any type of commercial, industrial, apartment complex, hotel business
establishment, whether for profit or not.



[Amended 3-21-2005 by Ord. No. 4-2005]



   PAPER



   Includes newspapers, periodicals, cardboard and all other waste paper.



   RESIDENTIAL USER



   Any dwelling unit, including a single-family home or multifamily home.



[Amended 3-21-2005 by Ord. No. 4-2005]



   RUBBISH



   Includes rags, old clothes, leather, rubber, carpets, wood, sawdust,
tree branches, yard trimmings, wood furniture and other combustible solids
not of a highly volatile or explosive nature, metals, metal shavings, tin
cans, glass, crockery and other similar materials, exclusive of trade waste
and waste resulting from building construction or alteration work and
exclusive of cellar or yard dirt.



   SOLID WASTE COLLECTION CONTRACTOR



   A person or firm for hire, properly licensed in the State of New Jersey
for the purpose of collection of solid waste and solid waste materials.



   STREET, SIDEWALK, CURB, ALLEY



   Any accepted public street, curb, sidewalk or alley.



   TRADE WASTE



   All material resulting from the prosecution of any business, trade or
industry, whether or not conducted for profit, and shall include paper, rags,
leather, rubber, cartons, boxes, wood, sawdust, garbage, combustible and
noncombustible solids, except manure, metals, metal shavings, wire, tin cans,
cinders and other materials exclusive of wastes resulting from building
construction or alteration work.



   WASTE MATERIAL



   Includes any and all garbage, refuse, paper, ashes and wastes from
building construction or alteration work, regardless of how originating, and
shall also include cellar or yard dirt.



§ 241-19. Responsibility for collection and disposal.



   A.   Every residential user placing garbage, paper, ashes and
rubbish, herein defined, for collection from, on or in connection with
residential property or a residential unit, which property shall be within
the boundaries of the Town of Hammonton, may have such collection and removal
provided by the Town of Hammonton, subject to the rules and regulations set
forth within this article.



   B.   The Town of Hammonton shall not be responsible for the disposal
of trade waste, construction debris, hazardous waste, or waste related to the
transfer of ownership of a residential property or the change of occupancy by
a residential tenant thereof.  It shall be the responsibility of the
property owner and/or tenant to arrange, in those circumstances, for a solid
waste collection contractor to remove the aforedescribed waste.  Any person,
association, partnership, company, corporation, or property owner violating
this § 241-19(B) shall be subject to one or more of the following
penalties: 



   1.   For the first offense and second offense, a fine of $75; and



   2.   For a third or subsequent violation, a fine of up to $1,000,
imprisonment for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days or a period of
community service not to exceed ninety (90) days. 



[Amended 4-26-2010 by Ord. No. 6-2010; 7-25-2016 by Ord. No. 013-2016]



   C.   The Town of Hammonton shall not be responsible for furnishing
collection vehicles or personnel to remove and dispose of the solid waste of
nonresidential users within the Town of Hammonton; however, the Town shall
assume responsibility for the collection of the solid waste generated by the
two volunteer fire companies and the three military service organizations
(America Legion, Veterans of Foreign Wars and Disabled American Veterans), at
their respective principal facilities, and the Hammonton Rescue Squad.



[Amended 1-21-2008 by Ord. No. 2-2008]



§ 241-20. Preparation for collection; interference.



   A.   Preparation for collection.



      (1)   Containers shall be provided by the owner, tenant,
lessee or occupant of the premises. Refuse containers shall be maintained in
a clean, safe and good condition. Any container that does not conform to the
provisions of this article or that may have ragged or sharp edges or any
other defect liable to hamper or injure the person collecting the contents
thereof shall not be utilized. The collector shall have the authority to
refuse collection services for failure to comply herewith.



      (2)   Appropriate containers.



         (a)   The containers shall be of galvanized or plastic
composition, shall not exceed 40 gallons in capacity, shall be no heavier
than 50 pounds when filled, shall have a lid or cover and shall have two
sturdy handles.



         (b)   Plastic bags not less than two mils thick and not
larger than 40 gallons may be used if properly tied.



         (c)   Substitute containers may be used in place of
approved containers, such as another bag which is water repellent and animal
repellent, treated paper garbage and refuse bags or a bag of similar nature.
These bags shall not be less than two mils thick and shall not be larger than
40 gallons. All bags used shall be properly tied and secured so as to prevent
escape of solid waste.



      (3)   All garbage shall be thoroughly and completely drained
of all liquids, wrapped securely in paper and placed in a receptacle as
hereinbefore set forth.



      (4)   All grass, weeds, lawn clippings and similar growths
shall be placed in a container so that they may be readily emptied into the
municipal collection vehicle.



      (5)   Newspapers, magazines and periodicals shall be securely
tied in bundles, each having a maximum weight of 50 pounds.



      (6)   All broken glass or any other dangerous materials shall
be placed in a secure container to facilitate safe loading of broken glass or
other dangerous material.



      (7)   All ashes shall be placed in a container covered in such
a manner as to prevent contents of the container from becoming wet due to
rain or snow. Ashes shall be cold and free from any hot coals to prevent the
possibility of fire, and the container with the ashes shall not exceed 40
pounds in weight.



   (8)   Brush shall only be placed for collection in a single pile not
exceeding four feet in height, six feet in length, and six feet in width. 
Any person, association, partnership, company, corporation, or property owner
violating this § 241-20(A)(8) shall be subject to one or more of the
following penalties: 



      1.   For the first offense and second offense, a fine of $75;
and 



      2.   For a third or subsequent violation, a fine of up to
$1,000, imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days or a period of
community service not to exceed 90 days.



[Amended 4-26-2010 by Ord. No. 6-2010; 7-25-2016 by Ord. No. 013-2016]



   (9)   Household furniture will be accepted. However, separate
arrangements must be made by the individual owner with the Overseer of
Highways of the Town of Hammonton for the purposes of removal of said items.



   (10)   No person shall place on the curb or anywhere else for
purposes of collection any explosive or highly flammable materials or
hazardous waste, including but not limited to benzene, gasoline, petroleum,
explosive powder, nitrocellulose film or unbroken fluorescent tubes.



   (11)   Bulk items (as defined in this Chapter) shall not be
collected with the regular weekly collection but may be collected in
accordance with a schedule as determined by the Overseer of Highways for the
Town of Hammonton.  The Town reserves the right to refuse collection of bulk
materials which, in its opinion, are excessively heavy or cumbersome
including, but not limited to, motor engine blocks, automobile bodies or
portions thereof, truck bodies or parts, carpets and other similar
materials.  No refrigerator shall be placed for collection unless and until
the door of the refrigerator and/or freezer has been completely removed from
the hinges and the lock has been rendered inoperable.  In no event shall any
person or entity cause to be placed for collection any item in violation of
this subsection, nor shall any person or entity cause to be placed for
collection in excess of three bulky items for any single collection.  Any
person, association, partnership, company, corporation or property owner
violating this § 241-20(A)(11) shall be subject to one or more of the
following penalties:



      1.   For the first offense and second offense a fine of $75,
in addition to a fine of $50 per bulky item in excess of three bulky items,
if any; and



      2.   For a third or subsequent violation, a fine of up to
$1,000, imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days or a period of
community service not to exceed 90 days. 



[Amended 4-26-2010 by Ord. No. 6-2010; 7-25-2016 by Ord. No. 013-2016]



      (12)   Old lumber, shingles, wallboard or other old building
material or debris, if not able to be placed in containers, shall be stacked
and securely tied in bundles of not more than four feet in length and
weighing not more than 50 pounds each.



      (13)   Each box, carton or other container must be flattened
out and disassembled so as to be readily and easily handled. No part of any
such article shall exceed four feet in length or weigh more than 50 pounds
when deposited for municipal collection.



      (14)   Arrangement for disposal of trees and stumps shall be
made by the owner, occupant or person in control of the premises and shall
not be collected by the Town of Hammonton.



      (15)   No person shall place in any receptacle any garbage,
refuse or any other material which could be injurious to the collectors of
the municipality.



      (16)   Any paper drum or plywood drum shall not be utilized
for the storage of garbage or refuse or as ash containers, and containers of
this type will be classified as rubbish and will be collected by the
municipality.



      (17)   Each container of solid waste shall be placed on level
ground or surface by the property owner, tenant or other person placing
garbage for collection or from whose property such garbage is proposed to be
collected so that it does not easily upset.



      (18)   If any container of garbage is upset or overturned
other than by the town employees engaged in garbage or refuse collection, the
property owner, tenant or other person placing the garbage for municipal
collection shall promptly clean up such spill of garbage and restore it to a
suitable container as defined hereinbefore.



      (19)   No person shall place any of the items referred to in
this article for collection in any street or highway, either for collection
by the municipality or private disposal.



      (20)   If any container of garbage is upset or overturned by a
municipal employee other than as a result of improper preparation by the
residential user, the municipal employee shall immediately collect such
garbage and dispose of the same in the collection vehicle.



      (21)   If any town employee, in the course of his/her duties,
observes noncompliance with any of the regulations of this article, the
employee shall immediately inform the Overseer of Highways of the Town of
Hammonton. In the event that the noncompliance is noticed by a collector of
the municipality, the collector shall not make the collection of the noncom
plying items and shall immediately report this noncollection to the Overseer
of Highways of the Town of Hammonton.



      (22)   No trash or garbage shall be deposited upon any public
street or any other public place except at the curb for collection by the
municipality in accordance herewith.



      (23)   Receptacles utilized by nonresidential users must meet
the minimum requirements as set forth herein. However, said receptacles can
be larger in size as long as they are covered to prevent any refuse from
being scattered about by wind or other elements, are rodent proof, are
cleaned and sanitized as required and are conveniently located on the
premises for storage of refuse and are maintained in such a manner as to
prevent creation of a nuisance or menace to the public health. Nonresidential
users shall arrange to have refuse removed daily unless suitable facilities
are provided for the storage of solid waste until its removal.



      (24)   When a residential user elects to clean up accumulated
refuse from cellars, back yards, alleys, attics and spare rooms and excess
furniture, it shall be the obligation of the residential user to place such
material in such quantity and in such a manner as not to create a public
nuisance and safety hazard, and if the accumulation of solid waste exceeds
more than five containers prepared in accordance with this article, the
residential user shall either make special arrangements with the Overseer of
Highways to have the materials picked up in accordance with the schedule
established by the Overseer of Highways or shall arrange for private
collection thereof.



      (25)   Municipal employees shall not be required to make
garbage or trash collections from the premises of any residential user
whereon a dog is permitted to run loose.



   B.   No person or persons shall prevent or interfere with any agent,
servant or employee of the town or any authorized contractor or collector of
garbage, trash or refuse or with any contractor's or collector's employees
engaged in the discharge of their duties, in the sweeping or cleaning of any
street or removal there from of sweepings, ashes, garbage, rubbish or paper
or other refuse materials, or in the collection of garbage, trash, waste,
ashes, rubbish or similar material.



§ 241-21. Collection times.



[Amended 9-25-2000 by Ord. No. 35-2000]



   Collection from residential users shall be in accordance with a
schedule announced by the Highway Department of the Town of Hammonton. This
schedule may be from time to time amended upon publication. All collections
of garbage and any other material provided for in this article shall be
collected starting at 7:00 a.m. During the months of June, July and August,
collection will begin at 6:00 a.m.



§ 241-22. Collection requirements.



   A.   If any one or more of the above regulations are not followed by
the property owner, tenant or other person desiring municipal collection, the
municipality or its employees shall not be obligated to make a collection of
the items concerning which any one or more of the above regulations have not
been followed.



   B.   When any of the items named in or referred to in § 241-20 of
this article are placed at or just inside the curbline, it shall be assumed
that the same are so placed for municipal garbage and refuse collection and
disposal.



§ 241-23. Containers to be set out during specified times.



[Amended 9-25-2000 by Ord. No. 35-2000]



   For collection pursuant to a schedule announced by the Highway
Department of the Town of Hammonton, all approved containers must be placed
at the curbline, where they shall be easily accessible. No container shall be
set out prior to 12:00 noon on the day prior to collection, and all
containers shall be removed by 8:00 p.m. on the collection day. When a
regular collection day falls on a legal holiday, containers shall not be set
out until the next regularly scheduled collection, unless special
announcement of collection is made by the town.



§ 241-24. Restrictions on collectors.



   A.   Collection shall be done in a quiet and orderly manner in
compliance with all applicable statutes and noise ordinances within the Town
of Hammonton.



   B.   All solid waste collection contractors shall comply with the
ordinances of the town and rules and regulations and orders of the Highway
Department, as well as all applicable state, county and federal laws and
regulations.



   C.   All vehicles of solid waste collection contractors shall be of
a closed type and of such construction and loaded in such a fashion that no
part of the contents shall fall, leak or spill there from.



§ 241-25. Placement for collection.



   A.   All materials set or placed for collection by residential users
shall be set or placed as near as possible upon or along the curbline and
shall not be set or placed in any gutter, road or on any walk, sidewalk or
public thoroughfare so as to interfere with public travel.



   B.   Town collectors of solid waste are prohibited from entering
upon any unaccepted lands, streets, services areas, driveways or alleys or
any privately owned buildings or portions of any such buildings for the
purpose of removing refuse materials to the curb, and if solid waste of
residential users is not placed in accordance with this article, the
municipal collector will not accept the waste for collection.



   C.   When it shall appear to be more efficient for collection by the
municipality, the municipality, upon written request or permission by the
owner, may authorize town collectors to enter upon and collect garbage and
refuse placed at the curbline or side line of such unaccepted streets, lanes,
alleys, driveways, service areas or other thoroughfare areas as it may
designate, subject to such conditions as it may impose. Such collection
service shall not, however, be construed to be an acceptance of any such
unaccepted thoroughfare or area.



§ 241-26. Trash transported from outside municipality prohibited.



   A.   No person shall bring, cart, remove, transport or collect any
solid waste, whether garbage, paper, ashes, rubbish, waste materials,
construction debris, bulk items, hazardous waste or trade waste, from outside
this municipality or into this municipality for the purpose of dumping or
disposing thereof.



   B.   No person shall bring, cart, remove, transport or collect any
trade waste, waste materials, construction debris, hazardous waste or bulk
items from a nonresidential user and place the same for collection with the
solid waste of a residential user, and, in those locations where residential
and nonresidential users are located on the same premises, the solid waste
shall be disposed of separately and in accordance with this article.



§ 241-27. Refusal to collect.



   Any solid waste placed for collection by a residential user not in
accordance with this article will be refused by the municipal collector, and
it shall be the responsibility of the residential user to remove said solid
waste from the curbline and have it properly containerized, packaged or
secured for purposes of collection on the next scheduled date, or the
residential user shall have same disposed of privately by a solid waste
collection contractor.



§ 241-28. Violations and penalties.



   A.   Any person, firm, corporation or association violating the
terms of this article, whether as principal, agent or employee or another,
shall, upon conviction in the Municipal Court of the Town of Hammonton in the
County of Atlantic, be subject to one or more of the following: a fine of not
more than $1,000, imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days or a period
of community service not to exceed 90 days.



   B.   Each and every violation of this article and each and every day
that any provision of this article shall be violated shall be construed as a
separate and distinct violation thereof.



   C.   The violations and penalties set forth in this § 241-28 are
inapplicable to violations of § 241-19(B), § 241-20(A)(8) and §
241-20(A)(11), as these sections already contain separate penalties for a
violation.



[Added 7-25-2016 by Ord. No. 013-2016]



Article III.
Recycling



[Adopted 10-23-1989 by Ord. No. 34-1989]



§ 241-29. Title.



   This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Recycling
Ordinance of the Town of Hammonton."



§ 241-30. Definitions.



   As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:



   ALUMINUM



   Includes all products made wholly of aluminum, including but not
limited to aluminum cans, aluminum sheds, lawn chair frames, aluminum siding,
window frames and other clean household aluminum, but does not include
aluminum foil, trays, plates and screening.



   BRUSH



   Branches and twigs not to exceed three inches in diameter, five feet in
length and 50 pounds in weight that can be handled by one person.  Brush
does not include trees.



[Amended 7-25-2016 by Ord. No. 013-2016]



   CARDBOARD OR CORRUGATED PAPER



   Clean, heavy box materials commonly known as "cardboard boxes" and
similar heavy paper packaging containers that are free of plastic, foam and
other contaminants, also including food packaging boxes and other commercial
packaging that is free of food contaminants, plastic, wax and foam materials
that would make it undesirable for recycling purposes. All cardboard and
packaging must be opened and flattened for ease of handling.



   COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS



   Those properties used primarily for commercial purposes.



   FERROUS CONTAINERS



   Empty steel or tin food or beverage containers.



   GLASS



   Bottles and jars made of clear, green or brown glass. Expressly
excluded are noncontainer glass, plate or window glass, dishes, mirrors,
drinkware, tableware, porcelain or ceramics.



   INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENTS



   Those facilities that house or serve groups of people, including but
not limited to hospitals, schools, nursing homes, libraries and government
offices.



   PAPER



   Newsprint and other forms of paper and paper products, such as
magazines, catalogs, office paper, etc., excluding those soiled (i.e.,
containing carbon, adhesive or plastic) or unfit due to health and/or
sanitary reasons. Newspapers shall also be deemed soiled if they have been
exposed to substances rendering them unusable for recycling (i.e., water).



   PERSON



   Every owner, lessee and occupant of a residence within the boundaries
of the Town of Hammonton.



   PLASTICS



   Includes all materials or other products made of plastic.



[Added 11-22-1993 by Ord. No. 27-1993]



   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS



   Those materials which would otherwise become municipal solid waste and
which may be collected, separated or processed and returned to the economic
mainstream in the form of raw materials or products.



   RESIDENCE



   Any occupied single-family or multifamily dwelling from which the waste
is hauled to the landfill by the hauler or occupant.



   SCRAP METAL



   Includes ferrous or tin cans (excluding sixty-four-ounce containers),
refrigerators, freezers, water heaters, washers, dryers, metal sheds and any
other type of bulk metal household item.



   SOLID WASTE



   Any garbage, refuse and other discarded solid material brought to the
landfill by resident or hauler.



   YARD WASTE



   Includes branches, underbrush, pruning waste, shrubbery and soil.



§ 241-31. Program established.



   There is hereby established a mandatory program for the separation of
recyclable materials from the municipal solid waste stream by all persons
within the Town of Hammonton, hereinafter referred to as the "municipality."



§ 241-32. Administration of program.



   The Mayor and Council is hereby authorized to establish and promulgate
reasonable regulations, from time to time, to be adopted by resolution of the
Municipal Council, which shall specifically spell out the manner of operation
of this program. The regulation shall provide, among other provisions, the
following:



   A.   Items determined to be recyclable.



   B.   Persons and/or firms to be subject to said regulations.



   C.   Dates, times and places of pickup.



   D.   Manner of preparing recyclable items for pickup.



   E.   Any other regulations required to implement said program.



§ 241-33. Separation of recyclables; placement for collection.



   A.   Items designated to be recyclable materials by regulations
hereinafter promulgated, excluding newspapers and other paper goods, shall be
put in a suitable container, separate from other solid waste, and placed at
the curb or such other designated area for collection at certain times and
dates as may be hereinafter established in the municipality's recycling
regulations. In no event shall items placed at curbside for collection be
placed in a manner so as to impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic. The
container for recyclable materials shall be clearly labeled and placed at the
designated area for collection. Plastic shall be a recyclable material that
will be placed for collection.



[Amended 11-22-1993 by Ord. No. 27-1993]



   B.   Newspapers and other paper goods shall be bundled and tied with
twine or placed in a kraft paper bag (brown paper bag) and placed at the curb
or other designated area for collection at such times and dates as
established in the municipality's recycling regulations. The maximum weight
of each bundle or bag shall not exceed 30 pounds (approximately 12 inches
high).



   C.   If the recyclable collection and regular trash collection is on
the same day, the recyclable containers and newspapers shall be at least six
feet from the regular containers.



§ 241-34. Leaves.



   All persons within the municipality shall separate leaves from other
solid waste generated at their premises and, unless the leaves are stored or
recycled for composting or mulching on the premises or as otherwise provided
for by the municipality, place the leaves at the curb or other designated
area for collection at such times and dates and in the manner established by
the municipality's recycling regulations.



§ 241-35. Alternative collection of recyclables.



   A.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, any person
who is an owner, lesser or occupant may donate and sell recyclables to any
person, partnership or corporation, whether operating for profit or not for
profit. These materials may either be delivered to the individual's or
organization's site or they may be placed at the curb for collection by said
individual or organization on days not designated as recyclable material
collection days in the municipality's or designated agent's recycling
regulations.



   B.   In the event that materials are donated within the terms of
this article, it shall be the responsibility of the person or persons
accepting the donation to notify the Town of Hammonton Highway Department and
the Town of Hammonton Recycling Coordinator so as to afford the town proper
accounting of weight diverted from the solid waste stream.



   C.   Prior to collecting any recyclable materials, the person,
partnership or corporation, whether operating for profit or not for profit,
or a charitable, educational, cultural or religious organization, must
register with the Highway Department and receive written authorization to
make said collections and to use for identification purposes while soliciting.



§ 241-36. Collection by unauthorized persons prohibited.



   It shall be a violation of this article for any unauthorized person,
partnership, corporation or organization to collect, pick up or cause to be
collected or picked up, within the boundaries of this municipality, any of
the recyclable materials designated in the municipality's recycling
regulations. Each such collection in violation of this article shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense, punishable as hereinafter
provided.



§ 241-37. Inclusion in development plans.



   Any proposals for new development of five or more multifamily units and
1,000 square feet or more of commercial or industrial space must incorporate
provisions for recycling in the site plans. The Town of Hammonton Master Plan
must incorporate a recycling plan element and must be updated for recycling
every six years.



§ 241-38. Multifamily dwellings.



   In case of apartment houses, townhouses, condominiums or other
multifamily dwellings, the owner, manager or condominium association,
whichever shall apply, of said multifamily units shall ensure that a special
place is designated for the storage of recyclable materials as designated by
the municipality's recycling regulations. All owners, lessees or occupants of
these dwelling units shall be required to separate recyclable items in the
manner required by the municipality's recycling regulations and place them in
the designated place. The owner, manager or condominium association,
whichever shall apply, of the multifamily units shall notify the Municipal
Highway Department and the municipality's designated agent of the location of
the storage area. The location and setup of the designated area is to be
subject to the site plan approval of the municipality's Planning Board. With
respect to existing construction, the location and setup of the designated
area shall first be approved by the appropriate town officials.



§ 241-39. Exclusions.



   The Mayor and Council of the Town of Hammonton excludes from pickup
service persons and/or companies occupying commercial and institutional
establishments. These persons must otherwise provide for the collection of
recyclable materials as the same are designated in the municipality's
recycling regulations. Prior to April 1 of each year, said occupants must
provide written documentation to the municipality of the total amount of
materials recycled during the preceding calendar year.



§ 241-40. Recycling Coordinator.



   The municipality shall have a Recycling Coordinator who shall be
appointed by the Mayor and Council. The Recycling Coordinator shall have the
authority, obligation and duty to administer the recycling program in the
municipality. The Recycling Coordinator shall be under the jurisdiction of
the Overseer of Highways.



§ 241-41. Enforcement.



   The Highway Department and the Code Enforcement Officer of the Town of
Hammonton shall be the enforcing agents for this article and may issue
written warnings and/or summonses returnable in the Hammonton Municipal Court.



§ 241-42. Jurisdiction of Municipal Court.



   The Municipal Court of the Town of Hammonton shall have jurisdiction
and hear complaints for violations of this article.



§ 241-43. Violations and penalties.



   Any person, firm, corporation or organization that violates this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to one or more of the
following: a fine of not more than $1,000, imprisonment for a period not to
exceed 90 days or a period of community service not to exceed 90 days. Each
violation shall be considered as a separate offense, and each date of
violation shall be considered as a separate offense when determining
penalties under this section.



Article IV.
Fees for Solid Waste Removal



[Adopted 5-22-1995 by Ord. No. 13-1995]



§ 241-44. Purpose.



   A.   The Town of Hammonton has incurred substantial increased cost
to collect, transport and dispose of solid waste, including among other costs
a tipping or disposal charge paid to the Atlantic County Utilities Authority
for the use of the County Landfill.



   B.   The disposal charge is in addition to the other costs of
administration, equipment and labor which the town maintains for providing
this service to the community.



   C.   Unless the increased costs are not offset by the creation of
new revenue, the service of trash and garbage collection and disposal by the
town will be in serious jeopardy of continuance. Also, the additional cost of
disposal of trash as outlined in this article should be paid by those
receiving the benefit and not by all the taxpayers.



   D.   The intention of this article is to provide a method of
securing revenue to meet at least in part these added costs and to impose the
charges for this service approximately to the persons who receive this
service. This result has not been reached arbitrarily and is a conclusion
taken from a study of costs and charges which faces the Town of Hammonton.
The resulting method and fees are deemed to be fair and equitable without
intending to be a revenue measure beyond need. The fees imposed will be
charged to the person receiving the service and in relation to the extent of
the service furnished.



§ 241-45. Fees imposed; stickers; application and use.



   A.   There is hereby created a fee for the collection and disposal
of solid waste in the Town of Hammonton to be known as the "sticker fee,"
which shall be adopted by resolution yearly.



   B.   The fees provided for shall be paid to the town by the purchase
of town-approved and town-issued stickers. The stickers shall be applied to
the solid waste sought to be disposed.



   C.   Stickers shall be placed upon the bag, container or item being
disposed in a conspicuous place thereon. If no sticker is applied, the waste
will not be collected.



   D.   Stickers may be purchased only from the authorized officer of
the town who will issue them to qualified users of this service in books of
such number prescribed to be issued.



   E.   Application may be made to such officer during any business day
so that the service will not be interrupted according to the need of the user
to have his, her or its waste collected.



   F.   The application to secure such stickers shall require the name
of the user, the address of the property adjacent to which the waste will be
placed for collection and the nature of the use of the property. The stickers
will not be transferable.



§ 241-46. Construction waste.



   Any waste material more than two cubic yards generated by the
renovation, remodeling, repair or addition by the property owner, business,
entity or agent thereof shall be disposed of by hiring or employing a private
contractor.



§ 241-47. Senior citizen discount.



   Senior citizens shall be entitled to a discounted fee.



ARTICLE V.
Permit Procedures for Construction Dumpsters



[Adopted 4-20-2015 by Ord. No. 007-2015]



§ 241-48. Definitions.



   As used in this article, the following term shall have the meaning
indicated:



   CONSTRUCTION DUMPSTER — A roll-off waste container transported to and
from the place of use by trucks or trailers and positioned at a construction
site for the collection and eventual disposal of construction waste.



§ 241-49. Application/permit procedures.



   Any property owner or private contractor intending to utilize a
construction dumpster shall complete a permit application in the Construction
Office.  The permit shall require that the applicant certify that the
location is compliant of the provisions § 241-50A and B below.  It is the
policy of the town to require the placing of dumpsters on private property
and to permit placement of same upon the public roadways if and only if
placement on private property is not possible.  Where placement is proposed
for a public roadway, the application shall be provided to the Chief of
Police who shall determine whether public safety shall be jeopardized by the
proposed placement.  If the Chief of Police deems the location appropriate,
he/she shall indicate his/her approval on the application and return same to
the Construction Office.



§ 241-50.  Construction dumpster locations.



   A.   Single-family residential zones. No construction dumpster shall
be located within 10 feet of an abutting dwelling, unless the owner of the
abutting dwelling agrees to such in writing which shall be submitted with the
permit application.  No dumpster shall be placed so that it blocks any
public sidewalk.  Only in those instances where it is physically impossible
to locate the construction dumpster on the residential premises shall it be
placed in the roadway and then only if all other pertinent sections of this
article are complied with.



   B.   Multifamily, commercial and industrial zones. No construction
dumpster shall be located within 10 feet of an abutting residential property
unless the occupant of the abutting dwelling agrees to such in writing which
shall be submitted with the permit application. No dumpster shall be placed
so that it blocks any public sidewalk.  Only in those instances where it is
physically impossible to locate the construction dumpster on the residential
premises shall it be placed in the roadway and then only if all other
pertinent sections of this article are complied with.



   C.   Location on public street.  If permitted, any construction
dumpster placed on a public roadway shall be positioned directly in front of
or on the side of the property address utilizing the dumpster. Additionally,
a dumpster placed in a roadway shall:



      (1)   Be not more than 12 inches from the curb;



      (2)   Not obstruct driveways of abutting properties;



      (3)   Not obstruct traffic or create a "blind spot" which
would jeopardize the safety of pedestrians, bicyclists or other motorists;



      (4)   Be protected at both ends by a barricade, which after
sunset shall have a flashing yellow light attached to it; and



      (5)   Have a reflector or reflective area of not less than 36
square inches at each end.



   D.   No parking zones.  A dumpster shall not be placed on a public
street if on-street parking for vehicles is not allowed at that location.



   E.   Time limitations.



      (1)   Single-family residential zones. A construction dumpster
and any replacement dumpster placed under this subsection and not in a public
street may be placed for not more than a total of 30 days in any six-month
period. An exception to this time limit shall be made for dumpsters
associated with the construction of new residential dwellings which shall be
permitted to remain upon the premises (as opposed to on any roadway) from the
date of construction permit issuance to the date of a Certificate of
Occupancy issuance.  A construction dumpster and any replacement dumpster
placed upon a public street may be placed for not more than a total of 14
days in any six-month period.



      (2)   Multifamily and commercial. A construction dumpster and
any replacement dumpster placed under this subsection and not in a public
street may remain in the site as long as required, but not to exceed a total
of six months. A construction dumpster or any replacement dumpster placed
upon a public street may be placed for not more than a total of 14 days in
any six-month period.



      (3)   Industrial. A dumpster or any replacement dumpster
placed under this subsection may remain on the site as long as needed, but
not to exceed a total of 18 months.



   F.   Sanitation. The following requirements shall be maintained
regardless of the dumpster's location:



      (1)   The area around the dumpster shall be kept free of
debris and litter;



      (2)   Any dumpster into which animal or vegetable waste or
material has been dumped or deposited shall be removed or emptied within 24
hours;



      (3)   Any dumpster producing or causing noxious, foul or
offensive odors shall be immediately removed or cleaned to eliminate the odor;



      (4)   A full dumpster shall be removed from the site and
emptied within two days; and



      (5)   The dumpster must be covered at night and when not in
active use.



   G.   Usage. A dumpster shall only be used to contain and remove
debris and material generated at the location where the dumpster is placed.



   H.   Identification. The name and telephone number of the owner of
the dumpster and/or the company that is responsible for the dumpster shall be
displayed in a weatherproof manner on the dumpster.



   I.   Permit required. A permit shall be required for all dumpsters.
The permit shall be obtained from the Construction Office after paying the
required fee of $25; however, if the dumpster is going to be placed in the
roadway, a fee of $200.00 shall be required.  The permit shall be displayed
in a weatherproof manner on the dumpster.



   J.   Insurance.  For any dumpster to be placed in a public roadway,
the applicant shall provide proof of insurance in the amount of $1,000,000.00
combined single limit which also names the town as an additional insured.



   K.   Abatement.  Any dumpster not in compliance with this
subsection is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated by
the municipality at the property owner's and/or responsible person's expense.
Abatement shall, at the municipality's option, include the removal and/or the
emptying of the dumpster.



   L.   Violations; penalties.



      (1)   Violation of any provision of this subsection shall be
punishable by a fine in an amount up to $1,000.00 plus court costs which may
be assessed against both the property owner and any other responsible
party.  Each day that the violation continues may be considered a separate
offense.



      (2)   In addition, a person found guilty of a violation of
this subsection shall be ordered to abate the problem and pay the cost
incurred by the Town of Hammonton if the town abated the problem.



CHAPTER 244.
SPECIAL SALES



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton
9-13-1971 by Ord. No. 10-1971 as Ch. 139 of the 1971 Code. Amendments noted
where applicable.]



   § 244-1.   Definitions.



   § 244-2.   License required.



   § 244-3.   Applicability of regulations.



   § 244-4.   Application requirements.



   § 244-5.   Effect of license.



   § 244-6.   Duties of licensee.



   § 244-7.   Violations and penalties.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Auctions — See Ch. 88.



§ 244-1. Definitions.



   A.   When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the
present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the
singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number.
The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.



   B.   For the purposes of this chapter the following terms, phrases,
words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein:



   FIRE, FLOOD AND OTHER ALTERED-GOODS SALE



   A sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to
believe that the sale will offer goods damaged or altered by fire, smoke,
water or other means, or goods which were on the premises at the time of the
fire or other casualty and not damaged by said casualty.



   GOING-OUT-OF-BUSINESS SALE



   A sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to
believe that upon the disposal of the stock of goods on hand the business
will cease and be discontinued, including, but not limited to, the following
sales: Adjuster's; Adjustment; Alteration; Assignee's Bankrupt; Benefit of
Administrator's; Benefit of Creditors'; Benefit of Trustees; Building Coming
Down; Closing; Creditor's Committee; Creditor's; End; Executor's; Final Days;
Forced Out; Forced Out of Business; Insolvents'; Last Days; Lease Expires;
Liquidation; Loss of Lease; Mortgage Sale; Receiver's; Trustee's; Quitting
Business; Rebuilding and Remodeling Sale.



   GOODS



   Meant to include any goods, wares, merchandise or other property
capable of being the object of a sale regulated hereunder.



   PERSON



   Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.



   REMOVAL-OF-BUSINESS SALE



   A sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to
believe that the person conducting the sale will cease and discontinue
business at the place of sale upon disposal of the stock of goods on hand and
will then move to and resume business at a new location in the town or will
then continue business from other existing locations in the town.



   TOWN



   The Town of Hammonton.



   TOWN LICENSE OFFICER



   The Town Clerk/Administrator of the Town of Hammonton.



§ 244-2. License required.



   A license issued by the Town License Officer shall be obtained by any
person before selling or offering to sell any goods at a sale to be
advertised or held out by any means to be one of the following kinds:



   A.   Going-out-of-business sale;



   B.   Removal-of-business sale; or



   C.   Fire, flood and other altered-stock sale.



§ 244-3. Applicability of regulations.



   A.   Established business requisite.



      (1)   Any person who has not been the owner of a business
advertised or described in the application for a license hereunder for a
period of at least 12 months prior to the date of the proposed sale shall not
be granted a license.



      (2)   Exception for survivors of businessmen. Upon the death
of a person doing business in this town, his or her heirs, devisees or
legatees shall have the right to apply at any time for a license hereunder.



   B.   Interval between sales. Any person who has held a sale, as
regulated hereunder, at the location stated in the application, within two
years last past from the date of such application, shall not be granted a
license.



   C.   Restricted location. Where a person applying for a license
hereunder operates more than one place of business, the license issued shall
apply only to the one store or branch specified in the application, and no
other store or branch shall advertise or represent that it is cooperating
with it or in any way participating in the licensed sale, nor shall the store
or branch conducting the licensed sale advertise or represent that any other
store or branch is cooperating with it or participating in any way in the
licensed sale.



   D.   Persons exempted. The provisions of this chapter shall not
apply to or affect the following persons:



      (1)   Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a
court of competent jurisdiction.



      (2)   Persons acting in accordance with their powers and
duties as public officials.



      (3)   Duly licensed auctioneers selling at auction.



      (4)   Persons conducting a sale of the type regulated herein
on the effective date of this chapter, unless such sale is continued for a
period of more than 10 days from and after such effective date, in which
event such persons, at the lapse of the said ten-day period, shall comply
with the provisions of this chapter.



      (5)   Any publisher of a newspaper, magazine or other
publication who publishes in good faith any advertisement without knowledge
of its false, deceptive or misleading character, or without knowledge that
the provisions of this chapter have not been complied with.



§ 244-4. Application requirements.



   A.   Written information required. A person desiring to conduct a
sale regulated by this chapter shall make a written application to the
License Officer, setting forth and containing the following information:



      (1)   The true name and address of the owner of the goods to
be the object of the sale.



      (2)   The true name and address of the person from whom the
goods to be sold have been purchased and the price therefor, and if not
purchased, the manner of such acquisition.



      (3)   A description of the place where such sale is to be held.



      (4)   The nature of the occupancy, whether by lease or
sublease, and the effective date of termination of such occupancy.



      (5)   The dates of the period of time in which the sale is to
be conducted.



      (6)   A full and complete statement of the facts in regard to
the sale, including the reason for the urgent and expeditious disposal of
goods thereby and the manner in which the sale will be conducted.



      (7)   The means to be employed in advertising such sale,
together with the proposed content of any advertisement.



      (8)   A complete and detailed inventory of the goods to be
sold at such sale as disclosed by the applicant's records. Said inventory
shall be attached to and become part of the required application.



         (a)   Bona fide orders. All goods included in such
inventory shall have been purchased by the applicant for resale on bona fide
orders without cancellation privileges, and shall not comprise goods
purchased on consignment.



         (b)   Goods purchased for sale hereunder. Such inventory
shall not include goods ordered in contemplation of conducting a sale
regulated hereunder. Any unusual purchase or additions to the stock of goods
of the business hereby affected within 60 days before the filing of an
application hereunder shall be deemed to be of such character.



   B.   License fee. Any applicant for a license hereunder shall submit
to the License Officer with the application a license fee of $25. Any
applicant for a renewal license hereunder shall submit to the License Officer
with the renewal application a renewal license fee of $25.



§ 244-5. Effect of license.



   A license shall be issued hereunder on the following terms:



   A.   Licensing period. The license shall authorize the sale
described in the application for a period of not more than 10 consecutive
days, Sundays and legal holidays excluded, following the issuance thereof.



   B.   Renewal procedure.



      (1)   The License Officer shall renew a license for one period
of time only, such period to be in addition to the 10 days permitted in the
original license and not to exceed 10 consecutive days, Sundays and holidays
excluded, when he/she finds:



         (a)   That facts exist justifying the license renewal.



         (b)   That the licensee has filed an application for
renewal.



         (c)   That the licensee has submitted with the
application for renewal a revised inventory showing the items listed on the
original inventory remaining unsold and not listing any goods not included in
the original application and inventory.



      (2)   For the purpose of this subsection, any application for
a license under the provisions of this chapter covering any goods previously
inventoried as required hereunder shall be deemed to be an application for
renewal, whether presented by the original applicant or by any other person.



   C.   Nature of sale. The license shall authorize only the one type
of sale described in the application at the location named therein.



   D.   Salable goods. The license shall authorize only the sale of
goods described in the inventory attached to the application.



   E.   Nontransferability. Any license herein provided for shall not
be assignable or transferable.



§ 244-6. Duties of licensee.



   A licensee hereunder shall:



   A.   Adhere to inventory. Make no additions whatsoever during the
period of the licensed sale, to the stock of goods set forth in the inventory
attached to the application for license.



   B.   Advertise properly. Refrain from employing any untrue,
deceptive or misleading advertising.



   C.   Adhere to advertising. Conduct the licensed sale in strict
conformity with any advertising or holding out incident thereto.



   D.   Keep duplicate inventory. Keep available at the place of sale a
duplicate copy of the inventory submitted with the application, and shall
present such duplicate to inspecting officials upon request.



   E.   Segregate noninventoried goods. Keep any other goods separate
and apart from the goods listed in the filed inventory as being objects of
sale, and shall make such distinction clear to the public by placing tags on
all inventoried goods in and about the place of sale, apprising the public of
the status of all such goods.



§ 244-7. Violations and penalties.



   Any person violating any of the terms and provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction in the Municipal Court of the Town of Hammonton, be
subject to one or more of the following: a fine of not more than $1,000,
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days or a period of community
service not to exceed 90 days. The Municipal Judge before whom any person is
convicted of violating this chapter shall have the power to impose any fine
or term of imprisonment, not exceeding the maximum fixed in this chapter.



CHAPTER 247.
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton as
indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]



ARTICLE I.
Obstructions



   § 247-1.   Placement of building materials and other obstructions;
removal.



   § 247-2.   Obstruction of sidewalks by gates.



   § 247-3.   Recovering penalties.



   § 247-4.   Violations and penalties.



ARTICLE II.
Snow and Ice Removal



   § 247-5.   Responsibility; time limit.



   § 247-6.   Noncompliance.



   § 247-7.   Costs.



   § 247-8.   Violations and penalties.



ARTICLE III.
Excavations and Openings



   § 247-9.   Definitions.



   § 247-10.   Permit required; emergencies.



   § 247-11.   Application for permit.



   § 247-12.   Issuance of permit; revocation.



   § 247-13.   Commencement of work; notice; backfilling and
restoration of pavement; traffic.



   § 247-14.   Fees; performance and maintenance guaranty.



   § 247-15.   Town to be saved harmless.



   § 247-16.   Certificate of insurance required.



   § 247-17.   Maintenance of traffic flow.



   § 247-18.   Safety requirements.



   § 247-19.   Specifications for restoration of road.



   § 247-20.   Standards for existing town roads or right-of-ways.



   § 247-21.   Specifications for dedicated but unopened streets.



   § 247-22.   Protection of newly paved roadways.



   § 247-23.   Violations and penalties.



ARTICLE IV.
Construction of Curbs and Sidewalks Required by Persons Constructing
Residential or Commercial Buildings



   § 247-24.   Construction of curbs and sidewalks required; costs.



   § 247-25.   Submission of plans and specifications.



   § 247-26.   Provisions where no road grade has been established;
certification.



   § 247-27.   Curb/sidewalk waiver request provisions.



   § 247-28.   Violations and penalties.



   § 247-29.   through § 247-30. (Reserved)



ARTICLE V.
Construction of Rights-of-Way in Subdivisions and Multifamily Housing Projects



   § 247-31.   Restrictions on applications.



   § 247-32.   Definitions.



   § 247-33.   Permit required for construction or improving of
rights-of-way.



   § 247-34.   Conditions for permit approval.



   § 247-35.   Certification of installation of public utilities.



   § 247-36.   Payment of inspection fees and related costs.



   § 247-37.   Violations and penalties.



ARTICLE VI.
Sidewalk and Curb Construction and Maintenance



   § 247-38.   Premises owner to maintain sidewalks and curbs.



   § 247-39.   Notice to owner of unsafe condition.



   § 247-40.   Failure to comply; work to be done by town.



   § 247-41.   Line and grade of sidewalks and curbs.



   § 247-42.   Appropriation of funds; disposition of moneys.



   § 247-43.   Application for permit; fee.



   § 247-44.   Violations and penalties.



ARTICLE VII.
Street Lighting Standards



   § 247-45.   Purpose.



   § 247-46.   Standards for streetlight construction.



   § 247-47.   Standards for streetlights along existing public roads.



   § 247-48.   Violations and penalties.



ARTICLE VIII
Adopt-a-Street Program



   § 247-49.   Program established.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 115.



   Land development — See Ch. 175.



   Soliciting in roadways — See Ch. 204.



Article I.
Obstructions



[Adopted 9-13-1971 by Ord. No. 10-1971 as Art. III of Ch. 143 of the 1971
Code; amended in its entirety 5-18-2015 by Ord. No. 008-2015]



§ 247-1. Placement of building materials and other obstructions; removal.



   No person or persons shall place or cause to be placed any cask,
barrels, boxes, building materials or obstructions of any kind whatever on
any of the sidewalks or in any of the public streets, roads or highways in
said town, without permission first obtained in writing from the Highway
Committee.



§ 247-2. Obstruction of sidewalks by gates.



   No gate or gates shall be allowed to swing across or otherwise obstruct
the free passageway of any of the sidewalks in the town, under a like penalty
as in the preceding section.



§ 247-3. Recovering penalties.



   All penalties imposed by this article shall be sued for and recovered
in an action of debt in the name of the Treasurer of the town, to and for the
use of the town.



§ 247-4. Violations and penalties.



   A person convicted of violating any provision of this article shall be
subject to one or more of the following: a fine of not more than $1,000,
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days or a period of community
service not to exceed 90 days.



Article II.
Snow and Ice Removal



[Adopted 9-13-1971 by Ord. No. 10-1971 as Ch. 137 of the 1971 Code; amended
in its entirety 5-18-2015 by Ord. No. 008-2015]



§ 247-5. Responsibility; time limit.



   The owner or owners, tenant or tenants on lands abutting or bordering
upon the paved sidewalks of the public streets, avenues and highways in the
Town of Hammonton shall remove or cause to be removed from the paved
sidewalks in front of or bordering on their said lands all snow and ice
within 12 hours of daylight after the same shall be formed or fall thereon.



§ 247-6. Noncompliance.



   In case such owner or owners, tenant or tenants of any land abutting or
bordering upon any public street, avenue or highway in said town shall
neglect or refuse to remove such snow or ice within 12 hours of daylight
after the same shall have fallen or formed, it shall be the duty of the
officer having charge of the streets and highways of said town to remove or
cause to be removed such snow and ice from the paved sidewalks in front of or
bordering on such land.



§ 247-7. Costs.



   The cost paid and incurred by such officer for removing such snow and
ice from any paved sidewalk shall be by him/her certified to the Common
Council, which shall examine such certificate, and if found to be correct,
shall cause the cost as shown thereon to be charged against the lands
abutting or bordering such paved sidewalk; and the amount so charged shall
forthwith become a lien upon such lands and shall be added to and become and
form part of the taxes then next to be assessed and levied upon such lands,
and shall be collected and enforced according to law.



§ 247-8. Violations and penalties.



   Such owner or owners, tenant or tenants, for every neglect or refusal
to comply with the provisions of this article, shall also subject to one or
more of the following: a fine of not more than $1,000, imprisonment for a
period not to exceed 90 days or a period of community service not to exceed
90 days.



Article III.
Excavations and Openings



[Adopted 9-13-1971 by Ord. No. 10-1971 as Ch. 92 of the 1971 Code; 4-26-1982
by Ord. No. 5-1982; 5-18-2015 by Ord. No. 008-2015]



§ 247-9. Definitions.



   For purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:



   APPLICANT



   Any person making written application to the Town Engineer for an
excavation permit hereunder.



   EMERGENCY



   Any unforeseen circumstances or occurrence, the existence of which
constitutes a clear and immediate danger to persons or properties. 



   EXCAVATION



   The excavation or opening or any other work permitted under a permit
and required to be performed under this article.



   PERMITTEE



   Any person who has been granted and has in full force and effect a
permit issued hereunder.



   PERSON



   Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.



   STREET



   Any street, highway, sidewalk, alley or avenue or any other public way
or public ground in the Town of Hammonton and under the control of the Town
of Hammonton.



§ 247-10. Permit required; emergencies.



   A.   It shall be unlawful, except in an emergency as set forth in
Subsection B hereunder, for any person to engage in any of the following
activities unless such person shall first have obtained a permit therefor
from the Town Clerk/Administrator as herein provided:



      (1)   To dig up, excavate, tunnel, undermine or in any manner
break up any street.



      (2)   To make or cause to be made any excavation in or under
the surface of any street for any purpose.



      (3)   To place, deposit or leave upon any street any earth or
other excavated material obstructing or tending to interfere with the free
use of the street.



      (4)   To clear any town right-of-way of vegetation for the
installation of gravel material and/or construction of a bituminous concrete
cartway.



      (5)   To perform any other operation on any street which in
any manner interferes with or disturbs the surface of such street.



   B.   In the event that any street, main, conduit or other utility
installation in or under any street, alley, sidewalk or public way shall
burst, break or otherwise be in such condition as to seriously endanger
persons or property, the owner of such sewer, main, conduit or other
installation shall immediately remedy such trouble and shall immediately take
all such necessary steps to make said location safe and secure. Such owner
shall not, however, begin making any permanent repairs to such street, alley
or sidewalk until they shall have secured a permit as hereinafter provided.
Such permit shall be applied for within five days after such break or other
dangerous conditions have developed, and the necessary permanent repairs to
the street, alley or sidewalk shall be made as directed by the Town Engineer
and shall be completed as soon as practicable after receipt of the permit.



§ 247-11. Application for permit.



   A.   A written application for the issuance of an excavation permit
shall be obtained from the Town Clerk/Administrator. The application shall
state the name and address of the applicant, the estimated dates of
commencement, completion and restoration of the excavation and such other
data as may reasonably be required by the Town Engineer.



   B.   Any plans or drawings attached to the application must be drawn
by a professional engineer of the State of New Jersey and must be drawn to a
scale sufficient to show clearly the proposed work. Plans shall show
locations and profiles if needed for all utilities within 25 feet of the
proposed work, for the full width of the public right-of-way, utility
companies may use a non-licensed engineer acceptable to the Town Engineer.



   C.   The permittee has the additional responsibility of obtaining a
separate permit in accordance with N.J.S.A. 2A:170-69.4 through 2A:170-69.6
when the proposed excavation is located within 200 feet of a gas pipeline,
and all permits issued by the Town Engineer are subject to the issuance of
said separate permit. The applicant is further responsible for contacting all
other local utilities to determine whether any property or facilities of the
utilities are located in the vicinity of the proposed excavation site, and if
so, the applicant is obligated to comply with any statutes or regulations
pertaining thereto.



   D.   All permittees must call the New Jersey Utility Opening Service
and obtain clearances and mark-out locations before beginning excavation.  A
copy of the utility mark out number shall be provided to the municipality for
their records as well as maintaining a copy on file at the work site.



§ 247-12. Issuance of permit; revocation.



   A.   Upon application and payment of the fees and deposits for which
provision is hereinafter made, the Town Engineer, in his/her discretion, may
authorize the municipal clerk to issue a permit to excavate or open the
surface of any town road. The permit shall state the name of the applicant,
the location of the opening,  the number of days for which the permit shall
remain in force and the amount of the review and inspection escrow.



   B.   Any permits issued under this article may be revoked at any
time by the Town Engineer.



§ 247-13. Commencement of work; notice; backfilling and restoration of
pavement; traffic.



[Amended 5-15-2017 by Ord. No. 012-2017]



   A.   No openings shall be commenced or completed on weekends,
holidays, or outside the normal working hours of 7:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.
without written permission of the Engineer, and/or Business Administrator,
Police Chief or his/her authorized representative unless in case of
emergency.  Failure to provide notice as required as stipulated herein may
result in revocation of the permit and issuance of a stop-work order.  The
applicant shall be responsible to pay for all overtime costs incurred for
inspection of work and for all required traffic control.



   B.   Permits shall become null and void unless the work is commenced
within 60 days of the issuance of said permit, unless an extension of time is
granted by the Town Engineer.



   C.   The applicant shall give a forty-eight-hour notice to the Town
Engineer or his/her duly authorized representative and the Hammonton Police
Department prior to making any road openings, except in cases of emergency as
provided for in § 247-10B. No opening shall be commenced on a Saturday,
Sunday or a holiday unless in cases of emergency.  The failure of an
applicant to provide the notice required by this article shall authorize the
engineer to direct that all work shall cease for a period of 48 hours to
permit the engineer to assign an engineer to the project in question.



   D.   The applicant shall give twenty-four hour written notice to all
residences, businesses, and property owners located within the work zone
area, which includes any roadway section that will be closed to traffic
(hereinafter referred to as the "affected property owners"), prior to making
any road openings, except in cases of emergency as provided for in §
247-10B.  The written notice shall provide the following information: 



      (1)   Section of any roadways that will be closed;



      (2)   Reason for the roadway closures;



      (3)   Length of time the roadway closures will occur; and



      (4)   List of phone numbers and contact information to call in
case of questions or emergency.



   The applicant shall provide a list of all notices provided in
accordance with this § 247-13(D) to the Engineer, Business Administrator
and/or designated Town Official prior to the commencement of any work.  The
failure of an applicant to provide the notice required by this Article shall
authorize the engineer to direct that all work shall cease for a period of
twenty-four hours to permit the applicant to provide the appropriate notices
to all residences, businesses and property owners. 



   E.   The applicant shall provide the Engineer, Business
Administrator and/or designated Town Official, Police Chief, and all affected
property owners twenty-four hour advanced written notice of the applicant's
work schedule.  The failure of an applicant to provide the notice required
by this Article shall authorize the engineer to direct that all work shall
cease for a period of twenty-four hours to permit the applicant to provide
the appropriate notices to all residences, businesses and property owners. 



   F.   The applicant, on the day of the actual road closure, road
opening and/or  commencement of any work, shall do the following: 



      (1)   Knock on all resident and business doors within the work
zone area to make people aware of any road closure, the proposed work, and
shall provide the same information set forth in § 247-13(D) and §
247-13(E), and any other information that may be of benefit; 



      (2)   Provide an explanation of any portion of any roadways
that will be opened to local traffic only;



      (3)   Make sure the blockage of any driveways is avoided to
the greatest extent possible;



      (4)   Make sure proper police traffic control, flaggers, etc.,
are placed at critical locations to keep the public informed of closures,
access, etc.  Flaggers are to be placed at all closures and intersections
affected by the closure.  Every reasonable effort is to be made to
facilitate the residents and business requests during the closure; 



      (5)   Make sure the Hammonton Public School Bus Coordinator,
Toni Mazza (609) 567-7078, is aware of any road closures particularly if
access for school children at times of pick-up and drop-off are impacted;



      (6)   Emergency access to properties within the section of
road closure must be provided;



      (7)   Avoid unnecessary idling of vehicles within the work
zone area where possible; 



      (8)   Proper advance warning signs, cones, barrels, lights,
etc., must be provided to alert the general public of the work zone area and
restrictions. 



      (9)   The applicant's contractor is responsible to maintain a
safe environment for workers and the general public;



      (10)   Pictures of the affected areas are to be taken by the
applicant's contractor and provided to the Engineer, Business Administrator
and/or designated Town Official, both before and after the work is completed
to ensure the affected areas are returned to the same condition as before the
work commenced.



      The applicant shall create a checklist out of the processes and
procedures set forth in § 247-13(C), § 247-13(D), § 247-13(E) and this §
247-13(F), check off the items completed, sign and date the checklist and
provide same to the Engineer, Business Administrator and/or designated Town
Official on the day of the actual road closure and/or commencement of the
work.



   G.   All openings must be backfilled immediately and temporary
restoration completed unless otherwise approved to provide for safe passage
and in accordance with applicable restoration standards of the ordinance or
as directed by the Engineer.



   H.   No work areas shall be closed to traffic without the approval
of the Town Engineer and approval from the Town Police Chief or authorized
representative.  Proper signage and detour routes must be approved by the
Police Chief.



   I.   With the exception of an emergency, no permits will be issued
for road openings or any permanent restoration completed between December
15th and March 15th or where conditions exist due to severe weather, freeze
and/or frost without written permission from the Town Engineer and/or Public
Works Manager or Business Administrator.



   J.   Should a roadway opening permit be required between December
15th and March 15th and during the months when Hot Mix Bituminous Concrete is
commercially unavailable, the trench or excavation surface shall be
temporarily restored using a sub-base, eight inches thick, of dense graded
aggregate DGA and a temporary paved surface course with UPM brand, or
approved, equal to a depth of six inches from the roadway surface and shall
be graded and compacted to meet the existing roadway surface grades.



§ 247-14. Fees; performance and maintenance guaranty.



   A.   A non-refundable, $250 base application fee shall be posted
with the Municipal Clerk prior to said application being forwarded to Town
Engineer for review and request for posting of escrow fees.  Thereafter,
activity fees will be assessed based on the following schedule:



      Openings (In Pavement and Outside of Pavement)



         Base fee ($250.00) plus $75.00 per opening (Including
trench for boring or driving small diameter utility services)



      Directional boring and Cable Installation (In Pavement and
Outside of Pavement)



         Base fee ($250.00) plus $.50 per foot



   [Amended 10-24-2011 by Ord. No. 18-2011; 3-26-2018 by Ord. No. 012-2018]



   B.   Pole installation.  No fee but drawings and a permit are
required. No inspection fee will be charged, unless conditions exist that
warrant inspection of the installation due to the close proximity of existing
municipal utilities.  The Town Engineer shall recommend the amount to be
posted with the town as an inspection escrow.



   C.   Performance guaranty. No road opening permit shall be issued
until a satisfactory two year performance guaranty is posted with the Town
Clerk/Administrator according to the approval of construction estimates by
the Town Engineer. These performance guaranties shall be by performance bonds
certified checks or similar cash-equivalent guaranties with the exception of
public utility company guaranties, which may be annual performance bonds of
an amount approved by the Town Engineer, but in no case less than $50,000 and
in a form approved by the Town Solicitor and Risk Manager. Performance
guaranties shall be based upon current estimates of market values of required
constructions for the intended work.



   D.   Inspection fees. Inspection fees shall be estimated by the Town
Engineer based upon estimated field inspection expenses and review of the
application. Such fees shall be payable directly to the Town
Clerk/Administrator's office. No work shall commence until those fees have
been posted and cleared.  It may be necessary to replenish the escrow to
cover unexpected costs associated with the work.



§ 247-15. Town to be saved harmless.



   The applicant, upon securing said permit, agrees that the Town of
Hammonton will be saved harmless from any and all claims of any nature
arising out of the construction of road and street opening work covered by
said permit and further that the Town of Hammonton, in issuing said permit,
shall not assume liability in connection therewith. In the event of any suit
or claim against the town by reason of the negligence or default of the
permittee or for any other reason directly or indirectly attributable to the
permitee's work, upon the town's giving written notice to the permittee of
such suit or claim, any final judgment against the town requiring it to pay
for such damage shall be conclusive upon the permittee, and the permittee
shall be liable for the town's costs in connection with such suit.



§ 247-16. Certificate of insurance required.



   Prior to performing any work under the permit, the permittee shall
deliver to the Town Engineer a certificate of insurance in the sum of not
less than $1,000,000 combined single limit (CSL) with the town and its agents
and employees named as an additional insured. Where applicable, the permittee
shall demonstrate that the explosion, collapse and underground (xcu)
exclusion has been removed from its insurance policy. The insurance carrier
will not cancel said insurance without giving the Town of Hammonton at least
30 days' notice thereof in writing.  The form and amount of the insurance
coverage must be approved by the town's Solicitor and Risk Manager.



§ 247-17. Maintenance of traffic flow.



   A.   The permittee shall take appropriate measures to assure that
during the performance of the excavation and restoration work traffic
conditions as nearly normal as practicable shall be maintained at all times
so as to cause as little inconvenience as possible to the occupants of the
abutting property and to the general public, provided that the Town Engineer,
in coordination with the local Police Department, may permit the closing of
streets to all traffic for a period of time prescribed by him/her if, in
his/her opinion, it is necessary. The permittee shall keep all road and
street openings guarded at all times and open no greater part of such road or
street than shall be reasonably necessary as determined by the Town Engineer
and local Police Department. The permittee shall route and control traffic,
including its own vehicles, as directed by the local Police Department.
Before any highway may be closed or restricted to traffic, the permittee must
receive the approval of the Town Engineer and the local Police Department.
Upon completion of the construction work, the permittee shall notify the Town
Engineer and the local Police Department before traffic is moved back to its
normal flow so that any necessary adjustments may be made.



   B.   The permittee must contact the local Police Chief or his/her
authorized representative relative to the need for Police Traffic Control in
conjunction with the work to be performed.  If determined to be necessary,
the permittee shall be responsible for the cost to provide the Police Traffic
Protection and post the required fee, insurance coverage and other paperwork
with the town prior to the start of construction.  Any barricades, drums,
cones, signage or similar warning structures required by the Police
Department shall be provided by the permittee at no cost to the town.



   C.   Where flag persons are deemed necessary by the Town Engineer or
local Police Department, they shall be furnished by the permittee at its own
expense. Through traffic shall be maintained without the aid of detours, if
possible. In instances in which this would not be feasible, the local Police
Chief will designate and approve detours to provide for the safe passage of
vehicular traffic.



   D.   The excavation work shall be performed and conducted so as not
to interfere with access to fire stations and fire hydrants. Materials or
obstructions shall not be placed within 15 feet of fire plugs. Passageways
leading to fire escapes or fire-fighting equipment shall be kept free of
piles of material and other obstructions.



§ 247-18. Safety requirements.



   The following measures shall be taken to ensure the safety and
protection of the traveling public:



   A.   All openings must be backfilled and temporary restoration
completed unless otherwise approved to provide for safe passage and in
accordance with applicable restoration standards.



   B.   If it is necessary to leave an excavation unfinished overnight
or for an extended period, the permittee shall place at the site barricades
exhibiting his/her name and a phone number where he/she can be reached at all
times. The permittee shall also notify the Hammonton Police Department of the
condition of the unfinished excavation and furnish said Police Department
with his/her name and phone number where he/she can be reached at all times.
Flame torches, flashers, barricades, drums, cones, signage or similar warning
structures must be used at the construction site or along the right-of-way,
as required by the Town Engineer, Chief of Police or his/her representative.



   C.   Any portions of work areas not closed to traffic must be
temporarily patched with cold patch a minimum of two inches thick and
properly maintained until either temporary or final paving is installed.



   D.   The permittee shall erect and maintain suitable timber barriers
to confine earth from trenches or other excavation in order to encroach upon
highways as little as possible.



   E.   The permittee shall construct and maintain adequate and safe
crossings over excavations and across highways under improvement to
accommodate vehicular and pedestrian traffic at all street intersections.
Vehicular crossings shall be constructed and maintained of steel plates or of
plank, timbers and blocking of adequate size to accommodate vehicular traffic
safely. Timber decking shall be not less than four inches thick and shall be
securely fastened. Pedestrian walkways, if of timber, shall consist of
planking three inches thick, 12 inches wide (per individual plank) and of
adequate length, together with necessary blocking. The walkway shall not be
less than five feet in width and shall be provided with a railing as required
by the Town Engineer and/or the local Police Department.



[Amended 7-23-2001 by Ord. No. 26-2001]



§ 247-19. Specifications for restoration of road.



   It is the expressed desire of the town to limit roadway disturbance to
the greatest extent possible and to complete all restorations in such a
manner as to provide for a stable and safe roadway, sidewalk, shoulder and/or
lawn area acceptable to the town and to the reasonable satisfaction of the
adjacent property owners.



   A.   Restoration Limits and Type - The type, thickness, and extent
of any roadway restoration shall be as directed by the Town Engineer
depending on the following conditions:



      (1)   Condition and classification of the existing roadway or
right-of-way (ROW).



      (2)   Length of time since the roadway was last resurfaced.



      (3)   The extent (length, width, depth) of the proposed
disturbance and restoration.



      (4)   Type of utility installation that will occur.



      (5)   The amount of proposed roadway openings, test pits
and/or pilot holes which are completed within the roadway surface.



      (6)   In order to avoid unnecessary roadway pavement,
sidewalk, shoulder area or disturbance to existing municipal utilities and
service lines, the use of directional drill, borings, blowpipe or other
acceptable means of utility installation shall be employed wherever possible,



   B.   In order to provide for proper trench compaction in accordance
with NJDOT Standards, trenches shall be backfilled with clean backfill free
of clay and debris in layers not to exceed 12 inches and a vibratory tamper
or similar equipment shall be used to provide satisfactory compaction of the
trench area to reduce the potential for settlement.  Should there be a
deficiency of suitable fill, additional backfill material shall be supplied.
Whenever the Town Engineer or his/her duly authorized representative shall
deem the material unsatisfactory for backfill, the permittee shall provide
acceptable material for the backfill.



   C.   In all cases where the road or street is to be excavated, the
permittee is obligated to restore said road or street to the construction
standards noted in Section 247-20 in compliance with NJDOT standards and as
directed by the Engineer. In all cases of excavation or milling of the final
surface course pavement, the existing bituminous surface shall be neatly saw
cut straight through the existing bituminous surface, one foot wider on all
sides than the initial excavation to allow the final surface pavement to be
placed on undisturbed sub-base material. The final restoration must be
completed to encompass all areas disturbed during the utility installation to
ensure that a stable trench restoration is accomplished.  The final
restoration limits will be determined in the field with the Town Engineer or
an authorized representative of the town and the contractor.



   D.   After backfill, the trench will be inspected by the Town
Engineer or his/her representative, and he/she will determine the extent of
resurfacing necessary, i.e., trench area only, half lane width or restoration
of the entire roadway width for a specified width and length on each side of
the opening.  In the event that the roadway has been resurfaced by the town
during the previous five years, the Town Engineer shall require full lane
width or full roadway width restoration for a distance of ten feet on each
side of the roadway opening unless otherwise approved by the Mayor and Town
Council.



   E.   All saw cut edges of the existing bituminous surface shall be
tact coated and sealed to form a water tight flexible seal between the two
roadway surfaces. 



   F.   In the case of a trench or opening in the grass shoulder, the
applicant shall restore the top four inches of the trench with material
capable of supporting the growth of grass and shall fertilize and seed said
surface to provide a stable stand of grass satisfactory to the affected
property owner and Town Engineer.



   G.   Whenever required by the Town Engineer, requests for service
lateral installations which require crossing the existing paved surface shall
be performed utilizing a driven, board or other approved methodology for
completion of pipe installation under the paved portion of the road or street
without disturbing the surface.



   H.   Road openings and/or trenches involving unusual or special
conditions shall be restored in accordance with and pursuant to the direction
of the Town Engineer or his/her representative.



   I.   Within 48 hours of the anticipated commencing of final
restoration work, the applicant shall request an inspection by the Town
Engineer at which time the Town Engineer will determine whether the road
restoration was completed in a satisfactory manner or will require additional
road restoration.  However, inspection escrow fees will be held until a
subsequent inspection is made by the Town Engineer within one year and again
after two years of completion of the  permanent roadway, shoulder, sidewalk
or lawn restoration, but no later than two years from the inspection date of
the permanent paving restoration.  At that time the Town Engineer may
require additional road restoration to be completed by the applicant prior to
release of the inspection escrow fees or shall request the Municipal Clerk to
release any remaining escrow fees, project, performance, maintenance bonds,
and other surety to the applicant if said restoration is deemed
satisfactory.  The onus of requesting inspections and release of escrow fees
remains on the applicant.



[Amended 10-24-2011 by Ord. No. 18-2011]



   J.   In any case where the contractor has not complied with these
regulations to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer or his/her
representative, the Engineer, upon providing requisite notice to the bond
company or immediately if, in the sole opinion of the engineer, a public
emergency exists without notice, may cause the work to be done, and the cost
shall be deducted from the performance bond posted by the applicant.  If no
bond has been posted, the applicant shall be personally responsible to
reimburse the town for that cost and, failing that, the town shall have the
power to impose a lien upon the property in question.



§ 247-20. Standards for existing town roads or right-of-ways.



   A.   Off-street rights-of-way shall be improved to the following
standards:



      (1)   Fill.



         (a)   Fill shall be clean with no organic content and
free of roots, stumps, clay, or similar material capable of providing a
stable compacted trench area as per NJDOT standards.



         (b)   Fill shall be compacted with proper equipment over
fill areas and regraded to the prior surface grade or sub-base grade.



      (2)   Lawn Surface.  Lawn surface area shall be returned to
its original grade and condition by replacing topsoil four inches thick,
seeding, sodding, planting and/or compacting, as required by the Town
Engineer to the satisfaction of the affected property owner.



   B.   Bituminous concrete streets shall be improved to the following
standards:



      (1)   Fill.



         (a)   Fill shall be clean with no organic content and
free of roots, stumps, clay or similar material capable of providing a stable
compacted sub-base as per NJDOT standards.



         (b)   Eighty-five-percent compaction shall be provided
in fill areas through:



            [1]   One-foot fill over underground utilities and
hand or mechanical tamping as required along the sides of any pipe
installation proper for a stable sub-base as per NJDOT standards.



            [2]   One-foot lifts individually compacted by
hand or mechanical tamping as per NJDOT standards.



      (2)   Sub-base.  Gravel or dense graded aggregate (DGA)
sub-base shall be eight inches thick of compacted road aggregate, Type 2,
Class A, Class B or dense graded aggregate (DGA) compliant with NJDOT
standards.



      (3)   Temporary pavement restoration.



         (a)   The temporary patch pavement restoration shall be
at least six inches thick measured after rolling, of cold patch, Type R-R,
applied in one layer and rolled to compaction.



         (b)   The type of material used for the temporary patch
restoration shall be Hot Mixed Asphalt (HMA) 19M64 or an equivalent base
course.



         (c)   The finished grade shall be brought to the
original street grade or slightly above same to allow for trench settlement.



         (d)   The temporary pavement restoration shall remain in
place for a minimum of  three months, at which time the level of temporary
restoration shall be removed or cut back or milled to a depth of two and one
half inches below the original street grade and section to allow for the
permanent pavement restoration. 



         [Amended 3-26-2018 by Ord. No. 012-2018]



      (4)   Permanent pavement restoration.



         (a)   The temporary patch pavement restoration shall
remain in place for a minimum of four months, at which time the level of cold
patch temporary restoration shall be removed or cut back or milled to a depth
of two and one half inches below the original street grade and section to
allow for the permanent pavement restoration.



         (b)   The width of the permanent pavement restoration
shall be extended for a minimum of one foot on each side beyond the limits of
the temporary pavement restoration and shall be saw-cut or milled to form
straight stable edge of the existing bituminous surface.



         (c)   All struck edges and the overlapping surface edge
shall be coated with an asphaltic cement to bind the bituminous concrete to
the surrounding existing bituminous concrete.



         (d)   The permanent pavement restoration shall be HMA
95M64, 12M64 or an equivalent surface course applied as specified by the Town
Engineer.



         (e)   Newly restored bituminous surfaces shall be at
least two and one half inches thick following compaction and level with the
original grade and section.



         (f)   All saw-cut edges of the existing bituminous
surface shall be tact coated and sealed to form a water tight flexible seal
between the two roadway surfaces. 



      (5)   Concrete Curb/Sidewalk/Driveway Restoration.



         (a)   All concrete restoration work shall comply with
applicable standards of the Town Ordinance for said concrete construction and
in accordance with NJDOT standards.



      (6)   Lawn Surface.  Lawn surface area shall be returned to
its original grade and condition by replacing with topsoil four inches thick,
seeding, sodding, planting and/or compacting as required by the Town Engineer
to the reasonable satisfaction of the affected property owner.



§ 247-21. Specifications for dedicated but unopened streets.



   A.   The clearing of the proposed street or public right-of-way
shall conform with § 247-20A(1) and (2). All grading shall be done to the
full right-of-way width on the proposed street or public right-of-way.



   B.   The base for all streets or public rights-of-way shall be a
minimum six-inch compacted road aggregate, Type 2, Class A, Class B or an
equivalent, or dense graded aggregate (DGA) compliant with NJDOT standards
and shall be 3/5 of the width of the right-of-way or as approved by the Town
Engineer.



   C.   All proposed streets or public rights-of-way shall be paved to
3/5 of the right-of-way width or as approved by the Town Engineer, with
construction materials discussed with the Town Engineer and as approved by
the governing body.  In general, minimal quality paving shall be Hot Mixed
Asphalt surfacing consistent with applicable NJDOT standards. Construction
standards established in § 247-20 shall be applicable, except that patching
on temporary pavement is not required.



   D.   No proposed street or public right-of-way constructed,
reconstructed or improved shall have a grade of less than 1/2 of 1%.  Should
grades be less than ½ of 1% concrete gutter minimum 18 inches wide shall be
installed per NJDOT standards.  No gutter line grades less than 0.4% shall
be considered.



   E.   No proposed street or public right-of-way shall be constructed,
reconstructed or improved to carry water for more than 500 feet on the
surface, and the water shall not be brought back to the surface until it
reaches its disposal areas.



   F.   Each plan submitted shall have a letter attached from a
licensed professional engineer describing the proposed drainage plan and
associated storm water recharge areas as required and shall comply with
applicable design and construction standards of the town, NJDOT and the
Pinelands Commission.



   G.   Other improvements, such as curbs, gutters, sidewalks, and/or
driveways, may be required by the governing body to ensure that the proposed
street complies with proposed or existing improvements in the adjoining
neighborhood. The governing body's decision shall be final in determining the
need for these improvements.



   H.   Upon completion of the utility, roadway, storm sewer pipe and
storm water storage/recharge system, the Design Engineer shall provide an
as-built plan and certification of the proposed improvements as per
applicable Town Ordinance standards.



   I.   The applicant shall be responsible to post review and
inspection escrow fees, performance and maintenance bonds for said
improvements as per applicable Town Ordinance standards.



§ 247-22. Protection of newly paved roadways.



[Added 2-9-1998 by Ord. No. 6-1998; amended 5-22-2000 by Ord. No. 12-2000]



   A.   The purpose of this section is to amend Ordinance No. 6-1998
which was adopted to protect the integrity of newly paved and constructed
roadways within the Town of Hammonton and set forth a time period during
which excavation and road opening permits shall not be permitted or issued.
This amendment is intended to take into consideration and promote
construction in areas where municipal utility extensions, repairs, or
replacements have been made as well as in areas where a newly paved roadway
surface has been completed.



   B.   Applicability. The limitations outlined herein shall be
applicable to all contractors, utilities, and others who may apply for
excavation and road opening permits within the Town of Hammonton except in
the case of emergency as defined elsewhere within these standards.



   C.   Period of moratorium.



      (1)   There shall be established a period of 60 months from
the date of completion and acceptance of any roadway reconstructed and funded
through the use of NJDOT Municipal Aid or Discretionary Aid Programs. The
only exception shall be in the case of an emergency which threatens the
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Town of Hammonton.



      (2)   There shall be established a period of 60 months from
the date of completion and acceptance of a newly paved, constructed or
reconstructed roadway associated with a municipal utility extension, repair,
or replacement except in the following cases:



         (a)   New home, commercial or industrial construction on
a previously vacant parcel of land, and subject to the review and approval by
the Mayor and Town Council related to said request.



         (b)   In the case of an emergency which would threaten
the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Town of Hammonton.



   D.   Conditions and requirements for roadway opening and restoration
where an exception or emergency roadway opening is granted.



      (1)   Should an exception or emergency roadway opening request
be granted during the stipulated moratorium period, as stated herein above,
the following restoration requirements apply:



         (a)   All initial openings shall be saw cut for maximum
dimension of two feet by four feet and an additional one foot wide on each
side of the initial temporary trench for final restoration purposes.  If the
roadway cannot accommodate these dimensions, a full lane or full roadway
restoration, in the discretion of the municipal engineer, shall be required.



         (b)   The trench shall be backfilled with clean fill,
free of clay and debris and compacted in 12-inch lifts to the satisfaction of
the engineer unless otherwise stipulated.



         (c)   The typical sub-base, base and surface course
restoration should be consistent with  the following:



            [1]   Option #1:



               [a]   Dense graded aggregate DGA, eight
inches thick.



               [b]   Hot Mixed Asphalt (HMA) 19.M64, 12M64
or an equivalent base course two and one-half inches thick.



               [c]   Hot Mixed Asphalt (HMA) 9.5 M64, 12M64
or an equivalent surface course two and one half inches thick.



            [2]   The above noted restorations will require
that asphaltic oil be applied to the joint as a waterproof seal abutting the
old and new pavement surfaces.



   E.   Twenty-four month maintenance warranty and guaranty shall apply
after permanent pavement restoration has been satisfactorily completed.
Should settlement of the restored pavement area occur within a two year
period from the date of permanent pavement restoration, the contractor shall
be required to mill and/or excavate and repair the area to the satisfaction
of the Town Engineer and Roadway Supervisor consistent with the provisions of
this article or as directed by the Engineer.



§ 247-23. Violations and penalties.



[Amended 5-15-2017 by Ord. No. 012-2017]



   A.   Any person who shall violate any provisions of this article,
for each offense, shall be subject to one or more of the following: a fine of
not more than $2,000, imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days or a
period of community service not to exceed 90 days, and each day's continuance
of such violation shall constitute a separate offense.



   B.   In addition to the violations and penalties set forth in §
247-23(A) above, any person who shall violate any provisions of this Article
shall be subject to the issuance of a stop work order on all present and
scheduled projects until the Town is satisfied, in its sole discretion, that
this Article III will be followed.



Article IV.
Construction of Curbs and Sidewalks Required by Persons Constructing
Residential or Commercial Buildings



[Adopted 9-13-1971 by Ord. No. 10-1971 as Art. IV of Ch. 143 of the 1971
Code; amended in its entirety 5-18-2015 by Ord. No. 008-2015]



§ 247-24. Construction of curbs and sidewalks required; costs.



[Amended 5-16-2016 by Ord. No. 010-2016]



   It is hereby determined to be in the public interest that all persons
constructing (as defined in § 175-10 "Construction") any residential or
commercial buildings or engaged in development (as defined in § 175-10
"Development") within the Town of Hammonton shall build simultaneously with
said construction and/or development curbs and sidewalks on the area of the
premises fronting on public roads of the Town of Hammonton, and that the cost
of the said curbs and sidewalks shall be borne by the abutting property
owners.



§ 247-25. Submission of plans and specifications.



[Amended 5-16-2016 by Ord. No. 010-2016]



   No person, partnership, corporation or group of persons shall construct
any residential or commercial building or engage in development within the
Town of Hammonton without providing for the construction of curbs and
sidewalks on all roads upon which the affected property fronts, and such
person, partnership, corporation or group of persons who shall henceforth
apply for a permit to construct said building shall present to the
Construction Code Official of the Town of Hammonton, with the plans and
specifications as to the building to be constructed, plans and specifications
showing the proposed construction of said curbs and sidewalks consistent with
the provisions contained in the town's lot grading Ordinance #31-2005 of the
Town of Hammonton.  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the
Building Inspector for the building so constructed until the curbs and
sidewalks provided for in the plans and specifications have been
satisfactorily completed at the applicant's expense.



§ 247-26. Provisions where no road grade has been established; certification.



   Should an application be made for a building permit to construct a
residential or commercial building in any area of the Town of Hammonton where
no road grade has been established, any other provisions in this article
notwithstanding, the applicant shall not be required to submit the plans and
specifications for the construction of curbs and sidewalks with application
for the building permit, but shall, in lieu thereof, proceed in accordance
with the variance procedure for the placement of curb and sidewalk as
stipulated under section 247-27 of the ordinance and file a certification
with the Building Inspector consenting to the curbs and sidewalks being
constructed by the municipality on all roads upon which said property fronts,
upon the grade of the road, or part thereof, being legally established, or at
such future time as the municipality shall elect to install curbs and
sidewalks, and said certification shall contain therein the consent of the
applicant to the municipality so installing said curbs and sidewalks at the
applicant's expense at such future time as the municipality elects to do so
and the grade is legally established. This certification shall be a covenant
running with the land and shall be binding on all purchasers or possessors in
interest, heirs or legal representatives of the applicant. Should the
municipality at a future date elect to install curbs and sidewalks along the
affected road where no grade is legally established at the time of the
application as an improvement assessed against the abutting property owners
in the area, said application shall be considered for all purposes as an
irrevocable authorization to the Town Clerk/Administrator to vote said front
for the assessment of benefits proposal. Upon the said curb and sidewalk
improvements being subsequently installed, the cost shall be assessed against
the property owner in the same manner as all other municipal improvements. In
the event of failure to pay the proportionate share of the cost of the
improvements, a lien may be assessed against the subject premises.



§ 247-27. Curb/sidewalk waiver request provisions.



[Amended 5-16-2016 by Ord. No. 010-2016]



   The primary function of concrete curbs and sidewalks shall be to
provide for safe pedestrian movement throughout various parts of the town.
Unless specifically waived by the Planning Board or Zoning Board,
curbs/sidewalks shall be installed along all streets for all types of
development within the Town of Hammonton.



   A.   For the purpose of this section, the town shall be divided into
three curb/sidewalk areas to provide flexible curb/sidewalk requirements and
encourage a functional and usable curb/sidewalk system.  The areas will be
referenced by zoning districts as designated on the current zoning map for
the town that fall within the Pineland Town boundary designation.



      (1)   Curb/Sidewalk Area #1 shall consist of the following
zone districts as depicted on current zoning map for the town:  All Downtown
DT-1 through DT-4, all Gateway, GW-1 through GW-3, R-1, R-2, M2-A, R-3A and
the HB, Highway Business Districts.  Curb/Sidewalk Area #1 includes those
portions of the town where the highest pedestrian traffic is anticipated. The
continuation of the existing curb/sidewalk system is, therefore, very
important for the safe movement of pedestrians and also allows connections to
existing and future pedestrian traffic generators, downtown and commercial
corridor businesses, parks, public transportation and residential segments.



      (2)   Curb/Sidewalk Area #2 generally includes those portions
of the town located just beyond the more heavily developed Curb/Sidewalk Area
#1 and shall include the following Zoning Districts: M1, M2 and R3. Because
of the proximity to schools and existing future pedestrian traffic
generators, transit facilities and parks, the need for curbs/sidewalks in
these areas is high.



      (3)   Curb/Sidewalk Area #3 consists of all lands within the
RR (Rural Residential) and REC (Recreational Zone Districts) Curb/Sidewalk
Area #3 is similar to Curb/Sidewalk Area #2, with the exception that the
maximum permitted residential densities are lower. The need for
curbs/sidewalks is high in the vicinity of pedestrian traffic generators,
schools, parks and transit facilities and commercial corridors, etc.



   B.   The requirements of this section relating to the construction
of curb/sidewalks may be modified and/or waived by the Planning Board or
Zoning Board, if requested by the applicant/developer, upon the Board's
determination that both the area to be developed and the entire town would be
better served by waiving the requirement for the installation of curb and
sidewalk.  The Planning Board or Zoning Board shall have sole jurisdiction
to waive curb and/or sidewalks.  The Planning Board shall hear all
applications for a waiver in cases where no subdivision or site plan
application is involved.  The Planning Board or Zoning Board shall review
such requests taking into consideration § 247-27(A)(1-3), the location,
topography and particular characteristics of the land in relation to the
Master Plan and Land Development Ordinances of the Town of Hammonton.



   C.   Where the requirements of this section relating to the
construction of curb/sidewalks have been waived by the Planning Board or
Zoning Board, a ten-foot-wide cleared and graded area (parallel to the
roadway) shall be provided, partly to provide for pedestrian safety and
partly to provide area for future curb/sidewalk construction if the need
arises. The composition of the graded area shall be at the discretion of the
Planning Board or Zoning Board.



   D.   A 12-foot wide pedestrian easement perpendicular to the roadway
may be required by the Planning Board or Zoning Board through the center of
blocks more than 600 feet long to provide circulation or access to schools,
playgrounds, shopping or other community facilities.



   E.   The Town Engineer has the right to increase the dimensions
referenced in paragraphs C and D above for unusual configurations and/or the
requirement for additional circulation with a commensurate increase in the
cost.



   F.   Material and construction. Walks shall be constructed of
portland cement concrete. Concrete shall be Class C having a 28-day
compressive strength of 4,000 pounds per square inch, unless otherwise
stipulated by the governing body having jurisdiction over the affected
roadway frontage.



   G.   Joint fillers shall be of the preformed bituminous cellular
type and preformed bituminous type.



   H.   Dimensions of the concrete walks shall be at least five feet
wide and at least four inches in thickness, except at points of vehicular
crossing where the minimum thickness shall be six inches.



   I.   The walks shall be located at least five feet back from the
curbface.



   J.   Expansion joints shall be provided with filler materials not
more than 20 feet apart.



   K.   Transverse surface grooves shall be cut in the walk between
expansion joints at intervals equal to the walk width.



   L.   All edges shall be neatly rounded to 1/4 inch.



   M.   The finish shall be made with a wood float, followed by
brushing with a wet soft-hair brush to a neat and workmanlike surface.



   N.   Handicap ramps shall be provided at all intersections and other
areas of expected pedestrian crossing in accordance with the latest NJDOT and
ADA standards.



   O.   The walk shall be gently graded toward the gutter line with a
slope of 2%.



   P.   For any development or developments not involving subdivision
or site plan review, if the requirements pertaining to the installation of
curbs/sidewalks in a specific area are impractical or exact undue hardship to
an applicant due to peculiar or unusual conditions of the land in question,
the applicant may apply for a waiver of the requirements set forth in this
chapter. Public notice shall not be required.



   Q.   The approval to allow for the developer/applicant to receive a
curb/sidewalk waiver does not relieve the developer/applicant and owner from
entering into an agreement with the town that, should the municipality at a
future date elect to install curbs and sidewalks along the affected road,
said applicant and owner shall give an irrevocable authorization which shall
be binding on any future owner to the Town Clerk/Administrator to vote
his/her front footage for the assessment of benefits proposal, which
authorization shall run with the land (with the cost of any recording of same
to be borne by the applicant).  Upon the curb and sidewalk improvements
being subsequently installed in front of his/her premises pursuant to an
assessment of benefits procedure, the cost shall be assessed against the
property owner in the same manner as all other municipal improvements. 



§ 247-28. Violations and penalties.



Editor's Note: Former § 247-28, Critical area, and former § 247-29, Curbs
and sidewalks outside of critical area, both adopted 4-24-1989 by Ord. No.
12-1989, were repealed 9-27-2010 by Ord. No. 22-2010. This ordinance also
renumbered former § 247-30 as § 247-28. A person convicted of violating any
provision of this article shall be subject to one or more of the following: a
fine of not more than $1,000, imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days
or a period of community service not to exceed 90 days.



§ 247-29. through § 247-30. (Reserved)



Article V.
Construction of Rights-of-Way in Subdivisions and Multifamily Housing Projects



[Adopted 9-13-1971 by Ord. No. 10-1971 as Art. V of Ch. 143 of the 1971 Code;
amended in its entirety 5-18-2015 by Ord. No. 008-2015]



§ 247-31. Restrictions on applications.



   No person, firm or corporation shall hereafter apply for any
subdivision approval by the Planning Board or for any approval by any
governmental subdivision of the Town of Hammonton for a multifamily
construction project under this article, for any subdivision which fronts on,
or requires the use of, any street that is not any of the following:



   A.   Constructed, paved and improved to the standards hereinafter
set forth.



   B.   A publicly maintained street under the jurisdiction and control
of the Town of Hammonton, County of Atlantic or State of New Jersey.



   C.   A public dedicated right-of-way which does not conform to
Subsections A and B hereof.



§ 247-32. Definitions.



   As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:



   MULTIFAMILY CONSTRUCTION



   Any apartment or condominium complex or combination of same which
consists of rentable or sellable units on one tract of ground or one or more
adjoining tracts of ground, consistent with the definitions contained within
the town's land development ordinance.



   PUBLIC DEDICATED RIGHT-OF-WAY



   Any road, whether opened or unopened, which has been dedicated by any
prior act of a property owner or developer which shows as a street on any
filed map and which appears on the Tax Duplicate Map of the Town of
Hammonton, as well as any street shown on any sketch plat introduced with the
application for subdivision approval by the applicant to the Planning Board
of the Town of Hammonton relating to the application under consideration.



§ 247-33. Permit required for construction or improving of rights-of-way.



   Any person, firm or corporation who shall apply for subdivision
approval to the Planning Board or for any approval by any governmental
subdivision of the Town of Hammonton for a multifamily construction project
under this article, which proposed subdivision fronts on or requires the use
of any dedicated public right-of-way not covered within § 247-31A or B of
this article, shall only be permitted to construct, pave or improve said
dedicated public right-of-way upon first submitting an application in
duplicate to the Town Clerk/Administrator of the Town of Hammonton, which
application shall request the issuance of a permit for the construction,
reconstruction, paving, repaving or improving of any portion of said
dedicated public right-of-way consistent with applicable town standards.



§ 247-34. Conditions for permit approval.



   No permit shall be issued for said street improvements, as set forth in
§ 247-33 above, by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton
until the following conditions are met:



   A.   A permit shall not be issued by the Mayor and Common Council
until such person, firm or corporation has submitted to the Mayor and Common
Council a plan or plans drawn by a licensed professional engineer showing
existing grades or contours and proposed grades of streets, proposed typical
cross sections of streets, right-of-way widths and construction widths,
drainage scheme and description of all materials to be used in the
construction and the proposed method of construction of said street or public
right-of-way. Said plans shall be accompanied by a letter from said engineer
describing in detail the proposed drainage plan for all surface water along
the dedicated right-of-way referred to in said subdivision. The storm water
storage/recharge system shall be consistent with applicable Town and
Pinelands Commission regulations.



   B.   Said plans as set forth in Subsection A of § 247-34 of this
article shall be submitted to the Town Engineer for review and approval
before any permit shall be issued by the Mayor and Common Council. The Town
Engineer shall have the right to recommend to the Mayor and Common Council
that any of the requirements within this section may be waived where said
Engineer gives the Town of Hammonton a written opinion that such waiver will
not impair the street plan of the Town of Hammonton or future street
development within said town and that the granting of such a waiver is not
against the public interest. The Mayor and Common Council shall have the sole
discretion to determine whether such a waiver shall be granted and to what
extent, once a recommendation of waiver is received from the Town Engineer.



   C.   No permit will be issued by the Mayor and Common Council until
a satisfactory performance bond with sufficient sureties, or in the amount of
120% of the Town Engineer's estimate of cost, is posted with the Town of
Hammonton, approved as to form and sureties by the Solicitor and Risk
Manager, or a cash deposit equivalent. All bonds shall guarantee completion
in three years.



   D.   The Town Engineer reserves the right to set the time limits for
the proposed construction, reconstruction, paving, repaving or improving of
any street or public right-of-way within the town limits. The applicant shall
also be responsible to post a review and inspection escrow account with the
town to cover all costs associated with the proposed improvements.



   E.   The clearing of the proposed street or public right-of-way
shall conform to the New Jersey State Highway Department Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction 1961, Article 2.1.1, 2.1.3
entitled "Clearing Site." All grading will be done to the full right-of-way
width on the said proposed street or public right-of-way.



   F.   The base for all streets or public rights-of-way shall be road
gravel or Dense Graded Aggregate (DGA), compacted to a depth of six inches,
and shall be 3/5 of the width of the right-of-way or as approved by the Town
Engineer.



   G.   All proposed streets or public rights-of-way shall be paved to
3/5 of the right-of-way width or as approved by the Town Engineer with type
Hot Mixed Asphalt (HMA) material in compliance with the New Jersey State
Highway Department Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction
1961, Article 2.2A.1, 3.2A.2, 3.2A.3 entitled "Bituminous Stabilized Base
Course," except that the gravel mix stones shall be no larger than 1/2
inch.  The type of material and thickness shall be consistent with
applicable Town Road Improvement standards.



   H.   All proposed streets or public rights-of-way shall have gutters
where said roadway grades are less than 0.5% and shall be constructed six
inches thick and 18 inches wide of Class B concrete (State Highway
Specifications) and shall be constructed in accordance with the New Jersey
State Highway Department Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction 1961, Article 5.4.1, 5.4.2, 5.4.3 entitled "Gutters."  No
gutter grade shall be less than 0.4%.



   I.   All proposed streets or public rights-of-way shall have curbs
six inches by eight inches by 18 inches of Class B concrete (State Highway
Specifications) and shall be constructed to conform with the New Jersey State
Highway Department Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction
1961, Article 5.5.1, 5.5.2, 5.5.3 entitled "Curbs and Headers."



   J.   Streets shall have sidewalks four inches thick and five feet
wide and shall be constructed of Class C concrete (State Highway
Specifications), except in the area of concrete driveways and where the
thickness will be increased to six inches minimum.



   K.   All applicants for a permit shall have the right, where the
sidewalks on the streets are to be improved and opened in compliance with the
above standards, to delay the installation of sidewalks for a period not to
exceed the term of the bond, in those parts of the subdivision where
residential construction is to occur, until such time as the lots in question
are sold or until construction is commenced by the subdivider of the house or
other structure to be built on the premises or until such time as the
developer, in the case of multifamily construction, is ready to commence the
construction of the complex, unless it is determined that said installation
is required to address drainage, soil erosion, or public safety concerns.



   L.   No proposed street or public right-of-way constructed,
reconstructed, paved, repaved or improved shall have a grade of less then
4/10 of 1%.



   M.   No proposed street or public right-of-way shall be constructed,
reconstructed, paved, repaved, repaired or improved as to carry water for
more than 500 feet on the surface, and said water shall not be brought back
to the surface until it reaches its disposal area consistent with applicable
town standards.



   N.   The requirements as hereinabove set forth within this section
shall apply to all dedicated rights-of-way, whether opened or unopened, which
are not improved to the standards set forth herein and which will be required
to handle the traffic flow from or to said subdivision and which have not
been subject to prior acceptance by the Town of Hammonton, County of Atlantic
or State of New Jersey as public streets, with the exception of those streets
designated as private lanes and qualifying as private lanes within Chapter
175, Land Development. 2



§ 247-35. Certification of installation of public utilities.



   A certification from the applicant must be presented to the Mayor and
Common Council that all public utilities have been installed prior to
construction of the street's surface being commenced.



§ 247-36. Payment of inspection fees and related costs.



   The subdivider shall pay to the Town Clerk/Administrator into a special
escrow account an amount equal to 5% of the Town Engineer's estimate of cost
for the completion of roadway, utility drainage and restoration improvements,
which amount shall be used to cover all inspection fees and related costs of
the Town Engineer and all other town officials for services rendered relating
to the applicant's application.



§ 247-37. Violations and penalties.



   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall for each offense be subject to one or more of the following: a
fine of not more than $1,000, imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days
or a period of community service not to exceed 90 days, and each day's
continuance of such violation shall constitute a separate offense.



Article VI.
Sidewalk and Curb Construction and Maintenance



[Adopted 3-27-2000 by Ord. No. 7-2000; amended in its entirety 5-18-2015 by
Ord. No. 008-2015]



§ 247-38. Premises owner to maintain sidewalks and curbs.



   The owner of any premises in the Town of Hammonton abutting a sidewalk
or curb shall, at his/her own expense, keep and maintain such sidewalk or
curb in good condition and state of repair and shall not permit the same to
fall into a state of disrepair or to become unfit or unsafe to walk upon. In
the event that such sidewalk or curb or any part thereof becomes unsafe or
hazardous to the public or unfit to walk upon, the abutting owner, at his/her
own cost and expense, shall forthwith reconstruct or repair, as the facts may
require, such sidewalk or curb or that part thereof which requires
reconstruction or repair. This article shall not apply to situations where,
in an approved subdivision, a developer is required to install curbs and
sidewalks and where responsibilities for construction and maintenance are
more particularly delineated in the Chapter 175, Land Development.



§ 247-39. Notice to owner of unsafe condition.



   Where, in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer, Town Engineer or
the Highway Department Superintendent, a sidewalk or curb is in an unsafe or
hazardous condition, either shall inform the Town Council which shall by
resolution authorize a notice in writing to be served upon the owners or
occupant of said lands, requiring the necessary specified work to said curb
or sidewalk to be done; by said owner or occupant within the period not less
than 30 days from the date of service of said notice. Whenever any lands are
occupied and the owner cannot be found within the town, said notice may be
mailed, postage prepaid, to his or her post office address as it is
ascertained from the latest tax rolls of the Town of Hammonton. In a case
where an owner is a nonresident of the municipality or his or her post office
address cannot be ascertained, then a notice may be inserted for four weeks,
once a week in the official newspaper of the Town of Hammonton.



§ 247-40. Failure to comply; work to be done by town.



   In the case where the owner or occupant of such lands shall not comply
with the requirements of such notice, it shall be lawful for the Public Works
Superintendent, upon filing due proof of service or publications of the
aforesaid notice, to cause the required work to be done and paid for out of
the town funds available for that purpose. The cost of such work shall be
certified by the Public Works Superintendent to the Town Engineer who shall
verify the same and return it over to the Tax Collector. Upon filing these
said certificates, the amount of the cost of such work shall be and become a
lien upon said abutting lands in front of which such work was done, and
collected in the manner provided by law for the collection of other
assessments or lien; in addition thereto, the Town of Hammonton as its
option, may maintain an action to recover the amount thereof against the
owner of said lands in any court of competent jurisdiction.



§ 247-41. Line and grade of sidewalks and curbs.



   A.   All new sidewalks and curbs construction by an abutting owner
shall be constructed in accordance with the line and grade established by the
Town Engineer. All old and existing sidewalks are to be reconstructed or
repaired in accordance with the existing line and grade unless such line or
grade is changed by the Town Engineer. It shall be the duty of the abutting
owner in all instances to make inquiry of the Town Engineer respecting such
line and grade.



   B.   All sidewalks and curbs constructed, reconstructed or repaired
shall be in accordance with specifications in the Ordinance of the Town of
Hammonton.



§ 247-42. Appropriation of funds; disposition of moneys.



   The town may each year include in its annual budget or Tax Ordinance an
appropriation for curb and/or sidewalk repairs in addition to any existing
maintenance fund, out of which appropriation, all cost of construction and/or
repair of curbs or sidewalks during the year may be charged when it becomes
necessary for the Highway Department to make such repairs and/or construction
pursuant hereto. All moneys recovered or paid to the town under the
provisions of this section, other than penalties as hereinafter set forth,
shall be credited to the account out of which such work was paid.



§ 247-43. Application for permit; fee.



   Whenever any curb or sidewalk is required to be repaired, reset or
re-laid in the Town of Hammonton, application for a permit shall be made by
the owner of the abutting lands or his/her contractor to the Construction
Official, specifying grade, dimensions, mixed materials and method of
construction or repair to be used. The Construction Official shall examine
said specifications and upon approval of the Town Engineer, in compliance
with all the provisions of this article, shall grant a permit to the
applicant. Fees for the aforesaid permit shall be $1 per linear foot of curb
being repaired, or for a dollar amount established by the Town Engineer to
cover the estimated cost for review, approval, and inspection fees required
to complete the work associated with the curb and sidewalk construction.



§ 247-44. Violations and penalties.



   A.   The failure of any applicant or owner or his/her contractor,
servant or agent to construct or repair such curbs and/or sidewalks in
accordance with the specifications failed by him/her for the purpose of
securing that permit under the terms of this article shall be and constitute
a violation hereof.



   B.   Any person violating the terms of this article or refusing or
neglecting to comply with any of the provisions hereof shall, upon conviction
therefor, be subject to one or more of the following: a fine of not more than
$1,000, imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days or a period of
community service not to exceed 90 days, in the discretion of the court
before whom such conviction is had.



   C.   Each day's persistence in the things or acts prohibited by this
article shall be and constitute a separate and distinct offense subject to
any and all penalties prescribed in this article.



Article VII.
Street Lighting Standards



[Adopted 9-25-2000 by Ord. No. 34-2000; amended in its entirety 5-18-2015 by
Ord. No. 008-2015]



§ 247-45. Purpose.



   The purpose of this article is to establish standards for street
lighting within the Town of Hammonton.



§ 247-46. Standards for streetlight construction.



   All streetlights hereinafter constructed in connection with major/minor
subdivisions and site plans, with public streets that have been dedicated to
the Town of Hammonton, shall conform to the following minimum standards:



   A.   Streetlights in residential areas must be installed
approximately 250 to 300 feet apart on straight roadway sections, dependent
on lot frontage. Lights are required at the end of all cul-de-sac streets, at
all curves with radius less than 350 feet or internal angle greater than
30°, as well as at each intersection in accordance with a streetlight
placement plan approved by the Town Planning Board and Town Lighting
Committee. Luminaries shall be one-hundred-watt high-pressure sodium.



   B.   Streetlights in industrial areas must be installed
approximately 400 feet apart, on cul-de-sac as well as at each intersection
in accordance with a streetlight placement plan approved by the Town Planning
Board and Town Lighting Committee. Luminaries shall be one-hundred-watt
high-pressure sodium.



   C.   Luminaries shall be mounted on a standard light pole as
approved by the Town Lighting Committee and the Electric Company. Said
luminaries shall be installed in such a manner that said fixtures shall be at
twenty-five-foot vertical clearance from the roadway surface.



   D.   Streetlights shall be requested and paid for by the
developer/builder as set forth by the then existing Electric Company's Street
lighting Tariff so that the town will only be responsible for the energy
consumption and not the installation. Once the installation is complete and
the roadway is accepted into the town's roadway system, the town will take
ownership of the lighting utility bill. The Mayor and Council and the
Lighting Committee must finally approve all street lighting layouts.



§ 247-47. Standards for streetlights along existing public roads.



   All streetlights requested along existing public roads in the Town of
Hammonton shall conform to the following minimum standards:



   A.   Streetlights in residential areas shall be installed
approximately 300 to 400 feet apart, or as allowed by the existing spacing of
electric utility poles. Lights shall be installed at ends of all culs-de-sac,
at all curves with radius less than 350° or internal angle greater than 30°
and at all intersections. Luminaries shall be one-hundred-watt high-pressure
sodium.



   B.   Streetlights in all other areas of the town shall be installed
as determined to be required by Mayor and Council.



   C.   All street lighting requests shall be reviewed by the Street
Lighting Committee which shall report to Mayor and Council for its
consideration and approval.



§ 247-48. Violations and penalties.



   A person convicted of violating any provision of this article shall be
subject to one or more of the following: a fine of not more than $1,000,
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days or a period of community
service not to exceed 90 days.



ARTICLE VIII
Adopt-a-Street Program



[Adopted 8-25-2014 by Ord. No. 018-2014]



§ 247-49.  Program established.



   In order to promote greater public participation in the life of the
community and the operation of town facilities, there is hereby established
an "Adopt-a-Street" program, to be administered under the auspices of the
town's Public Works Department.



   A.   Any individual citizen, group of citizens, family, civic
organization, or business may apply for sponsorship of a street or
combination of streets within the town, taking responsibility for certain
tasks aimed at maintaining the street or streets in a clean, attractive, and
safe fashion.  The Town Public Works Director, in consultation with the Town
Administrator, shall develop an application covering rules for the program,
and shall recommend an appropriate sponsorship fee structure to Mayor and
Town Council for approval.



   B.   Approved sponsors commit to assisting the town's Public Works
Department in the care and maintenance of Town streets by performing, at
least four times each year, some or all of the following tasks, as
appropriate for the area adopted:



      (1)   Removing litter and recyclable materials.



      (2)   Clearing brush and invasive plants.



      (3)   Mulching street trees.



      (4)   Planting trees, shrubs, and flowers.



   C.   The town will supply bags and other material that will be used
to maintain streets.  Sponsors will perform their cleanup with appropriate
clothing including rain gear and gloves.



   D.   Sponsors will be publicly recognized for their efforts through
the prominent placement of a sign, to be purchased and installed by the town,
declaring their sponsorship.



   E.   All sponsorships shall be valid for a period of five years, and
shall be renewable, with the current sponsor having right of first refusal. 
Failure to agree to renew a sponsorship within a reasonable period of time
from the date of expiration shall constitute sufficient grounds to allow
another individual or group to assume sponsorship of the subject street(s).



   F.   Each sponsor shall agree, at a minimum, to the following
stipulations:



      (1)   To conduct all activities in a safe and responsible
manner.



      (2)   To comply with all relevant rules and regulations.



      (3)   To notify the town, through the Business Administrator,
regarding their decision to resign or not renew the sponsorship in writing.



      (4)   To supply sufficient advance notice of scheduled work to
the Director of Public Works.



      (5)   To assign a person in charge of volunteers.  This "crew
chief" will be responsible for signing volunteers in and out, as well as
ensuring that all volunteers comply with relevant safety requirements.



      (6)   To ensure that all volunteers under the age of 18 have
close and appropriate adult supervision at all times.



      (7)   To wear clothing (including shoes and gloves)
appropriate for the work and weather.



      (8)   To report any and all damage to the Town Clerk within 24
hours of occurrence.



      (9)   To sign a "Hold Harmless Agreement" with the Town of
Hammonton.



   G.   Individuals or groups that are unable to commit to actual work
on a street may provide funding or materials as an in-kind contribution. 
These donations will also qualify for recognition through sign placement,
although the term of acknowledgement shall carry for one year.



CHAPTER 251.
SWIMMING POOLS



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton
9-13-1971 by Ord. No. 10-1971 as Ch. 145 of the 1971 Code. Amendments noted
where applicable.]



   § 251-1.   Intent.



   § 251-2.   Definitions.



   § 251-3.   Fencing and gates.



   § 251-4.   Locking of gates.



   § 251-5.   Fence exceptions for aboveground pools.



   § 251-6.   Removal of steps when aboveground pool not in use.



   § 251-7.   Fencing of preexisting pools.



   § 251-8.   Building permit required; fee.



   § 251-9.   Violations and penalties.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Land development — See Ch. 175, § 175-135.



§ 251-1. Intent.



   The Town of Hammonton is of the considered belief that regulation of
the construction and maintenance of swimming pools, and the enclosure and
fencing of same, is in the public interest and is a reasonably necessary
exercise of the police power for the health, welfare and safety of the
inhabitants of the Town of Hammonton and visitors thereto.



§ 251-2. Definitions.



   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:



   PERSON



   Any person, partnership, corporation or other group of persons.



   SWIMMING POOL



   Any body of water which is out of doors and is artificially constructed
in whole or in part, and which is more than 24 inches in depth at any point
either below ground level or within the pool itself should the pool be
constructed above ground level.



§ 251-3. Fencing and gates.



   No person shall construct or maintain a swimming pool within the Town
of Hammonton unless said pool is enclosed with a fence of at least four feet
in height from average ground grade, which fence shall completely enclose the
area within which the swimming pool is located and shall bar all reasonable
and normal access to the pool except through a self-closing gate or gates,
which shall be the same height of the fence and shall have facilities
enabling said gate or gates to be locked.



§ 251-4. Locking of gates.



   No person maintaining any pool within the Town of Hammonton shall
permit the gate or gates to the enclosed area surrounding said pool to be
unlocked at any time when the pool is not in use.



§ 251-5. Fence exceptions for aboveground pools.



   A.   For the purposes of this chapter, no fence shall be required
around a pool that is constructed above ground:



      (1)   Where that portion of the pool, scaffolding or walking
area surrounding the pool which is closest to the average ground grade is
more than four feet in height from average ground grade; and



      (2)   Where said pool has a removable stairway as its only
means of ingress and egress.



   B.   This exclusion of the fence requirement of this section shall
not apply if any nonremovable portion of the pool or scaffolding or any other
part of the pool structure which can be used for the purpose of gaining
access to the pool is less than four feet in height from average ground grade.



§ 251-6. Removal of steps when aboveground pool not in use.



   In the case of a pool built above ground grade which qualified for the
exception set forth in § 251-5 above, the removable stairs or steps which
are used for purpose of gaining access to or from said pool area must be
removed or elevated above four feet from average ground grade at all times
when the pool is not in use.



§ 251-7. Fencing of preexisting pools.



   All persons having a swimming pool on their property which is in
existence on the effective date of this chapter and which does not conform to
the requirements of this chapter shall provide the required fencing and gates
as set forth in § 251-3 herein within 60 days from the effective date of
this chapter.



§ 251-8. Building permit required; fee.



   No person shall construct or maintain an outdoor swimming pool in the
Town of Hammonton without first applying for and securing a building permit
from the Building Inspector. Any person applying for such a permit shall
supply the Building Inspector with full plans and specifications as to the
pool, the pool area, the fencing and the gates and shall pay a fee of $2 with
said application.



§ 251-9. Violations and penalties.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
one or more of the following: a fine of not more than $1,000, imprisonment
for a period not to exceed 90 days or a period of community service not to
exceed 90 days.



CHAPTER 254.
TAXATION



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton as
indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable. Amended in
full 12-14-2015 by Ord. No. 25-2015.]



ARTICLE I.
Tax Exemptions for Existing Residential Dwellings and Commercial or
Industrial Structures



   § 254-1.   Definitions.



   § 254-2.   Granting of exemption.



   § 254-3.   Exemption for improvements to commercial or industrial
structures.



   § 254-4.   Duration of tax exemption; application of other laws to
projects.



   § 254-5.   Tax payments due upon disqualification of property owner
prior to termination of agreement; termination of agreement.



   § 254-6.   Determination of tax due upon completion of improvement.



   § 254-7.   Ineligibility of property for which property taxes or
penalties are due.



   § 254-8.   Application approval; recording as part of tax records.



   § 254-9.   Additional improvements.



   § 254-10.   Taxes subject to exemption.



   § 254-11.   Notice to taxpayers of adoption of ordinance.



ARTICLE II.
Tax Exemptions and Abatement for New Commercial or Industrial Construction



   § 254-12.   Definitions.



   § 254-13.   Granting of exemption.



   § 254-14.   Contents of applications for tax exemption and/or
abatement.



   § 254-15.   Duration of tax exemption and/or abatement; application
of other laws to projects.



   § 254-16.   Tax payments due upon disqualification of property
owner prior to termination of agreement; termination of agreement.



   § 254-17.   Determination of tax due upon completion of
construction.



   § 254-18.   Ineligibility of property for which property taxes or
penalties are due.



   § 254-19.   Application approval; recording as part of tax records;
copy of agreement forwarded to department of community affairs.



   § 254-20.   Additional improvement or construction.



   § 254-21.   Taxes subject to exemption.



   § 254-22.   Annual report.



   § 254-23.   Notice to taxpayers.



   § 254-24.   Repealer.



ARTICLE I.
Tax Exemptions for Existing Residential Dwellings and Commercial or
Industrial Structures



[Adopted 9-12-1994 by Ord. No. 24-19941]



   1.   Editor's Note: This article also provided that, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq., "areas in need of rehabilitation may qualify for
tax exemption programs provided they have conditions such that a significant
portion of structures are in a deteriorated or substandard condition; there
is a continuing pattern of vacancy, abandonment or underutilization of
property in the area, with a persistent arrearage of property tax payments;
and a program of rehabilitation may be expected to prevent further
deterioration and promote the overall development of the community." The
governing body further determined that the following zones meet the
aforementioned conditions: the Town Business Zone, Highway Business Zone,
Mixed Use Zone and the Agricultural Production/Compatible Light Industry Zone.



   The governing body approved a Resolution on 10-26-2015 following a
recommendation from the Planning Board that the entire Town be declared an
area in need of rehabilitation as set forth in N.J.S.A.40A:21-1 and
specifically N.J.S.A. 40A:12a-14.  Thus, this Chapter encompasses all Zoning
Districts within the Town of Hammonton.



§ 254-1.  Definitions.



   As used in this article, the following meanings shall apply:



   ASSESSOR — The officer of the Town of Hammonton charged with the duty
of assessing real property for the purpose of general taxation.



   COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURE — A structure or part thereof used
for the manufacturing, processing or assembling of material or manufactured
products or for research, office, industrial, commercial, retail,
recreational, hotel or motel facilities or warehousing purposes or for any
combination thereof which the governing body determines will tend to maintain
or provide gainful employment within the municipality, assist in the economic
development of the municipality, maintain or increase the tax base of the
municipality and maintain or diversify and expand commerce within the
municipality. It shall not include any structure or part thereof used or to
be used by any business relocated from another qualifying municipality.



   COMPLETION — Substantially ready for the intended use for which a
building or structure is constructed, improved or converted.



   DWELLING — Consisting of single family attached, single family
detached and twin or two family dwellings as further defined in § 175-10.



   EXEMPTION — That portion of the Assessor's full and true value of any
improvement, conversion, alteration or construction not regarded as
increasing the taxable value of a property, pursuant to this article.



   IMPROVEMENT — A modernization, rehabilitation, renovation, alteration
or repair which produces a physical change in an existing building or
structure; that improves the safety, sanitation, decency or attractiveness of
the building or structure as a place in which to live or work; and which does
not change its permitted use.  In the case of a commercial or industrial
structures, it shall not include ordinary painting, repairs and replacement
of maintenance items, or an enlargement of the volume of an existing
commercial or industrial structure by more than 30%.  In no case shall it
include the repair of fire damage or other damage to a property for which a
claim was received by any person from an insurance company at any time during
the three-year period immediately preceding the filing of an application
pursuant to this article.  The exemption/abatement ordinance does not apply
to the construction of above-ground or in-ground pools or pole barns.



[Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 009-2017]



§ 254-2.  Granting of exemption. 



[Amended 2-26-1996 by Ord. No. 1-1996; 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 009-2017]



   A.   An exemption from taxation for improvements to dwellings may be
granted upon review, evaluation and approval of each application on an
individual basis by the governing body.  The Town of Hammonton shall regard
the first $25,000 of the Assessor's full and true value of the improvements
to the dwelling as not increasing the value of the property for a period of
five years.  During the exemption period, the assessment on the property
shall not be less than the assessment thereon existing immediately prior to
the improvements, unless an abatement is granted pursuant to § 254-2(B), or
unless there is damage to the structure through action of the elements
sufficient to warrant a reduction.



   B.   The Town of Hammonton may allow an abatement of 30% of the
annual amount of the exemption granted under § 254-2(A) above, for a period
of five years, if the Assessor's full and true value of the improvements to
the dwelling exceed the $25,000 exemption amount.



§ 254-3.  Exemption for improvements to commercial or industrial structures.



[Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 009-2017]



   An exemption from taxation for improvements to commercial or industrial
structures may be granted upon review, evaluation and approval of each
application on an individual basis by the governing body.  The Town of
Hammonton shall exempt 100% of the Assessor's full and true value of the
improvements to the commercial or industrial structure as not increasing the
value of the property for a period of five years.  During the exemption
period, the assessment on the property shall not be less than the assessment
thereon existing immediately prior to the improvements, unless there is
damage to the structure through action of the elements sufficient to warrant
a reduction.



§ 254-4.  Duration of tax exemption; application of other laws to projects.



   A.   All tax exemptions granted pursuant to this article shall be in
effect no more than the five full tax years next following the date of
completion of the project.



   B.   All projects subject to tax exemption as provided herein shall
be subject to all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations
regarding pollution control, worker safety, discrimination in employment,
housing provisions and zoning, planning and building code requirements.



§ 254-5.  Tax payments due upon disqualification of property owner prior to
termination of agreement; termination of agreement.



   A.   If during any tax year prior to the termination of the tax
exemption, the property owner ceases to operate or disposes of the property
or fails to meet the conditions for qualifying, then the tax which would have
otherwise been payable for each tax year shall become due and payable from
the property owner as if no exemption had been granted. The Tax Assessor
shall notify the property owner and the Tax Collector forthwith, and the Tax
Collector shall, within 15 days thereof, notify the owner of the property of
the amount of taxes due. However, with respect to the disposal of the
property, where it is determined that the new owner of the property will
continue to use the property pursuant to the conditions which qualified the
property, no tax shall be due, the exemption shall continue and the agreement
shall remain in effect.



   B.   At the termination of a tax exemption, a project shall be
subject to all applicable real property taxes, as provided by state law and
regulation and local ordinance, but nothing herein shall prohibit a project,
at the termination of an exemption, for qualifying for and receiving the full
benefits of any other tax preferences provided by law.



§ 254-6.  Determination of tax due upon completion of improvement.



The Assessor shall determine, on October 1 of the year following the date of
the completion of an improvement, the true taxable value thereof. The amount
of tax to be paid for the first full tax year following completion shall be
based on the assessed valuation of the property for the previous year, plus
any portion of the assessed valuation of the improvement not allowed an
exemption pursuant to this article. The property shall continue to be treated
in the appropriate manner for each of the five full tax years subsequent to
the original determination by the Assessor.



§ 254-7.  Ineligibility of property for which property taxes or penalties
are due.



   No exemption shall be granted pursuant to this article with respect to
any property for which property taxes are delinquent or remain unpaid or for
which penalties for nonpayment of taxes are due.



§ 254-8.  Application approval; recording as part of tax records.



   No exemption shall be granted pursuant to this article except upon
written application therefor filed with and approved by the Assessor. Every
application shall be on a form prescribed by the Director of the Division of
Taxation in the Department of the Treasury and provided for the use of
claimants by the Town of Hammonton and shall be filed with the Assessor
within 30 days, including Saturdays and Sundays, following the completion of
the improvement. Every application for exemption which is filed within the
time specified shall be approved and allowed by the Assessor to the degree
that the application is consistent with the provisions of this article,
provided that the improvement for which the application is made qualifies as
an improvement pursuant to the provisions of this article and N.J.S.A.
40A:21-1 et seq. The granting of an exemption shall be recorded and made a
permanent part of the official tax records of the taxing district, which
record shall contain a notice of the termination date thereof.



§ 254-9.  Additional improvements.



   Any additional improvements, completed on a property granted a previous
exemption during the period in which such previous exemption is in effect,
shall be qualified for an exemption just as if such property had not received
a previous exemption. In such case, the additional improvement shall be
considered as separate for purposes of calculating exemptions.



§ 254-10.  Taxes subject to exemption.



   The exemption provided by this article shall apply to property taxes
levied for municipal purposes, school purposes and county government purposes.



§ 254-11.  Notice to taxpayers of adoption of ordinance.



   Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:21-20, notice of the adoption of this article
shall be included in the mailing of annual property tax bills to each owner
of a dwelling located in the Town of Hammonton during the first year
following adoption of this article.



ARTICLE II.
Tax Exemptions and Abatement or New Commercial or Industrial Construction



 



[Adopted 4-17-2000 by Ord. No. 8-2000; amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 009-2017]



§ 254-12.  Definitions.



   As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:



   ASSESSOR — The officer of a taxing district charged with the duty of
assessing real property for the purpose of general taxation, also identified
in this article as the Town Tax Assessor.



   COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURE — A structure or part thereof used
for the manufacturing, processing or assembling of material or manufactured
products, or for research, office, industrial, commercial, retail,
recreational, hotel or motel facilities, or warehousing purposes, or for any
combination thereof, which the governing body determines will tend to
maintain or provide gainful employment within the municipality, assist in the
economic development of the municipality, maintain or increase the tax base
of the municipality and maintain or diversify and expand commerce within the
municipality. It shall not include any structure or part thereof used or to
be used by any business relocated from another qualifying municipality unless
the total square footage of the floor area of the structure or part thereof
used or to be used by the business at the new site, together with the total
square footage of the land used or to be used by the business at the new
site, exceeds the total square footage of that utilized by the business at
its current site of operations by at least 10%; and the property that the
business is relocating to has been the subject of a remedial action plan
costing in excess of $250,000 performed pursuant to an administrative consent
order entered into pursuant to authority vested in the Commissioner of
Environmental Protection under P.L. 1970, c. 33 (N.J.S.A. 13:1D-1 et seq.),
the Water Pollution Control Act, P.L. 1977, c. 74 (N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et
seq.), the Solid Waste Management Act, P.L. 1970, c. 39 (N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1 et
seq.), and the Spill Compensation and Control Act, P.L. 1976, c. 141
(N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11 et seq.).



   COMPLETION — Substantially ready for the intended use for which a
building or structure is constructed, improved or converted.



   CONSTRUCTION — The provision of a new commercial or industrial
structure, or the enlargement of the volume of an existing commercial or
industrial structure by more than 30%, but shall not mean the conversion of
an existing building or structure to another use.



   EXEMPTION — That portion of the Assessor's full and true value of any
improvement or construction not regarded as increasing the taxable value of a
property pursuant to this act.



   IMPROVEMENT — A modernization, rehabilitation, renovation, alteration
or repair which produces a physical change in an existing building or
structure that improves the safety, sanitation, decency or attractiveness of
the building or structure as a place for human habitation or work, and which
does not change its permitted use. It shall not include ordinary painting,
repairs and replacement of maintenance items, or an enlargement of the volume
of an existing structure by more than 30%. In no case shall it include the
repair of fire or other damage to a property for which payment of a claim was
received by any person from an insurance company at any time during the
three-year period immediately preceding the filing of an application pursuant
to this act.



§ 254-13.  Granting of exemption.



[Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 009-2017]



   A.   Exemptions and/or abatements from taxation for construction of
commercial or industrial structures may be granted upon review, evaluation
and approval of each application on an individual project basis by municipal
resolution.  If the application is approved and the exemption and/or
abatement is granted, the Mayor and Town Council will enter into a written
agreement with the applicant for the exemption and/or abatement of real
property taxes.



   B.   Application for exemptions and/or abatements from taxation
filed pursuant to this article will take initial effect for the first full
tax year commencing after the tax year in which this article is adopted, and
for tax years thereafter as set forth in P.L. 1991, c. 441 (N.J.S.A.
40A:21-1, et seq.), but no application for exemptions and/or abatements shall
be filed for exemptions and/or abatements to take initial effect for the
eleventh full tax year or any tax year occurring thereafter, unless this
article is readopted by the Mayor and Town Council pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:21-4.



   C.   The written tax agreement entered into between the Town and
applicant shall provide for the applicant to pay the Town in lieu of full
property tax payments an amount annually computed based upon the tax phase-in
basis formula set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:21-10(c).



§ 254-14.  Contents of applications for tax exemption and/or abatement.



[Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 009-2017]



   Applicants for tax exemption and/or abatement for new construction of
commercial or industrial structures shall provide the municipal Mayor and
Town Council with an application setting forth:



   A.   A general description of a project for which exemption is
sought.



   B.   A legal description of all real estate necessary for the
project.



   C.   Plans, drawings and other documents as may be required by the
Mayor and Town Council to demonstrate the structure and design of the
project, including site plans and floor plans.



   D.   A description of the number, classes and type of employees to
be employed at the project site within two years of completion of the
project, and a breakdown of those employees which it is estimated will be new
hires from the population of the Town of Hammonton.



   E.   A statement of the reasons for seeking tax exemption on the
project, and a description of the benefits to be realized by the applicant if
a tax agreement is granted.



   F.   Estimates of the cost of completing such project.



   G.   A statement showing:



      (1)   The real property taxes currently being assessed at the
project site;



      (2)   Estimated tax payments that would be made annually by
the applicant on the project during the period of the agreement; and



      (3)   Estimated tax payments that would be made by the
applicant on the project during the first full year following the termination
of the tax agreement.



   H.   A description of any lease agreements between the applicant and
proposed users of the project, and a history and description of the users'
businesses.



   I.   Such other pertinent information as the Mayor and Town Council
may reasonably require.



§ 254-15.  Duration of tax exemption and/or abatement; application of other
laws to projects.



[Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 009-2017]



   A.   All tax exemptions and/or abatements granted pursuant to this
article shall be in effect for no more than the five full tax years next
following the date of completion of the project.



   B.   All projects subject to tax agreement as provided herein shall
be subject to all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations on
pollution control, worker safety, discrimination in employment, housing
provision, zoning, planning and building code requirements.



§ 254-16.  Tax payments due upon disqualification of property owner prior
to termination of agreement; termination of agreement.



   A.   If during any tax year prior to the termination of the tax
agreement, the property owner ceases to operate or disposes of the property,
or fails to meet the conditions for qualifying, then the tax which would have
otherwise been payable for each tax year shall become due and payable from
the property owner as if no exemption had been granted. The Mayor and Town
Council shall direct the Town Clerk/Administrator to notify the property
owner and Tax Collector forthwith, and the Tax Collector shall within 15 days
thereof notify the owner of the property of the amount of taxes due.



   B.   However, with respect to the disposal of the property, where it
is determined that the new owner of the property will continue to use the
property pursuant to the conditions which qualified the property, no tax
shall be due, the exemption shall continue, and the agreement shall remain in
effect.



   C.   At the termination of a tax agreement, a project shall be
subject to all applicable real property taxes as provided by state law and
regulation and local ordinance, but nothing herein shall prohibit a project,
at the termination of an agreement, from qualifying for and receiving the
full benefits of any other tax preferences provided by law.



§ 254-17.  Determination of tax due upon completion of construction.



   The Town Tax Assessor shall determine, on October 1 of the year
following the date of the completion of construction, the true taxable value
thereof. The amount to be paid for the first full tax year following
completion shall be based on the assessed valuation of the property for the
previous year plus any portion of the assessed valuation of the construction
not allowed an exemption pursuant to this article. The property shall
continue to be treated in the appropriate manner for each of the five full
tax years subsequent to the original determination by the Town Tax Assessor.



§ 254-18.  Ineligibility of property for which property taxes or penalties
are due.



[Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 009-2017]



   No exemption and/or abatement shall be granted pursuant to this article
with respect to any property for which property taxes are delinquent or
remain unpaid, or for which penalties for nonpayment of taxes are due.



§ 254-19.  Application approval; recording as part of tax records; copy of
agreement forwarded to department of community affairs.



   A.   No exemption and/or abatement shall be granted pursuant to this
article except upon written application therefor filed with and approved by
the Town Tax Assessor. Every application shall be on a form prescribed by the
Director of the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury, and
provided for the use of claimants by the Town of Hammonton, and shall be
filed with the Town Tax Assessor within 30 days, including Saturdays and
Sundays, following the completion of the construction. Every application for
exemption and/or abatement which is filed within the time specified, shall be
approved and allowed by the Town Tax Assessor to the degree that the
application is consistent with the provisions of this article, provided that
the construction for which the application is made qualifies as a
construction pursuant to the provisions of this article and of N.J.S.A.
40A:21-1 et seq. The granting of an exemption and/or abatement shall be
recorded and made a permanent part of the official tax records of the taxing
district, which records shall contain a notice of the termination date
thereof.



[Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 009-2017]



   B.   Within 30 days after the execution of an agreement, the Mayor
and Town Council shall direct the Town Clerk/Administrator to forward a copy
of the agreement to the Director of the Division of Local Government Services
in the Department of Community Affairs.



§ 254-20.  Additional improvement or construction.



[Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 009-2017]



   Any additional improvement or construction, completed on a property
granted a previous exemption and/or abatement pursuant to this article during
the period in which such previous exemption and/or abatement is in effect,
shall be qualified for an exemption just as if such property had not received
a previous exemption and/or abatement. In such case, the additional
improvement or construction shall be considered as separate for the purposes
of calculating exemptions pursuant to this chapter.



§ 254-21.  Taxes subject to exemption.



[Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 009-2017]



   The exemption and/or abatement of real property taxes provided this
article shall apply to property taxes levied for municipal purposes, school
purposes, county government purposes and for the purposes of funding any
other property tax exemptions or abatements.



§ 254-22.  Annual report.



   The Mayor and Town Council shall direct the Tax Assessor to provide the
report required by N.J.S.A. 40A:21-21 to the Director of the Division of
Local Government Services in the Department of Community Affairs.



§ 254-23.  Notice to taxpayers.



   Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:21-20, notice of the adoption of this article
shall be included in the mailing of annual property tax bills to each owner
of a property located in the area within the Town of Hammonton in which the
exemptions may be allowed pursuant to this article, during the first year
following adoption of this article.



§ 254-24.  Repealer.



   All parts of any ordinance of the Town of Hammonton that are
inconsistent with this article are hereby repealed.



CHAPTER 257.
TAXICABS



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton
9-13-1971 by Ord. No. 10-1971 as Ch. 147 of the 1971 Code. Amendments noted
where applicable.]



   § 257-1.   Definition.



   § 257-2.   Power to license and control.



   § 257-3.   Issuance of license; conditions.



   § 257-4.   Number of licenses.



   § 257-5.   Age, residency and other licensing requirements;
transferability.



   § 257-6.   License necessary to drive cab.



   § 257-7.   Prohibited parking areas.



   § 257-8.   Revocation.



   § 257-9.   Expiration of license.



   § 257-10.   Violations and penalties.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Air taxi service — See Ch. 72.



   Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 271.



§ 257-1. Definition.



   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:



   TAXICAB



   Every vehicle, except a motorbus, which is used or to be used for the
common carriage and conveyance of persons for hire from place to place within
the Town of Hammonton, or from a point within the Town of Hammonton to a
point without the Town of Hammonton.



§ 257-2. Power to license and control.



   The licensing and control of taxicabs and the owners and operators
thereof shall be in the governing body of the Town of Hammonton.



§ 257-3. Issuance of license; conditions.



[Amended 11-26-2012 by Ord. No. 025-2012]



The Town Clerk or Business Administrator of the Town of Hammonton is hereby
authorized to issue taxicab licenses to applicants who may apply and pay the
fee, on the following conditions:



   A.   Every owner shall make application for a license or renewal
thereof, which application shall be made in writing on appropriate
application form created by the Town Clerk and filed with the Town Clerk or
Business Administrator, and shall set forth the following:



      (1)   Motor vehicle year, make, model, serial number and
license plate number



      (2)   Applicant(s) name, address and telephone number



      (3)   Business name, address and telephone number



      (4)   Signatures of applicant(s) and all driver(s)



   B.   The applicant shall pay an annual license fee of $50 to be made
payable to the Town of Hammonton.



   C.   Before such license is granted, the owner shall submit a
Certificate of Insurance for each separate business vehicle in the amount of
$500,000 liability for each person and not less than $500,000 liability
insurance per accident.



[Amended 10-23-1989 by Ord. No. 35-1989]



   D.   Each initial application must be approved by the governing body
in the form of a resolution.



   E.   Issuance of taxi cab license and licensing of drivers is
subject to police approval.



§ 257-4. Number of licenses.



[Amended 11-26-2012 by Ord. No. 025-2012]



   The Town Clerk or Business Administrator is hereby empowered to approve
and license, after full compliance by the applicants with all the applicable
provisions of this chapter, not more than eight taxicabs in the Town of
Hammonton.



§ 257-5. Age, residency and other licensing requirements; transferability. 1



[Amended 11-26-2012 by Ord. No. 025-2012]



   No taxi license is transferable.  Each new business is required to
make application per this chapter.



§ 257-6. License necessary to drive cab.



[Amended 11-26-2012 by Ord. No. 025-2012]



   A.   Each driver who is licensed shall be subject to police approval.



   B.   Each driver shall pay a fee of $1.



   C.   Each driver must be at least 21 years of age.



   D.   Each driver must submit proof of identity and hold a current
New Jersey driver's license.



   E.   The Town Clerk or Business Administrator may add or remove
driver(s) at the request of the applicant(s) and upon police approval.



§ 257-7. Prohibited parking areas. 2



[Amended 11-26-2012 by Ord. No. 025-2012]



   No taxicab, as above described, having been licensed to operate within
the Town of Hammonton, shall be parked for the purposes of soliciting trade
on any street in the Town of Hammonton.  However, nothing herein shall be
construed to prevent the taking on or discharging of passengers at any place
within said town..



§ 257-8. Revocation.



[Amended 11-26-2012 by Ord. No. 025-2012]



   The governing body may, by appropriate resolution, revoke any license
granted, so long as the license owner is given a public hearing, for any of
the following reasons:



   A.   For conviction of having violated any of the provisions of this
chapter.



   B.   For conviction of having failed to obey the traffic regulations
and laws of the state for the operation and registration and inspection of
motor vehicles.



   C.   For conviction of having used said taxicab or automobile while
engaging in the violation of any law or statute of this state or of the
United States.



   D.   Upon proof of having failed to pay any judgment for personal
injury or property damage obtained against him/her for the unlawful or
negligent operation of the automobile for which this license is granted.



§ 257-9. Expiration of license.



[Amended 11-26-2012 by Ord. No. 025-2012]



   Taxicab license(s) issued under this chapter shall expire one year from
date of issuance.



§ 257-10. Violations and penalties.



   Anyone violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to one
or more of the following: a fine of not more than $1,000, imprisonment for a
period not to exceed 90 days or a period of community service not to exceed
90 days.



 


Notes

1 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).

2 
Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).



CHAPTER 259.
TOBACCO PRODUCTS



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton as
indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]



ARTICLE I.
Vending Machines and Self-Service Displays



   § 259-1.   Purpose.



   § 259-2.   Remote actuators.



   § 259-3.   Retail establishments.



   § 259-4.   Violations and penalties.



Article I.
Vending Machines and Self-Service Displays



[Adopted 12-18-2000 by Ord. No. 41-2000]



§ 259-1. Purpose.



   The purpose of this article is to prohibit unregulated tobacco vending
machines and self-service displays of tobacco products.



§ 259-2. Remote actuators.



   It shall be unlawful to offer for sale or to sell tobacco through a
tobacco vending machine which is not equipped with a remote actuator to
insure compliance with N.J.S.A. 2A:170-51, a statute prohibiting the sale or
furnishing of tobacco products to persons under 18 years of age.



§ 259-3. Retail establishments.



   It shall be unlawful to maintain a self-service tobacco display within
any retail establishment.



§ 259-4. Violations and penalties.



   Unless otherwise provided by law or statute, any person violating any
of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a
penalty of not less than $100 nor more than $500 for each offense.



CHAPTER 261.
TOWING



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton
10-24-1983 by Ord. No. 11-1983. Amendments noted where applicable.]



   § 261-1.   Purpose; authority.



   § 261-2.   Establishment of towing service list.



   § 261-3.   Eligibility for towing service list.



   § 261-4.   Contract required; stipulations of contract; insurance
coverage.



   § 261-5.   Removal from list; hearing.



   § 261-6.   Right to request specific towing service; applicability.



   § 261-7.   Rights of towing service to take action.



   § 261-8.   Complaints; violations and penalties.



   § 261-9.   Exhibit A: Maximum Fee Schedule.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 271.



§ 261-1. Purpose; authority.



   The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the Town of Hammonton and individuals traversing
said town from traffic hazards occasioned by an accumulation of towing trucks
and similar vehicles at the scenes of accidents or abandoned cars. This
chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers given the Town of Hammonton
under the State Constitution and state law.



§ 261-2. Establishment of towing service list.



   The Police Department of the Town of Hammonton is hereby authorized to
list all certified tow-truck operators of the Town of Hammonton on a rotating
basis and to assign weeks during which the particular towing service shall be
entitled to tow vehicles that are disabled or abandoned on the public
highways of the Town of Hammonton. No more than two towing services shall be
listed for a second week until all certified towing services have been listed
for at least one week. Said list shall be posted in the office of the Police
Department with a copy distributed monthly to each certified towing service.



§ 261-3. Eligibility for towing service list.



   A.   All existing towing services in the Town of Hammonton shall be
automatically eligible for said list, provided that the proprietors of said
towing services entered into a contract with the Hammonton Police Department
stating that they will comply with all provisions of this chapter, including
the fee schedule attached hereto setting forth maximum charges for providing
towing services, which fee schedule shall be Exhibit A in § 261-9 hereof for
all purposes.



   B.   Any new towing service that is established in the Town of
Hammonton shall have the right to apply to be placed on said list and shall
be placed on the list once the Police Department has investigated said
applicant and determined that his/her equipment is satisfactory to provide
towing services and that the individual does not have a criminal record
involving moral turpitude relating to offenses for which he/she was convicted
or incarcerated within five years prior to the date of said application. All
such applications to be placed on the list shall be in duplicate with a copy
filed with the Town Clerk/Administrator. The new applicants shall also become
eligible only upon entering into the contract as hereinabove set forth with
the Hammonton Police Department. When a towing service is placed on the list,
it shall have all of the privileges and obligations of all other towing
services on the list.



   C.   Should an applicant be rejected for the list by the Police
Department or should the application not be acted upon within 90 days after
filing, the applicant shall have a right to appeal to Mayor and Council said
refusal or inaction.



   D.   Nothing in this section shall apply to those services being
rendered to tractor trailers, buses and similar heavy vehicles, and the
Police Department shall establish a separate list of those towing services
that are able to provide services for big rigs, which list shall be used
exclusively for the providing of towing services to those types of vehicles.



§ 261-4. Contract required; stipulations of contract; insurance coverage.



   The towing services who are placed on the list shall not provide any
towing services on the roads and public highways of the Town of Hammonton
until they enter into a contract with the Police Department that has the
following particulars:



   A.   The particular towing service covenants and agrees to comply
with the maximum fee schedule attached hereto as Exhibit A in § 261-9 and
any supplements or replacements thereof. Nothing in this chapter or the
contract shall prevent a towing service from charging a lesser fee than the
maximum fees set in Exhibit A if the towing service so chooses.



   B.   The towing service in question, if it has to store the vehicle,
covenants and agrees not to release the vehicle until a vehicle release is
completed, signed and filed with the Hammonton Police Department. A copy of
the vehicle release form is attached hereto as Exhibit B hereof. Editor's
Note: Said Exhibition B is on file in the Town offices.



   C.   The towing service in question covenants and agrees not to
provide any towing services on the public roads and highways of the Town of
Hammonton during any week when it is not listed to perform said services
unless requested to do so in a particular instance by a towing service listed
as being on duty for that week.



   D.   Towing contractors shall be required to purchase, maintain and
provide during the time of service on the rotary list proof of insurance
furnished by a reputable insurance company licensed to do business in the
State of New Jersey, containing the following coverages with liability limits
as set forth below:



[Amended 8-24-2009 by Ord. No. 18-2009]



      (1)   Garage liability/comprehensive general liability
insurance policy in an amount not less than $1,000,000 combined single limit
coverage bodily injury and property damage liability, inducting but not
limited to personal injury, products liability (where applicable),
independent contractor and completed operation coverage.



      (2)   Garagekeepers legal liability "direct primary" insurance
policy in an amount not less than $100,000. Said policy must include both
comprehensive and collision and an endorsement to include on hook.



      (3)   Automobile liability insurance policy in an amount not
less than $1,000,000 combined single limit covering bodily injury and
property damage liability including but not limited to owned, nonowned and
hired vehicles.



      (4)   Workers' compensation insurance as required by law,
including, but not limited to, statutory New Jersey Workers' Compensation
benefits, and employers liability of at least $100,000.



      (5)   Excess/umbrella liability. In the event that a garage
liability and/or automobile liability cannot be purchased up to the required
limit of $1,000,000, an excess liability or umbrella liability policy must be
purchased to effect a total liability limit of $1,000,000. Excess or umbrella
liability policies will not be required for garage or automobile policies
that meet or exceed the minimum limit of $1,000,000.



      (6)   The garage liability policy shall name the Town of
Hammonton as additional insured and certificate holder.



      (7)   The contractor will execute an agreement to hold
harmless, indemnify and defend, at the contractors expense, the Town, its
employees and officials from any and all claims, demands, suit or action for
personal injury or property damage brought against the Town, its employees
and officials for any activities which arise out of any services performed
wider this chapter.



§ 261-5. Removal from list; hearing.



   Any towing service that violates any provision of the contract as
herein set forth or of this chapter shall be subject to being removed from
the list established under § 261-2 of this chapter upon being given written
notice and an opportunity for a hearing before Town Council. Said notice
shall give the towing service that is the alleged violator at least 10 days'
notice, in writing, and an opportunity to be present and represented by
counsel and to present evidence to show cause why said towing service should
not be temporarily suspended for a term to be set by Mayor and Council or
permanently removed from said list.



§ 261-6. Right to request specific towing service; applicability.



   Nothing in this chapter shall control the right of any towing service
to tow a vehicle where a specific towing service in the Town of Hammonton is
requested by an owner. In like fashion, this chapter shall not apply to
vehicles towed from private property. This chapter applies exclusively to
vehicles that are either disabled or abandoned on a public road or highway of
the Town of Hammonton.



§ 261-7. Rights of towing service to take action.



   Nothing in this chapter shall limit the right of any towing service
which stores a motor vehicle towed off a public road or highway from taking
such actions as are permitted by law if the vehicle in question is left in
the towing service's possession without being reclaimed or without the towing
bill of the towing service being paid for a period of 30 days from the date
of said towing. In such case, the towing service operator shall have all the
rights related to a garage man’s lien or the right of public sale as
provided by state law.



§ 261-8. Complaints; violations and penalties.



   Nothing within § 261-5 of this chapter shall prevent the Police
Department and the members thereof from making a complaint against a towing
service operator for violating the provisions of this chapter, which shall be
heard before the Municipal Judge of the Town of Hammonton. Said complaint may
issue either for a violation of a particular provision(s) of the contract
executed by the towing service under § 261-4 of this chapter or, in the
alternative, may charge an unlisted towing service with providing said
services within the Town of Hammonton without qualifying for the list
established under § 261-2. If a particular towing service is found guilty of
such a violation, the proprietor thereof shall be subject to one or more of
the following: a fine of not more than $1,000, imprisonment for a period not
to exceed 90 days or a period of community service not to exceed 90 days for
each violation, to be imposed at the discretion of the Municipal Judge of the
Town of Hammonton. The right to make a complaint under this section shall be
a separate remedy which may be imposed in addition to a proceeding instituted
before the Mayor and Council to remove a towing service from the list under
§ 261-2 of this chapter. If the Police Department or the members thereof
elect to seek both remedies, the hearing as to being removed from the list
shall be deferred until the Municipal Judge hears the complaint for violating
the ordinance.



§ 261-9. Exhibit A: Maximum Fee Schedule.



[Amended 6-27-1988 by Ord. No. 14-1988; 4-22-2002 by Ord. No. 14-2002;
8-27-2012 by Ord. No. 022-2012]



   The Maximum Fee Schedule shall be as follows:



   Maximum Fee Schedule



 



Service
 
Fee


Basic tow
 
$125


Minimal winching
 
$50


Clean up fee if warranted by tower (up to 11,500 GVW, if over time and
material will apply)
 
$40


Charge for each additional 24 hours' storage
 
$30


Inside Storage per Day
 
$50


Wait time other than basic tow (first half hour free)
 
$75 per hour


Removal of abandoned vehicles as directed by Chief of Police (no charge to
Town of Hammonton)
 
$125


Additional cost for a second tow truck, if needed
 
$75 per hour


ADDITIONAL CHARGES:


Administrative fee
 
$35


Gate fee after hours
 
$55


Yard fee
 
$40




 



CHAPTER 264.
TRAILERS AND TRAILER CAMPS



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton
9-13-1971 by Ord. No. 10-1971 as Ch. 150 of the 1971 Code. Amendments noted
where applicable.]



   § 264-1.   Definitions.



   § 264-2.   Placing certain vehicles on permanent foundations
prohibited.



   § 264-3.   Use of certain vehicles for dwellings.



   § 264-4.   Licenses required.



   § 264-5.   Trailer camp and trailer license fees.



   § 264-6.   Applications for licenses or transfers.



   § 264-7.   Requirements for trailer camps.



   § 264-8.   Prior approval of site; prohibited area.



   § 264-9.   Water supply.



   § 264-10.   Sanitation facilities.



   § 264-11.   Laundry facilities.



   § 264-12.   Sewage disposal and drainage facilities.



   § 264-13.   Garbage and refuse facilities.



   § 264-14.   Fire prevention equipment.



   § 264-15.   Restrictions on pets.



   § 264-16.   Camp register.



   § 264-17.   Revocation of licenses.



   § 264-18.   Posting of trailer camp license.



   § 264-19.   Exemption of certain persons during religious festivals.



   § 264-20.   Violations and penalties.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Definition of manufactured home — See Ch. 147.



   Litter receptacles in trailer parks — See Ch. 184.



   Setting up trailers in parks — See Ch. 200, § 200-4.



§ 264-1. Definitions.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:



   PERSON



   Any individual, firm, trust, partnership, association or corporation.



   TRAILER



   Any movable or portable structure so designed so as to permit occupancy
for dwelling or sleeping purposes, and shall also be defined to include tents.



   TRAILER CAMP



   Any plot or tract of land upon which one or more trailers shall be
located.



   TRAILER SPACE



   A plot of land within a trailer camp designed for the accommodation of
one trailer.



§ 264-2. Placing certain vehicles on permanent foundations prohibited.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or permit to be placed any
trailer, bus, bus body, truck, truck body, trailer, van, railroad car,
temporary building or movable vehicle on a permanent foundation or piers in
the Town of Hammonton.



§ 264-3. Use of certain vehicles for dwellings.



   No bus, bus body, truck, truck body, van, railroad car or
tractor-trailer body shall be used or be permitted to be used for dwelling
purposes in the Town of Hammonton.



§ 264-4. Licenses required.



   No person shall park or permit to be parked any trailer, as herein
defined, for dwelling purposes, either temporarily or permanently upon any
street or plot of land within the Town of Hammonton except in a trailer camp;
and no person shall park or permit to be parked any trailer in a trailer camp
unless such person first obtained a license therefor.



§ 264-5. Trailer camp and trailer license fees.



   A.   The annual license fee for each trailer camp containing five
trailer spaces or less shall be $100; for each additional five trailer spaces
or fraction thereof, there shall be an additional annual fee of $25, said
fees to be paid in advance.



   B.   The annual license fee for parking each trailer in a trailer
camp shall be $50 per trailer, payable in advance.



   C.   The above-mentioned fees are hereby deemed necessary in order
to collect sufficient revenue to pay the additional cost and expense to the
Town of Hammonton by reason of the inspection of same by the agents of the
Town of Hammonton; and the additional cost to said town for:



      (1)   The use of its water and sewer system, if at all;



      (2)   The fire protection and police protection to be
furnished to the said trailer camps; and



      (3)   The maintenance of the educational facilities which
would be furnished to the occupants of said trailers.



§ 264-6. Applications for licenses or transfers.



   A.   Applications for a trailer camp license or for a license to
park or locate a trailer in a trailer camp shall be made in writing to the
Town Clerk/Administrator and shall contain the following:



      (1)   Name and address of the applicant.



      (2)   The location and description of the trailer camp or the
trailer, together with the land upon which it is to be parked.



      (3)   If for a trailer camp, a complete plan of the camp
showing compliance with this and all other sections of this chapter.



      (4)   Any further information that may be requested by the
Mayor and Common Council or the Board of Adjustment of the Town of Hammonton
to enable it or them to determine if the proposed camp will comply with all
legal requirements.



   B.   The application, if for a trailer camp license, shall be filed
in triplicate: one for the Mayor and Common Council, one for the Board of
Adjustment (Building Inspector) and one for the Chief of Police, who shall
investigate the applicant for a trailer camp and the location proposed
therefor and inspect the proposed plans and specifications. If the applicant
is found to be of good moral character and the proposed trailer camp will be
in compliance with all provisions of this chapter and other ordinances or
statutes, the Mayor and Common Council may in its discretion, upon the
recommendation of the Board of Adjustment and Chief of Police, approve the
application, and upon completion of the camp, may issue the license.



   C.   Upon application for a transfer of the trailer camp license to
another person, the Mayor and Common Council shall issue a transfer if the
Chief of Police shall report that the transferee is of good moral character.



§ 264-7. Requirements for trailer camps.



   Trailer camps shall conform to the following requirements:



   A.   The camp shall be located upon a site properly graded and
acceptable to the Mayor and Common Council as to drainage and health
conditions.



   B.   Each trailer space provided shall consist of 690 square feet
and shall be at least 23 feet wide and clearly defined. Trailers shall be so
placed or parked on each trailer space so there shall be at least a
fifteen-foot clearance between trailers. No trailer shall be located closer
than 20 feet from any property line abutting the trailer camp.



   C.   All trailer spaces shall abut upon a driveway not less than 20
feet in width, which shall have access to a public street. All driveways
shall be well marked and lighted at night with twenty-five-watt lamps
(minimum) at intervals of 100 feet, located approximately 10 to 12 feet above
the ground.



   D.   Each camp shall provide service buildings to house toilet
facilities, bathing facilities, laundry facilities and other sanitary
facilities as hereinafter more particularly described.



   E.   Each trailer space shall be provided with an electrical outlet
supplying at least 110 volts.



§ 264-8. Prior approval of site; prohibited area.



   No trailer camp shall be located on any site in the Town of Hammonton
unless said site shall first be approved by the Board of Adjustment of the
Town of Hammonton, provided nevertheless that no trailer camp shall be
permitted in the area of the Town of Hammonton bounded and described as
follows: Beginning at the intersection of the southwesterly line of the White
Horse Pike and the southeasterly line of Fairview Avenue and extends thence
southeastwardly along the said line of White Horse Pike to the
northwestwardly line of Eighth Street; thence southwestwardly along the said
line of Eighth Street to the northeasterly line of First Road; thence
northwestwardly along the said line of First Road to the southeasterly line
of Thirteenth Street; thence northwestwardly along the said line of
Thirteenth Street and the said line of Fairview Avenue to the said line of
White Horse Pike and the point and place of beginning.



§ 264-9. Water supply.



   An adequate supply of pure water for drinking and domestic purposes
shall be supplied to meet the requirements of the camp. The water supply
shall be obtained from faucets only. Cold-water-supply faucets shall be
located on each trailer space. Hot water shall be provided at all times in
the service buildings for bathing and laundry facilities.



§ 264-10. Sanitation facilities.



   Each trailer camp shall be provided with toilets, baths or showers,
slop sinks and other sanitation facilities which conform with the following
requirements:



   A.   Toilet facilities for men and women shall be either in separate
buildings at least 10 feet apart, or if in the same building, shall be
separated by a soundproof wall.



   B.   Toilet facilities for women shall consist of not less than one
flush toilet for every 10 trailer spaces and one shower or bathtub for every
10 trailer spaces and one lavatory for every 20 trailer spaces. Each toilet,
shower or bathtub shall be in a private compartment.



   C.   Toilet facilities for men shall consist of not less than one
flush toilet for every 15 trailer spaces, one shower or bathtub for every 10
trailer spaces, one lavatory for every 10 trailer spaces and one urinal for
every 15 trailer spaces. Each toilet, shower or bathtub shall be in a private
compartment.



   D.   Service buildings housing these toilet facilities shall be
permanent structures complying with all applicable ordinances and statutes
regulating buildings, electrical, plumbing and sanitation systems, and shall
be located not closer than 10 feet nor farther than 200 feet from any trailer
space.



   E.   Each service building shall contain at least one slop sink for
each sex and shall be located in a separate compartment.



   F.   The service buildings shall be well lighted, shall be well
ventilated with screened openings, shall be constructed of such materials as
shall permit repeated cleaning and washing, and shall be maintained at a
temperature of at least 68° F. during the period from October 1 to May 1.
The floors of the service buildings shall be of water-impervious material and
shall slope to a floor drain connected with an approved sewage disposal
system.



§ 264-11. Laundry facilities.



   Laundry facilities shall be provided in the ratio of one double laundry
tub and electric outlet and ironing board for every 20 trailers spaces.
Drying spaces shall be provided sufficient to accommodate the laundry of the
trailer occupants. The service building housing the laundry facilities shall
be a permanent structure complying with all applicable ordinances and
statutes regulating buildings, electrical, plumbing and sanitation sewerages
and systems.



§ 264-12. Sewage disposal and drainage facilities.



   Sewage and refuse from showers, bathtubs, toilets, slop sinks and
laundries shall be discharged into a sewer system, disposal plant, septic
tank or cesspool system of such construction and in such manner as will
present no health hazard and in compliance with applicable ordinances and/or
statutes. All kitchen sinks, washbasins, bath or shower tubs in any trailer
harbored or parked in any trailer camp may empty into a sanitary drain
located on the trailer space.



§ 264-13. Garbage and refuse facilities.



   Covered metal garbage cans or refuse incinerators shall be provided to
adequately permit disposal or destruction of all garbage and rubbish. The
cans or incinerators shall be kept in sanitary conditions at all times.
Garbage and rubbish not burned or destroyed shall be collected and disposed
of at least once each week.



§ 264-14. Fire prevention equipment.



   Every trailer camp shall be equipped at all times with one
soda-and-acid-type fire extinguisher of five-gallon capacity in good working
order for every 10 trailer spaces, located not farther than 200 feet from
each trailer space. No open fires shall be permitted at any place which would
endanger life or property, nor shall any open fire be left unattended at any
time.



§ 264-15. Restrictions on pets.



Editor's Note: See Ch. 84, Animals. No owner or person in charge of any dog,
cat or other pet animal shall permit it to run at large or to commit any
nuisance within the limits of any trailer camp.



§ 264-16. Camp register.



   A.   It shall be the duty of the trailer camp licensee to keep a
register of all trailer owners and occupants located within the trailer camp.
The register shall contain the following information:



      (1)   The make, model and year of all trailers.



      (2)   The license number and owner of all trailers and
automobiles by which they are towed, and the state issuing such licenses.



      (3)   The name and address of each occupant of each trailer.



      (4)   The dates of arrival and departure of each trailer.



   B.   The trailer camp licensee shall keep the register available for
inspection at all times by law enforcement officers, public health officials
and other officials whose duties would require the acquisition of the
information therein contained. No register shall be destroyed for a period of
three years following the date of registration.



§ 264-17. Revocation of licenses.



   The Mayor and Common Council may revoke any license to maintain and
operate a trailer camp when the licensee has been found guilty by a court of
competent jurisdiction of violating any provision of this chapter. Such
license may be reissued or reinstated only if the circumstances leading to
the conviction have been remedied and the camp is being maintained and
operated in full compliance with this chapter and other applicable ordinances
and/or statutes.



§ 264-18. Posting of trailer camp license.



   The license certificate for the trailer camp shall be conspicuously
posted in the office or on the premises of each trailer camp at all times.



§ 264-19. Exemption of certain persons during religious festivals.



   The provisions and sections of this chapter shall not be held to apply
to the parking or placing of trailers in the Town of Hammonton during the
religious festival periods of June 24, July 16 and August 15 of each year, if
the occupants of said trailers are engaged in the religious celebration
activity.



§ 264-20. Violations and penalties.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction before the Municipal Judge of the Town of Hammonton or other
proper court, be subject to one or more of the following: a fine of not more
than $1,000, imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days or a period of
community service not to exceed 90 days.



CHAPTER 267.
TREES



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton as
indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]



ARTICLE I.
Planting, Protection and Improvement



   § 267-1.   Permit required for certain acts.



   § 267-2.   Electric wires.



   § 267-3.   Animals.



   § 267-4.   Brine, gas or injurious chemicals.



   § 267-5.   Interference with Environmental Commission.



   § 267-6.   Enforcement; violations and penalties.



ARTICLE II.
Tree Preservation and Maintenance



   § 267-7.   Title.



   § 267-8.   Purposes.



   § 267-9.   Intent.



   § 267-10.   Definitions and word usage.



   § 267-11.   Permit requirements.



   § 267-12.   Application fees.



   § 267-13.   Exceptions to permit requirement.



   § 267-14.   Standards for consideration.



   § 267-15.   Protection of existing trees during development.



   § 267-16.   Planting of new trees.



   § 267-17.   Right to appeal.



   § 267-18.   Enforcement; violations and penalties.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Environmental Commission — See Ch. 6, Art. III.



   Trees blocking house numbers — See Ch. 104, § 104-4.



   Land development — See Ch. 175, §§ 175-91, 175-104 and 175-125.



   Posting notices on trees — See Ch. 184, § 184-18.



   Damaging trees in parks — See Ch. 200, § 200-4.



   Cutting trees to install satellite earth stations — See Ch. 220, §
220-5.



Article I.
Planting, Protection and Improvement



[Adopted 9-13-1971 by Ord. No. 10-1971 as Art. I of Ch. 134 of the 1971 Code;
amended in its entirety 8-23-2010 by Ord. No. 16-2010]



§ 267-1. Permit required for certain acts.



   No person, firm or corporation shall do or cause to be done any of the
following acts upon a public right-of-way within the Town of Hammonton
without the written permission of the Environmental Commission:



   A.   Cut, trim, break, climb with spikes, disturb the roots of or
otherwise injure, spray with any chemical or remove any living tree or shrub;
or injure, misuse or remove any structure or device placed to support or
protect such tree or shrub.



   B.   Plant any tree or shrub.



   C.   Fasten any rope, wire, electric attachments, sign or other
device to a tree or shrub or to any guard about such tree or shrub.



   D.   Close or obstruct any open space provided about the base of a
tree or shrub to permit the access of air, water or fertilizer to the roots
of such tree or shrub.



§ 267-2. Electric wires.



   Every person, firm or corporation having control over any wire for the
transmission of an electric current along a public right-of-way shall at all
times guard all trees through which or near which such wire passes against
any injury from the wire or from the electric current carried by it. The
device or means used shall in every case be subject to approval by the
Environmental Commission.



§ 267-3. Animals.



   No person, firm or corporation shall hitch or fasten any animal to any
tree or shrub upon a public right-of-way or to any guard or support provided
for the same.



§ 267-4. Brine, gas or injurious chemicals.



   No person, firm or corporation shall permit any brine, gas or injurious
chemical to come in contact with the stem or roots of any tree or shrub upon
a public right-of-way.



§ 267-5. Interference with Environmental Commission.



   No person, firm or corporation shall prevent, delay or interfere with
any lawful work undertaken by the Environmental Commission or its authorized
agent.



§ 267-6. Enforcement; violations and penalties.



   A.   The provisions of this article will be enforced by the Town
Code Enforcement Officer.



   B.   Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any
provision of this article shall be subject for each violation to one or more
of the following:



      (1)   A mandatory fine of not less than $300 and not more than
$1,000.



      (2)   A period of community service focused on the parks and
open spaces of the Town of Hammonton not to exceed 30 hours for each offense.



      (3)   Replacement of the total caliper of the trees improperly
removed, to be installed either on the property from which they were removed
or donated to the Town of Hammonton for community planting.



   C.   Each day on which trees are removed will constitute a separate
violation. In addition, any tree having a diameter in excess of 20 inches
which is removed in violation of this article shall also be considered a
separate offence.



   D.   For repeat offenses, the minimum mandatory fine is $500.



Article II.
Tree Preservation and Maintenance



[Adopted 5-24-1993 by Ord. No. 10-1993; amended in its entirety 8-23-2010 by
Ord. No. 16-2010]



§ 267-7. Title.



   This article shall be known as the "Town of Hammonton Tree Preservation
and Maintenance Ordinance."



§ 267-8. Purposes.



   The purposes of this article are to establish protective regulations
for trees within the boundaries of the Town of Hammonton in order to control
problems of flooding, soil erosion and air and noise pollution and to make
the Town of Hammonton a healthier and safer place in which to live.



§ 267-9. Intent.



   The intent of this article is to encourage the protection of the
maximum number of healthy trees and of large-specimen trees throughout the
town. The intent is not punitive nor intended to cause hardship to any
individual or private or public company that has taken reasonable care and
diligence to protect the trees within the Town of Hammonton or that wishes to
remove a tree for just cause within the provisions of this article.



§ 267-10. Definitions and word usage.



   A.   As used herein, the following terms have the definitions
indicated:



   COMMUNITY BUILDINGS



   Schools, hospitals, churches, clubs, lodges or any such building used
by an organization or group or by the public generally.



   CROWN



   The branches and foliage of a tree; the upper portion of a tree.



   DEVELOPED LOT



   Any lot on the Municipal Tax Map that is assessed for an improvement of
any kind, except a billboard.



   FLAGGING



   Any removable tagging of trees.



   LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT



   A person registered as a landscape architect by the State of New Jersey.



   PERMIT



   Any permit, in writing, as issued by a town official.



   PERSON



   Any individual person, association, company, corporation or similar
group.



   QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL FORESTER



   A person who has a B.S. degree from a four-year school of forestry
accredited by the Society of American Foresters.



   STREET TREE



   Any woody perennial plant usually having one or more main trunks and
the potential to reach the height of 10 feet or more located within the
easement area adjacent to a municipal, county or state right-of-way on within
said right-of-way.



   TOWN TREE



   Any woody perennial plant on property owned, leased or otherwise under
the exclusive jurisdiction of the Town of Hammonton or any other governmental
entity.



   TREE



   Any woody perennial plant usually having one or more main trunks and
the potential to reach the height of 10 feet or more.



   TREE DIAMETER



   The width of a tree measured 4 1/2 feet above the ground.



   TREE DRIPLINE



   The marking where the outer edge of a tree's branches overhangs the
ground.



   TREE EXPERT



   A person who meets the qualifications set forth in N.J.S.A. 45:15C-1 et
seq. and has been certified by the Board of Tree Experts established by the
Department of Environmental Protection.



   TREE REMOVAL



   The cutting down or other displacement of a tree, either chemically or
mechanically.



   TREE ROOT AREA



   The area under a tree extending from the trunk to the dripline.



   B.   The singular number shall include the plural, and the plural
number shall include the singular, unless the context is clearly denoted
otherwise.



§ 267-11. Permit requirements.



   A.   Street trees.



      (1)   No person or entity, directly or indirectly, without
first obtaining the approval of the Environmental Commission, shall remove or
relocate any street tree.



      (2)   No person shall be permitted to prune a street tree so
severely as to show evidence, within a period of two years, of irreparable
harm leading to the ultimate death of a tree.



      (3)   Whenever a street tree obstructs, interferes or impedes
vehicular or pedestrian traffic or in any way causes any damage to a
sidewalk, the Environmental Commission may cause the removal of the tree. All
attempts short of removal shall first be employed prior to removal of the
tree.



      (4)   Whenever possible, trees removed pursuant to this
section shall be replaced with new plantings.



      (5)   The applicant must provide three copies of the tree
removal permit application to the Code Enforcement Official and/or Building
Inspector. A copy shall also be provided to the Chairperson of the
Environmental Commission, or approved designee, who shall then decide if the
application should be reviewed by the entire Environmental Commission. In the
event that it is to be reviewed by the entire Commission, the procedure
outlined in § 267-11C(3) of this article shall be followed.



   B.   Town trees.



      (1)   No person or entity, directly or indirectly, without
first obtaining the approval of the Environmental Commission, shall remove or
relocate any Town tree.



      (2)   No person shall be permitted to prune a Town tree so
severely as to show evidence, within a period of two years, of irreparable
harm leading to the ultimate death of a tree.



      (3)   Whenever a Town tree obstructs, interferes with or
impedes vehicular or pedestrian traffic or in any way causes any damage to a
sidewalk creating an unreasonable risk of injury or damage to persons or
property, the Environmental Commission may authorize the removal of the tree.
All attempts short of removal shall first be employed prior to removal of the
tree.



      (4)   Whenever possible, trees removed trees pursuant to this
section, shall be replaced with new plantings.



      (5)   The applicant must provide three copies of the tree
removal permit application to the Code Enforcement Official and/or Building
Inspector. A copy shall also be provided to the Chairperson of the
Environmental Commission, or his/her approved designee, who shall then decide
if the application should be reviewed by the entire Environmental Commission.
In the event that it is to be reviewed by the entire Commission, the
procedure outlined in § 267-11C(3) of this article shall be followed.



   C.   Trees on new development lots.



      (1)   No person or entity, directly or indirectly, without
first obtaining a tree removal permit, shall remove any tree for purposes of
development of vacant lots in the Town of Hammonton.



      (2)   Applications for a tree removal permit, pursuant to this
section, shall include the following, and such shall be supplied when
application is made for a subdivision, site plan or planned development:



         (a)   The name(s), address and telephone number of the
property owner.



         (b)   The block and lot numbers of property on which
trees are located.



         (c)   A sketch map showing approximate locations of all
wooded areas on lots.



         (d)   A statement of the reason for tree removal.



         (e)   The flagging of trees to be removed so that they
can be identified by municipal personnel.



         (f)   The area of the entire tract.



         (g)   The location of all existing trees having a
diameter of 15 inches or greater, by species, size and condition.



         (h)   A topographical map of the property.



         (i)   A map of location and surrounding properties
approximating wooded areas.



         (j)   The location of streams and wetlands.



         (k)   The location of trees to be either removed or
planted in relation to the principal and accessory buildings, roads and
driveways, parking lots, garden areas, septic systems, etc.



         (l)   The grading plans.



      (3)   All applicants must provide three copies of the
applications to the Environmental Commission for its review prior to any
permit being issued for tree removal or development on the property or
receipt of Planning Board approval. The Environmental Commission shall
receive all pending applications seven days prior to its next scheduled
meeting for purpose of review. Any recommendations or comments shall be
forwarded by the Environmental Commission to the Planning Board and/or
Building Inspector within 30 days of the Environmental Commission meeting. In
the event that the Environmental Commission recommends disapproval of the
plan as submitted, it shall specify, in writing, the reason(s) for the
recommendation. This recommendation shall be considered and made part of the
permanent record before the Planning Board or Building Inspector.



   D.   Trees on developed lots.



      (1)   No person or entity, directly or indirectly, without
first obtaining a tree removal permit, shall be allowed to remove from a
developed lot any of the following:



         (a)   Any tree 20 inches or greater in diameter.



         (b)   Any 10 or more trees per acre or less, which trees
are seven inches or greater in diameter.



      (2)   Application for a tree removal permit under this section
shall include the following:



         (a)   The name(s), address and telephone number of the
property owner.



         (b)   The block and lot numbers of property on which
trees are located.



         (c)   A sketch map showing approximate locations of all
wooded areas on lots.



         (d)   A statement of the reason for tree removal.



         (e)   The flagging of trees to be removed so they can be
identified by municipal personnel.



      (3)   The applicant must provide three copies of the tree
removal permit application to the Code Enforcement Official and/or Building
Inspector. A copy shall also be provided to the Chairperson of the
Environmental Commission, or approved designee, who shall then decide if the
application should be reviewed by the entire Environmental Commission. In the
event that it is to be reviewed by the entire Commission, the procedure
outlined in § 267-11C(3) of this article shall be followed.



§ 267-12. Application fees.



   A.   For the issuance of a permit, the applicant shall pay to the
Town of Hammonton the following fees, based upon the application required:



      (1)   Street trees (covered under § 267-11A): No fee will be
required unless the applicant wishes to have his/her permit reviewed by a
certified tree expert either upon initial review or as an appeal to a
disapproval of the permit by the Environmental Commission. A fee of $50 will
be provided to defray the cost of the expert evaluation and analysis to be
performed by a certified tree expert, who shall issue his/her findings and
recommendation(s) to the Environmental Commission.



      (2)   Trees on new development lots (covered under §
267-11C): $50 to defray the cost of the evaluation and analysis to be
performed by a certified tree expert, who shall issue his/her findings and
recommendation(s) to the Environmental Commission.



      (3)   Trees on developed lots (covered under § 267-11D): No
fee will be required unless the applicant wishes to have his/her permit
reviewed by a certified tree expert either upon initial review or as an
appeal to a disapproval of the permit by the Environmental Commission. A fee
of $50 will be provided to defray the cost of the expert evaluation and
analysis to be performed by a certified expert, who shall issue his/her
findings and recommendations to the Environmental Commission.



      (4)   Minor development of one single-family resident where
the removal of fewer than 10 trees is required: $25.



      (5)   Any minor subdivision of two or more lots or a minor
site plan development where the removal of the trees is required: $150 plus
escrow fees.



      (6)   Any major subdivision or major site plan development
where the removal of trees is required: $500 plus escrow fees.



   B.   Fees collected under this article shall be used by the
Environmental Commission for expert tree evaluations for permit requests and
other Environmental Commission initiatives.



§ 267-13. Exceptions to permit requirement.



   The following trees may be removed without filing a permit application:



   A.   Trees directed to be removed by municipal, county or state
authority, pursuant to law. Municipal construction projects and Board of
Education construction projects are specifically not exempted.



   B.   Any tree that is an imminent threat to life or property, as
documented by photographs or certified tree experts.



   C.   Any completely dead tree, as determined by a landscape
architect, qualified professional forester or certified tree expert. It is
the responsibility of the homeowners to verify the credentials of a tree
expert. The qualified expert must be able to provide written evidence of such
evaluation upon request.



   D.   Any tree which is part of a nursery, garden center, Christmas
tree plantation orchard or cemetery.



   E.   Any tree allowed to be removed for agricultural purposes.



§ 267-14. Standards for consideration.



   The following standards and conditions shall be used by the appropriate
review:



   A.   The necessity to remove trees which pose a safety hazard to
pedestrian or vehicular traffic or threaten to cause disruption of public
services.



   B.   The necessity to remove trees which pose a safety hazard to
buildings.



   C.   The necessity to remove diseased trees; trees infested with
destructive insects liable to infect the healthy trees on adjacent property;
or trees weakened by age, storms, fire or other injury.



   D.   The necessity to observe good forestry practices, i.e., the
number of healthy trees that a given parcel of land will support, when
documented by a report prepared on behalf of the developer by a qualified
professional forester or a registered landscape architect.



   E.   The necessity for compliance with other codes, such as zoning
and subdivision regulations and health and other environmental ordinances.



   F.   The necessity to preserve a fifty-foot tree buffer zone at the
edge of a stream, wetlands or other similar bodies of water.



   G.   The necessity to preserve an adequate buffer zone of trees and
shrubs around multiple-dwelling areas, cluster developments and commercial or
industrial establishments to screen for noise, sight, aesthetic value and/or
size or height of buildings.



   H.   The necessity to prohibit tree removal from any slope if it
will contribute, in the opinion of the Planning Board, Environmental
Commission, Building Inspector or Town Engineer, to extra runoff of surface
water onto adjoining properties and erosion and silting, unless other means
approved by the Planning Board are provided to prevent runoff and erosion.



   I.   The necessity to preserve healthy trees that are special by
virtue of history, unusual size or age or are of a rare species.



   J.   Other conditions which, in the judgment of the Environmental
Commission, warrant consideration.



§ 267-15. Protection of existing trees during development.



   A.   Protection from mechanical injury.



      (1)   All trees to be retained within 25 feet of a building
site and lining ingress or egress roads, parking areas and utility easements
shall be protected from equipment damage by wrapping the trunk with a section
of snow fence or boards wired together. All exposed roots, trunks and
low-hanging branches shall be equally protected. Groups of trees may be
protected by fencing the entire area where they are located.



      (2)   Heavy-equipment operators shall be careful not to damage
existing tree trunks and roots. Feeder roots shall not be cut closer than 25
feet to tree trunks.



      (3)   Tree trunks and exposed roots damaged during
construction shall be protected from further damage by being treated
immediately by a certified tree expert.



      (4)   Tree limbs damaged during construction shall be treated
pursuant to the instruction of a tree expert.



      (5)   The operation of heavy equipment over root systems shall
be minimized in order to prevent soil compaction.



      (6)   Deciduous trees shall be given an application of a
slow-release, low-nitrogen, all-purpose fertilizer to aid in their recovery
from possible damage caused by construction operations. Such application
shall be made by a qualified professional, according to appropriate rates.



      (7)   Trees shall not be used for roping, cables, signs or
fencing. Nails and spikes shall not be driven into trees.



      (8)   The area around the base of existing trees shall be left
open to provide access for water and nutrients. Therefore, no impervious
cover and no storage of equipment, materials, debris or fill shall be allowed
within the drip line of any existing tree, except as may be necessary for a
maximum of three months if no other storage space is available.



   B.   Protection from grade change.



      (1)   Raising the grade. If the proposed grade of the land
located within six feet of a tree is to be raised more than six inches, the
developer shall install either:



         (a)   A system of gravel and drain tiles at the old soil
level opening into a dry well built around the trunk and designed for each
tree, individually fitting the contour of the land so that it drains water
away from the tree trunk; or



         (b)   A retaining wall between the existing grade and
the higher grade.



      (2)   Lowering the grade. If the proposed grade of the land
located within six feet of a tree is to be lowered by more than six inches,
the developer shall initiate one of the following methods to protect trees:



         (a)   Terracing the grade; or



         (b)   Installing a retaining wall between the existing
grade and the lower grade.



      (3)   If the proposed grade change, in the opinion of the Town
Engineer or the Environmental Commission, is too excessive to allow retention
of existing trees, the developer shall be required to replace the trees to be
removed on a one-to-four-basis (one inch of new tree diameter for every four
inches of tree diameter removed).



   C.   Protection from excavations. When digging trenches for utility
lines and other similar uses, the developer shall adhere to the following,
listed in the order of their preference:



      (1)   If possible, trenches should bypass the root area.



      (2)   If this is impossible, trenches should be tunneled under
the trees.



      (3)   If trenches must be dug past the side of a tree, the
following procedure shall be observed:



         (a)   Trenches shall be no closer to the trunk than half
the distance from the dripline.



         (b)   Cut as few roots as possible.



         (c)   If roots have to be cut, cut them as cleanly as
possible.



         (d)   Paint the cut ends with an approved tree wound
dressing.



         (e)   Backfill the trench as soon as possible, avoiding
soil compaction.



§ 267-16. Planting of new trees.



   Where it is impossible to retain existing trees or any tree with a
diameter of 10 inches or greater, the developer shall replant one inch of new
tree diameter for every four inches of existing tree diameter removed. New
trees shall have a minimum diameter of two inches and shall be guaranteed for
two growing seasons.



§ 267-17. Right to appeal.



   Any person aggrieved by an order or decision pursuant to this article
shall have the right to an administrative hearing before the Town Mayor or
his or her delegate. Such hearing shall be requested, in writing, within 10
days of the date of the order or decision to be appealed.



§ 267-18. Enforcement; violations and penalties.



   A.   The provisions of this article will be enforced by the Town
Code Enforcement Officer.



   B.   Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any
provision of this article shall be subject to one or more of the following: a
mandatory fine of not less than $300 and not more than $1,000, or a period of
community service, focused on the parks and open spaces of the Town, not to
exceed 30 hours for each offense.



   C.   Each day on which trees are removed which are not in compliance
with the standards of this article will constitute a separate violation.



   D.   For repeat offenses, the minimum mandatory fine is $500.



   E.   The fines collected in accordance with these provisions shall
be utilized by the Environmental Commission to pay for the services of a tree
expert, who shall be retained by the Town to perform periodic assessments of
the health, general condition and life expectancy of any trees to be removed
under this article. Any funds remaining shall be utilized by the members of
the Environmental Commission for future tree planting and other necessary
Environmental Commission functions, including but not limited to payment of
dues and fees for attending educational classes, including but not limited to
community forestry management classes.



CHAPTER 269.
UTILITY RESTORATION MONITORING



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton
6-28-2010 by Ord. No. 11-2010. Amendments noted where applicable.]



   § 269-1.   Legislative authority for notification by public
utilities.



   § 269-2.   Notification to Construction Code Official; site
restoration; fines.



   § 269-3.   Recordkeeping by Fire Department.



   § 269-4.   Use of fines for cost of monitoring.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Fire Department — See Ch. 25.



   Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 247.



§ 269-1. Legislative authority for notification by public utilities.



   N.J.S.A. 48:3-17a permits municipalities to adopt an ordinance
requiring public utilities to take certain action, including, but not limited
to, notifying the municipal construction code official prior to undertaking
certain work involving public utilities within the confines of a municipality.



§ 269-2. Notification to Construction Code Official; site restoration; fines.



   The Town of Hammonton wishes to adopt a chapter pursuant to the
aforesaid statute so that:



   A.   The Town of Hammonton Construction Code Official is notified
prior to the commencement of any utility work occurring within the Town of
Hammonton; and



   B.   The Town of Hammonton possess the powers to require site
restoration in the vicinity of the work in question; and



   C.   The Town of Hammonton is authorized to assess a fine if that
work has not been completed within the time limits set forth in the aforesaid
statute.



§ 269-3. Recordkeeping by Fire Department.



   The Town hereby designates the Hammonton Fire Department as the entity
responsible for monitoring and maintaining a record of those locations within
the municipality requiring pole removal, underground facility restoration,
right-of-way repair and/or debris removal and hot patch restoration, all
pursuant to subsection c of N.J.S.A. 48:3-17a.



§ 269-4. Use of fines for cost of monitoring.



   The Mayor and Council further direct that to the extent that a fine is
received pursuant to subsection e of the aforesaid statute, those funds shall
be transmitted to the Hammonton Fire Department to defray the cost of
administrative monitoring as described hereinabove.



CHAPTER 271.
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton
9-13-1971 by Ord. No. 10-1971 as Ch. 153 of the 1971 Code; amended in its
entirety 7-23-2001 by Ord. No. 26-2001. Subsequent amendments noted where
applicable.]



ARTICLE I.
General Provisions



   § 271-1.   Words and phrases defined.



   § 271-2.   Additional definitions.



   § 271-3.   Violations and penalties.



   § 271-4.   When effective.



   § 271-5.   Title.



ARTICLE II.
Parking



   § 271-6.   Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets.



   § 271-7.   Parking prohibited during certain hours on certain
streets.



   § 271-8.   Stopping or standing prohibited during certain hours on
certain streets.



   § 271-9.   Parking time limited on certain streets.



   § 271-10.   Angle parking.



   § 271-10A.   Parallel parking.



   § 271-11.   Snow emergency no parking areas designated.



   § 271-12.   Off-street parking projects.



   § 271-13.   Limited-time parking zones.



   § 271-14.   Fire lanes; fire hydrants.



ARTICLE III.
Special Purpose Parking Zones



   § 271-15.   Loading zones designated.



   § 271-16.   Taxi stands designated.



   § 271-17.   [Reserved.]



   § 271-18.   Bus stops designated.



   § 271-18.1.   Handicap parking, on-street.



   § 271-18.2.   Safe zone parking.



ARTICLE IV.
Traffic Regulations



   § 271-19.   Vehicles excluded from certain streets.



   § 271-20.   One-way streets designated.



   § 271-21.   Through streets designated.



   § 271-22.   County through streets designated.



   § 271-23.   Stop intersections designated.



   § 271-24.   Four-way stop intersections designated.



   § 271-24A.   Three-way stop intersections designated.



   § 271-25.   Yield intersections designated.



   § 271-26.   Turn prohibitions.



   § 271-27.   Speed zones along county roads.



   § 271-28.   Speed zones along Town roads.



   § 271-29.   No-passing zones.



   § 271-30.   Crosswalks.



   § 271-30A.   The Road to Excellence.



ARTICLE V.
Regulations for Vehicles in Excess of Certain Weights



   § 271-31.   Purpose.



   § 271-32.   Definitions.



   § 271-33.   Acts prohibited.



   § 271-34.   Entity or person liable/responsible.



   § 271-35.   Violations and penalties.



ARTICLE VI.
Observance of Lawful Orders and Posted Traffic Regulations.



   § 271-36.   Orders and regulations to be observed.



   § 271-37.   Violations and penalties.



ARTICLE VII.
Discourteous, Inconvenient, Annoying or Alarming Conduct from Operation or
Use of Motor Vehicle



   § 271-38.   Prohibitions; enforcement; violations and penalties.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Off-street parking — See Ch. 197.



   Taxicabs — See Ch. 257.



   Municipally owned vehicles — See Ch. 274.



Article I.
General Provisions



§ 271-1. Words and phrases defined.



   Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
herein.



§ 271-2. Additional definitions.



   For the purposes of this chapter, all streets, roads, avenues and
highways running parallel to Railroad Avenue in the Town of Hammonton shall
be considered as running in a northerly and southerly direction, and all
streets, roads, avenues and highways running parallel to Bellevue Avenue
shall be considered as running in an easterly and westerly direction.



§ 271-3. Violations and penalties.



[Amended 7-23-2001 by Ord. No. 26-2001]



   Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute,
every person convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days or both.



§ 271-4. When effective.



   This chapter shall take effect upon passage and publication as provided
by law and upon its approval by the Commissioner of Transportation of the
State of New Jersey. Editor's Note: Approved by the New Jersey Department of
Transportation February 8, 1974; resolution of consent adopted September 8,
1971 by the Atlantic County Board of Chosen Freeholders for regulations on
county roads.



§ 271-5. Title.



   This chapter may be known and cited as the "Traffic Ordinance."



Article II.
Parking



§ 271-6. Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets.



Editor's Note: Former § 271-201, Regulations not exclusive, which
immediately preceded this section, was repealed 7-9-1984 by Ord. No. 14-1984.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described below:



 

Name of Street
 
Side
 
Location




Alexander Drive

[Added 6-24-2013 by Ord. No. 012-2013]
 
Entire Cul-de-sac
 
Cul-de-sac


Anne Drive

[Added 6-24-2013 by Ord. No. 012-2013]
 
Entire Cul-de-sac
 
Cul-de-sac


Central Avenue
 
Both
 
From the westerly curbline of U.S. Route 30 to a point 300 feet west thereof


Central Avenue
 
Both
 
Third Street to Peach Street


Central Avenue

[Amended 10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 32-2008]
 
Both
 
From Vine Street in an easterly direction to the entrance of Town hall


Central Avenue (Atlantic County 542)

[Added 6-13-1988 by Ord. No. 11-1988]
 
East
 
From the south curbline of U.S. Route 30 to a point 90 feet south thereof



Cherry Street


[Added 10-28-2013 by Ord. No. 023-2013]
 
East
 
From S. Egg Harbor Road to a point 100 feet north thereof


Egg Harbor Road
 
East
 
N.J. Route 54 to Vine Street


Egg Harbor Road
 
West
 
Beginning 100 feet south of the southerly curbline of N.J. Route 54 and
extending to a point 50 feet north of the northerly curbline of N.J. Route 54


Egg Harbor Road

[Added 7-9-1984 by Ord. No. 14-1984]
 
Both
 
Bellevue Avenue to Vine Street


Eleventh Street

[Added 3-25-2002 by Ord. No. 7-2002]
 
North
 
From Kay Drive to Grand Street


Elvins Avenue

[Added 10-23-2017 by Ord. No. 021-2017]
 
North
 
Bellevue Avenue to Linda Avenue


Fourth Street

[Added 10-14-1985 by Ord. No. 14-1985]
 
East
 
From the northerly curbline of Bellevue Avenue to a point 100 yards north
thereof


Fourth Street

[Added 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 29-2002]
 
South-

west
 
From Bellevue Avenue to Pleasant Street


Front Street
 
East
 
From the northerly curbline of Twelfth Street to a point 105 feet north
thereof


Front Street
 
West
 
Beginning at a point 122 feet south of the southerly curbline of Twelfth
Street and extending 27 feet south thereof


Grand Street

[Added 11-18-2002 by Ord. No. 42-2002]
 
North
 
Between Eleventh Street and a point approximately 1,228 feet there from


Grand Street

[Added 10-14- 1985 by Ord. No. 14-1985]
 
West
 
From the northerly curbline of New Jersey Route 54 to a point 50 feet north
thereof


Grand Street

[Added 9-27-1982 by Ord. No. 19-1982]
 
West
 
Ninth Street to Tenth Street


Grape Street
 
South
 
Central Avenue to Third Street


Hammonton Lake Park entranceway

[Added 3-25-1991 by Ord. No. 4-1991]
 
Both
 
From Park Avenue to the property line of Hammonton Lake Park


Judy's Court

[Added 3-22-2010 by Ord. No. 5-2010]
 
South
 
Cul-de-sac off 11th Street (a distance of approximately 750 feet along the
southerly curb line to the point of tangency of the cul-de-sac on the north
side of same)


Leah Court

[Added 6-24-2013 by Ord. No. 012-2013]
 
Entire Cul-de-sac
 
Cul-de-sac


Linda Avenue

[Added 10-23-2017 by Ord. No. 021-2017]
 
South
 
Fairview Avenue to Elvins Avenue


Linda Avenue

[Added 10-23-2017 by Ord. No. 021-2017]
 
North
 
Sindoni Lane to Virginia Avenue


Messina Avenue

[Added 10-14-1985 by Ord. No. 14-1985; repealed 2-23-1987 by Ord. No. 2-1987]


North First Road

[Added 5-21-2007 by Ord. No. 9-2007]
 
Both
 
From the intersection of Twelfth Street to Orchard Street


North Grand Street

[Added 10-26-2010 by Ord. No. 20-2010]
 
Northeast
 
From the corner of 12th Street proceeding 50 feet on Grand Street at Block
2510 Lot 21


North Grand Street

[Added 10-26-2010 by Ord. No. 20-2010]
 
Southwest
 
From the corner of 12th Street proceeding 30 feet on Grand Street at Block
2507 Lot 7


North Liberty Street
 
East
 
Bellevue Avenue to Fairview Avenue


North Liberty Street

[Added 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 29-2002]
 
South-

west
 
From Bellevue Avenue to Pleasant Street


Orchard Street
 
North
 
From the westerly curbline of Railroad Avenue to a point 50 feet west thereof


Orchard Street
 
South
 
Tilton Street to North Egg Harbor Road


Packard Street

[Added 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 29-2002]
 
South-

west
 
From Bellevue Avenue to French Street


Park Avenue

[Added 1-27-1975 by Ord. No. 1-1975]
 
North
 
Egg Harbor Road to Central Avenue


Park Avenue

[Added 3-25-1991 by Ord. No. 4-1991]
 
South-

east
 
From Egg Harbor Road to and along the entire length of Hammonton Lake Park
property


Peach Street
 
North
 
Egg Harbor Road to Central Avenue


Peach Street
 
North
 
Third Street to Egg Harbor Road


Peach Street
 
South
 
Beginning at a point 117 feet east of the easterly curbline of Third Street
to a point 36 feet east thereof


Pleasant Street
 
South
 
Packard Street to Egg Harbor Road


Pleasant Street
 
South
 
Reading Railroad tracks to Washington Street


Pratt Street
 
South
 
Tilton Street to Egg Harbor Road


Rachel Court

[Added 6-24-2013 by Ord. No. 012-2013]
 
Entire Cul-de-sac
 
Cul-de-sac


Railroad Avenue
 
East
 
From the northerly curbline of Orchard Street to a point 50 feet north thereof


Railroad Avenue
 
East
 
From the southerly curbline of Twelfth Street to a point 80 feet south thereof


Railroad Avenue

[Added 11-28-1994 by Ord. No. 32-1994]
 
South
 
From Orchard Street to Thirteenth Street


Railroad Avenue
 
West
 
From the northerly curbline of Bellevue Avenue to a point 50 feet north
thereof


Railroad Avenue
 
West
 
From the northerly curbline of Orchard Street to a point 100 feet north
thereof


Rita Drive

[Added 5-21-2007 by Ord. No. 9-2007]
 
West side
 
Cul-de-sac off Main Road


School Lane
 
East
 
Vine Street to Bellevue Avenue


Sea Grove Avenue
 
Both
 
From the easterly curbline of U.S. Route 30 to a point 300 feet east thereof


Sea Grove Avenue

[Added 6-13-1988 by Ord. No. 11-88]
 
West
 
From the north curbline of U.S. Route 30 to a point 80 feet north thereof


Second Street
 
East
 
Cottage Avenue to Orchard Street


Second Street
 
East
 
Orchard Street to Pleasant Street


Sports Drive

[Added 7-24-2017 by Ord. No. 016-2017]
 
Inside of dirt track
 
100 Sports Drive -
Surrounding playing field


Tenth Street

[Added 1-27-1975 by Ord. No. 1-1975]
 
South
 
First Road to Grand Street


Third Street
 
East
 
From the northerly curbline of Bellevue Avenue to a point 185 feet north
thereof


Third Street
 
East
 
Peach Street to Grape Street


Third Street
 
West
 
Vine Street to Central Avenue


Tilton Street
 
East
 
Orchard Street to Pleasant Street


Twelfth Street

[Added 2-27-1995 by Ord. No. 4-1995; repealed 8-28-1995 by Ord. No. 21-1995]


Vine Street

[Amended 10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 32-2008]
 
Both
 
From Second Street to Third Street and at bend heading toward Route 54


Vine Street

[Repealed 10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 32-2008]


Vine Street

[Repealed 10-27-2008 by Ord. No. 32-2008]


Vine Street
 
North
 
Egg Harbor Road to Central Avenue


Washington Street
 
East
 
Twelfth Street to Somerby Avenue


Washington Street

[Added 5-22-1989 by Ord. No. 16-1989]
 
West
 
From the intersection with Twelfth Street to a point 200 feet south thereof




 



§ 271-7. Parking prohibited during certain hours on certain streets.



   No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified below of any
day specified below (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the
streets or parts of streets described below:



 

Name of Street
 
Side
 
Hours/Days
 
Location




Central Avenue

[Added 7-25-2011 by Ord. No. 15-2011]
 
Both
 
2:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m./

days on which Farmers Market occurs
 
From Bellevue Avenue to Vine Street


Central Avenue

[Added 3-14-1988 by Ord. No. 4-1988]
 
Both
 
8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m./

Monday through Friday
 
From Third Street to Vine Street


Messina Avenue

[Added 2-23-1987 by Ord. No. 2-1987]
 
East
 
8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m./

Monday through Friday
 
From the northerly curbline of Pleasant Street to a point 50 yards north
thereof


North Fourth Street

[Added 9-23-1991 by Ord. No. 21-1991]
 
Both
 
8:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m./

Monday through Friday
 
From the northerly curbline of Fairview Avenue to and inclusive of the entire
curb length fronting on and opposite the Hammonton Elementary School


Peach Street

[Added 10-14-1985 by Ord. No. 14-1985]
 
South
 
7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m./

school days
 
From the westerly curbline of Central Avenue to a point 75 yards east thereof


Pleasant Street

[Added 2-25-2002 by Ord. No. 1-2002]
 
Both
 
7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m./

Monday through Friday
 
From the curbline of Third Street to a point 350 feet northeasterly thereof


Third Street
 
Both
 
6:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon/

Sunday
 
From Pleasant Street to French Street


Vine Street
 
South
 
8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m./

school days
 
From Third Street to School Lane




 



§ 271-8. Stopping or standing prohibited during certain hours on certain
streets.



   No person shall stop or stand a vehicle between the hours specified
below of any day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets
or parts of streets described below:



 

Name of Street
 
Side
 
Hours
 
Location


Liberty Street

[Added 6-25-1994 by Ord. No. 21-1994]
 
Both
 
7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. Monday through Friday
 
In front of Hammonton High School



 



§ 271-9. Parking time limited on certain streets.



   No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown at
any time between the hours listed below of any day (except Sundays and public
holidays) upon any of the streets or parts of streets described below:



 

Name of Street
 
Side
 
Time Limit
 
Hours
 
Day
 
Location




Bellevue Avenue (N.J. Route 54)
 
Both
 
1 hour
 
8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
 
Mon., Tues., Wed., Thurs.
 
From the easterly curbline of Egg Harbor Road to a point 1,300 feet east
thereof


Bellevue Avenue
 
Both
 
2 hours
 
8:00 to 6:00 p.m., 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
 
Mon., Tues., Wed., Thurs., Fri., Sat.
 
Egg Harbor Road to Third Street


Central Avenue
 
Both
 
2 hours
 
8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
 
Mon., Tues., Wed., Thurs., Fri., Sat.
 
Bellevue Avenue to Vine Street


Central Avenue
 
West
 
1 hour
 
All
 
All
 
Vine Street to Third Street


East Pleasant Street

[Added 2-22-1999 by Ord. No. 1-1999]
 
North-

west
 
2 hours
 
All
 
All
 
250 feet from its intersection with Second Street


Egg Harbor Road
 
East
 
2 hours
 
8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
 
Mon., Tues., Wed., Thurs., Fri., Sat.
 
Vine Street to Bellevue Avenue


Grape Street
 
North
 
2 hours
 
6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
 
Mon. through Sat.
 
Central Avenue to Third Street


Horton Street
 
Both
 
2 hours
 
8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
 
Mon., Tues., Wed., Thurs., Fri., Sat.
 
Bellevue Avenue to Orchard Street


Peach Street

[Added 4-24-1989 by Ord. No. 8-1989]
 
Both
 
15 minutes
 
8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
 
Mon. through Fri.
 
South Third Street to rear line of Carnesale property


Peach Street

[Added 4-24-1989 by Ord. No. 8-1989]
 
East
 
3 hours
 
8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
 
Mon. through Fri.
 
Central Avenue to South Third Street


Peach Street
 
South
 
1 hour
 
All
 
All
 
Third Street to Central Avenue


Railroad Avenue
 
Both
 
2 hours
 
8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
 
Mon., Tues., Wed., Thurs., Fri., Sat.
 
Twelfth Street to Orchard Street


Second
 
Both
 
2 hours
 
8:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
 
Mon., Wed., Thurs., Fri., Sat.
 
Bellevue Avenue Street


Second Street
 
Both
 
2 hours
 
8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
 
Mon., Tues., Wed., Thurs., Fri., Sat.
 
Vine Street to Orchard Street


South Third Street

[Added 4-24-1989 by Ord. No. 8-1989]
 
Both
 
15 minutes
 
8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
 
Mon. through Fri.
 
Central Avenue to Peach Street


South Third Street

[Added 4-24-1989 by Ord. No. 8-1989]
 
North
 
3 hours
 
8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
 
Mon. through Fri.
 
Peach Street to rear line of Episcopal Church


Third Street
 
Both
 
1 hour
 
All
 
All
 
Central Avenue to Peach Street


Third Street
 
East
 
2 hours
 
8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
 
Mon., Tues., Wed., Thurs., Fri., Sat.
 
Vine Street to Orchard Street


Third Street
 
West
 
2 hours
 
6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
 
Mon. through Sat.
 
Peach Street to Grape Street


Twelfth
 
Both
 
1 hour
 
8:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
 
Mon., Wed., Thurs., Fri., Sat.
 
Railroad Avenue Street




 



§ 271-10. Angle parking.



   Only angle parking of vehicles shall be permitted on the streets or
parts of streets below which streets or parts are hereby designated for angle
parking only. Such vehicles shall park for such times and at such angles as
are marked off or otherwise designated.



 

Name of Street
 
Side
 
Time Limits
 
Hours
 
Angle of Parking
 
Location


Egg Harbor Road
 
West
 
2 hours
 
8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Mon., Tues., Wed.; Thurs.; 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
Fri., Sat.
 
30°
 
Bellevue Avenue to Orchard Street


Railroad Avenue
 
East
 
2 hours
 
8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Mon., Tues., Wed., Thurs.; 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
Fri., Sat.
 
30°
 
Twelfth Street to Orchard Street



 



§ 271-10A.  Parallel parking.



[Added 7-24-2017 by Ord. No. 016-2017]



All vehicles shall be parked parallel at all times:



 

Name of Street
 
Side
 
Location


100 Sports Drive
 
Outer side dirt track
 
Surrounding playing field



 



§ 271-11. Snow emergency no parking areas designated.



[Amended 3-21-2005 by Ord. No. 3-2005]



   A.   Parking prohibited.



      (1)   Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such
that it covers the street or highway, no vehicle shall be parked on any
street or highway within the Town of Hammonton.



      (2)   The above parking prohibition shall remain in effect
until after the snow has ceased and until the streets have been plowed
sufficiently so that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of
traffic.



   B.   Removal of vehicles. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing
in violation of this section shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the
safe and proper regulation of traffic, and any police officer may provide for
the removal of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of
removal and storage which may result from such removal, before regaining
possession of the vehicle.



   C.   Violations and penalties. Any person who shall violate any
provision of this section, for each offense, shall be subject to any or more
of the following: A fine of not more than $500; community service for up to
10 hours. Editor's Note: Former § 271-208, Parking-meter zones established,
which immediately followed this section, was repealed 7-9-1984 by Ord. No.
14-1984.



§ 271-12. Off-street parking projects.



   A.   Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:



   OFF-STREET PARKING PROJECTS



   The areas or places constructed or acquired or to be constructed or
acquired and owned and operated or to be owned and operated by the Parking
Authority of the Town of Hammonton, or operated by the Parking Authority of
the Town of Hammonton, or leased or to be leased by the Town of Hammonton or
the Parking Authority of the Town of Hammonton for the parking and storing of
motor and other vehicles or limited classes of such vehicles, and shall
include all real and personal property, driveways, roads, approaches,
structures, garages, meters, mechanical equipment and all appurtenances and
facilities either on, above or under the ground which are used or usable in
connection with such parking or storing of such vehicles, which "off-street
parking projects" shall be all premises or parts of the premises as described
in the schedule in Subsection B(2) of this section.



   PARKING SPACE



   The area or portion of any off-street parking project within which a
vehicle may be properly parked, which space shall be bounded by curb or lines
marked on the surface of the projects or by a combination of curb and lines.



   B.   Prohibited parking.



      (1)   It shall also be unlawful and a violation of this
section for any person to permit a vehicle registered in his/her name to
remain in any off-street parking project of the Town of Hammonton as
described in the schedule in Subsection B(2) below for a period of more than
two continuous hours.



      (2)   In accordance with the provisions of § 271-12B(1) and
D, vehicles may be parked within any of the following premises comprising
off-street parking projects of the Town of Hammonton. No vehicle shall be
washed, painted or repaired (except for necessary emergency repairs) while
within said off-street parking projects as hereinafter described. No
overnight parking will be allowed except for one vehicle per apartment tenant
if no parking is available on site or adjacent site of an apartment complex.
A permit will be required and a sticker or placard must be placed upon the
subject vehicle. Parking permits shall be obtained from the Hammonton Police
Department upon proof of tenancy, along with a valid New Jersey vehicle
registration, proof of insurance and a valid New Jersey driver's license.



[Amended 9-25-2000 by Ord. No. 33-2000; 2-25-2002 by Ord. No. 3-2002]



 

Name of Street
 
Location Tax Map Block and Lot Nos.
 
Dimensions
(feet)
 
Owned or Leased by Town




18 Second Street
 
Block 62, Lot 5
 
61 by 115.5
 
Leased


109 to 111 Vine Street
 
Block 66, Lots 9 and 20
 
94.1 by 127 (irregular)
 
Owned


209 Orchard Street
 
Block 58, Lot 11
 
106 by 135
 
Owned


220 Vine Street
 
Block 71, Lot 3
 
61.3 by 150
 
Owned (irregular)


226 Vine Street
 
Block 71, Lot 8
 
85.48 by 153.49
 
Owned (irregular)


Front Street (between Passmore Avenue and Line Street)
 
Block 72, Lot 7
 
42 by 480
 
Leased


North Egg Harbor Road (Orchard Street to Pleasant Street)
 
Block 20A, Lot 1
 
27 by 325.26
 
Owned


Passmore Avenue and Front Street
 
Block 69, Lot 40
 
50 by 72
 
Leased


Twelfth Street and Front Street
 
Block 69, Lot 4
 
228 by 50
 
Leased


Vine Street and Central Avenue

[Added 7-28-2003 by Ord. No. 15-2003]
 
Block 2810, Lot 14
 
158 by 67 (irregular)
 
Owned




 



   (2a)   Limited time parking.  There shall be four hour limited time
parking in the following municipal parking lots between the hours of 8:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m:



 

Name of Street
 
Block & Lot
 
Owned or Leased by Town


Vine Street
 
Block 2810, Lot 14
 
Owned


Central Avenue & Vine Street
 
Block 2811, Lot 7
 
Owned


Block 2811, Lot 9
 
Owned



 



[Added 1-27-2014 by Ord. No. 001-2014]



   (2b)   Limited time parking.  There shall be limited time parking
of three hours in the following municipal parking lot(s) at all times:



 

Name of Street
 
Block & Lot
 
Owned or Leased by Town


S. Egg Harbor Road/Vine Street
 
Block 2803, Lot 19 & 20
 
Owned



 



[Added 7-24-2017 by Ord. No. 016-2017]



   C.   The Police Department of the Town of Hammonton shall have the
right to remove from any off-street parking projects any unattended vehicle
parked or standing in any portion of an off-street parking project not
designated as a parking space, or any unattended vehicle parked or standing
in a designated parking space which has remained in said designated parking
space for a period of six hours after a summons has been issued charging a
violation of Subsections B and D of this section. When a vehicle is so
removed from an off-street parking project, the owner of said vehicle shall
pay, before being entitled to the recovery or possession of said vehicle, all
reasonable charges for towing, storage and other expenses incurred in the
removal of said vehicle.



[Amended 2-25-2002 by Ord. No. 3-2002]



   D.   Unwarranted use of parking projects. It shall be unlawful and
an offense for any person to wash, paint or repair a vehicle in an off-street
parking project; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed to
prohibit necessary emergency repairs of a vehicle.



§ 271-13. Limited-time parking zones.



[Added 7-9-1984 by Ord. No. 14-1984]



   A.   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:



   OPERATOR



   Includes every individual who shall operate a vehicle as the owner
thereof or as the agent, employee or permittee of the owner.



   PERSON



   Includes any individual, firm, partnership or corporation.



   STREET



   Any public street, avenue, road, boulevard, highway or other public
place located in the Town of Hammonton and established for the use of
vehicles.



   VEHICLE



   Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported upon a highway, except a device which is operated upon rails or
tracks.



   B.   There are hereby established "No Parking Zones" between the
hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. in the following streets and avenues in the
Town of Hammonton:



[Amended 12-17-2012 by Ord. No. 027-2012]



      (1)   Twelfth Street, from Washington Street to Railroad
Avenue, on both sides and parallel with the curb.



      (2)   Bellevue Avenue, from Egg Harbor Rd to Tilton Street, on
Both sides and parallel with the curb.



[Amended 9-25-2000 by Ord. No. 33-2000]



      (3)   Railroad Avenue, from Twelfth Street to Orchard Street,
parallel with the curb on the south side and at a thirty-degree angle to the
curb on the north side.



      (4)   Egg Harbor Road, from Bellevue Avenue to Orchard Street,
parallel to the curb on the north side and at a thirty-degree angle to the
curb on the south side.



      (5)   Second Street, from Vine Street to Orchard Street, on
both sides and parallel with the curb.



      (6)   Horton Street, from Orchard Street to Bellevue Avenue,
on both sides and parallel with the curb.



      (7)   Central Avenue, from Bellevue Avenue to Vine Street, on
both sides and parallel with the curb.



      (8)   Third Street, from Vine Street to Orchard Street, on the
north side only and parallel with the curb.



      (9)   Route 54 (Twelfth Street) from Railroad Avenue to West
End Avenue parallel with the curb.



[Added 2-25-2002 by Ord. No. 3-2002]



      (10)   Route 54 (Twelfth Street) from Front Street to Lincoln
Street parallel with the curb.



[Added 2-25-2002 by Ord. No. 3-2002]



   C.   Parking shall be prohibited on all days in said zones and
municipal parking lots between 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. No parking shall be
allowed on all days in said zones between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., with the
exception of any location where a business may be located whose hours extend
beyond 11:00 p.m. and parking shall be permitted until closing hours of
business. In said limited time parking zones, the Mayor and Council shall
cause appropriate signage to be erected, indicating the time limitations
applicable to that zone.



[Amended 9-25-2000 by Ord. No. 33-2000; 12-17-2012 by Ord. No. 027-2012]



   D.   [Reserved.]



[Repealed 12-17-2012 by Ord. No. 027-2012]



   E.   It shall be the duty of police officers of the Town of
Hammonton, acting in accordance with instructions issued by the Chief of
Police, to issue appropriate citations for the violation of the provisions of
§ 271-13 of the Code of the Town of Hammonton.



   F.   The fine for the violation of any of the provisions of §
271-13 of the Code of the Town of Hammonton shall be $20.



[Amended 9-25-2000 by Ord. No. 33-2000]



§ 271-14. Fire lanes; fire hydrants.



[Added 3-25-1991 by Ord. No. 9-1991]



   In accordance with the provisions of the New Jersey State Fire
Prevention Code, Section F-311.0 et seq., no person shall stop, stand or park
a vehicle at any time upon any street, part of a street, designated a fire
lane on public or private property and within 10 feet of a fire hydrant or
Fire Department connection with the Town of Hammonton.



Article III.
Special Purpose Parking Zones



§ 271-15. Loading zones designated.



   The locations described below are hereby designated as "loading zones."



 

Name of Street
 

Time

 
Side
 
Location


Horton Street

[Added 2-28-2005 by Ord. No. 1-2005]
 

7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.

 
South-west
 
Starting at a point 65 feet northwest from the southeast curbline of Bellevue
Avenue, State Route 54, and extending for a distance of 55 feet northwest
thereof


Second Street

[Added 2-28-2005 by Ord. No. 1-2005]
 

7:00 a.m.

 
South-west
 
Starting at a point 25 feet southeast from the southeast curbline of Bellevue
Avenue, State Route 54, and extending for a distance of 50 feet southeast
thereof



 



§ 271-16. Taxi stands designated.



   The locations described below are hereby designated as "taxi stands."



 

Street
 
Location
 
Hours



(Reserved)




 



§ 271-17. [Reserved.]



[Repealed 12-17-2012 by Ord. No. 027-2012]



§ 271-18. Bus stops designated.



   The locations below are hereby designated as "bus stops."



   A.   Along South Egg Harbor Road. Eastbound on the southerly side
thereof at Bellevue Avenue (far side):



      (1)   Beginning at 100 feet east of the easterly curbline of
Bellevue Avenue and extending 135 feet easterly thereof.



   B.   Along South Egg Harbor Road. Westbound on the northerly side
thereof at Vine Street (far side):



      (1)   Beginning at the northerly curbline of Vine Street and
extending 115 feet northerly thereof.



§ 271-18.1. Handicap parking, on-street.



Editor's Note: See also Ch. 197, Art. II, Handicap Parking Zones.



[Added 2-25-2002 by Ord. No. 2-2002]



   Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-197(3)c, there are hereby designated
restricted parking spaces for use by persons who have been issued special
vehicle identification cards and/or license plates by the Division of Motor
Vehicles, pursuant to the provisions of Section 2 of Chapter 280 of the Laws
of 1949 (N.J.S.A. 39:4-205) and Section 1 of Chapter 202 of the Laws of 1977
(N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.5) on the following streets and the designated locations:



   A.   Southwest of Pleasant Street nearest the intersection of Third
Street shall be located two handicap parking spaces properly designated and
marked with signage and pavement markings in accordance with the statutes and
regulations of the State of New Jersey.



   B.   544 South Third Street shall be located one bus size handicap
parking space properly designated and marked with signage in accordance with
the statutes and regulations of the State of New Jersey to accommodate
handicap bus daily pick-up and drop-off of disabled resident.



   [Added 7-24-2017 by Ord. No. 016-2017]



§ 271-18.2.  Safe zone parking.



[Added 11-21-2016 by Ord. No. 021-2016]



   There shall be designated two parking places at the parking lot located
on the corner of Vine Street and Central Avenue across the street from the
Town Hall Municipal Building designated as safe zone parking places. The
parking places will be restricted to 15 minute parking for divorced/separated
parents who need to meet and exchange their children per their individual
custody contracts.



Article IV.
Traffic Regulations



§ 271-19. Vehicles excluded from certain streets.



[Amended 12-27-1976 by Ord. No. 23-1976; 7-14-1980 by Ord. No. 16-1980]



   Trucks over weight limits provided below are hereby excluded from the
following described streets or parts of streets, except for the pickup and
delivery of materials on such streets:



 

Name of Street
 

Weight Limit



(tons)

 
Location




Basin Road
 

4

 
Basin Road to White Horse Pike (Route 30)


Berwyn Avenue
 

4

 
Broadway to Woodlawn Avenue


East Pleasant Street
 

4

 
Fourth Street to Liberty Street


Eighth Street

[Added 4-22-2002 by Ord. No. 15-2002]
 

4

 
Entire length


Francis Street
 

4

 
Entire length


Grape Street
 

4

 
Central Avenue to Liberty Street


Lakeview Avenue
 

4

 
Moss Mill Road to South White Horse Pike


Liberty Street
 

4

 
Entire length


Line Street
 

4

 
South First Road to Egg Harbor Road


Marlyn Avenue
 

4

 
Entire length


Oak Road
 

4

 
Union Road to White Horse Pike (Route 30)


Park Avenue
 

4

 
Egg Harbor Road to Central Avenue


Peach Street
 

4

 
Central Avenue to Liberty Street


Pine Road
 

4

 
Union Road to White Horse Pike (Route 30)


Pleasant Street
 

4

 
Entire length


Second Road
 

15

 
Chew Road to Twelfth Street (NJ Route 54)


Union Road
 

4

 
U.S. Route 206 to boundary line between the Town of Hammonton and the
Township of Winslow


Valley Avenue
 

4

 
Entire length


Woodlawn Avenue
 

4

 
Entire length




 



§ 271-20. One-way streets designated.



   The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby
designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated:



 

Name of Street
 
Direction of Travel
 
Limits




Boyer Avenue

[Added 3-24-1997 by Ord. No. 2-1997]
 
North-bound
 
Between the northerly curbline of Route 30 and the southerly curbline of Moss
Mill Road (CR561)


Eighth Street

[Added 3-24-1997 by Ord. No. 2-1997; repealed 7-25-2005 by Ord. No. 27-2005]


Front Street
 
South-bound
 
Between Twelfth Street (N.J. Route 54) and Passmore Avenue


Horton Street
 
North-bound
 
Between Bellevue Avenue and Pleasant Street


North Liberty Street
 
North-bound
 
Between Bellevue Avenue and Pleasant Street


Orchard Street
 
East-bound
 
Between Egg Harbor Road and Tilton Street


Peach Street
 
South-bound
 
Between Packard Street and Central Avenue


Pleasant Street
 
East-bound
 
Between Third Street and North Packard Street


Railroad Avenue
 
North-bound
 
Between Twelfth Street (N.J. Route 54) and West Orchard Street


School Lane
 
North-bound
 
Between South Third Street and Bellevue Avenue


Second Street
 
North-bound
 
Between Bellevue Avenue (N.J. Route 54) and Pleasant Street


Second Street
 
South-bound
 
Between Bellevue Avenue (N.J. Route 54) and Peach Street


Vine Street
 
East-bound
 
Between a point 252 feet east of the easterly curbline of South Third Street
and School Lane




 



§ 271-21. Through streets designated.



   Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the following described streets or parts
of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be
installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the through
street, except where "Yield Right-of-Way" signs are provided for in the
designations.



 

Name of Street
 
Location




Egg Harbor Road
 
Between Bellevue Avenue (N.J. Route 54) and Fairview Avenue


Eleventh Street

[Added 1-27-1975 by Ord. No. 1-1975]
 
Between Egg Harbor Road and First Road


Fifteenth Street
 
Between Second Road and Egg Harbor Road


First Road
 
Between N.J. Route 54 and Chew Road


Fourth Avenue
 
Between Bellevue Avenue (N.J. Route 54) and Fairview Avenue


Grand Street

[Added 1-27-1975 by Ord. No. 1-1975]
 
Between Passmore Avenue and Eleventh Street


Grand Avenue
 
Between Twelfth Street (N.J. Route 54) and Thirteenth Street


Lakeview Avenue
 
Between Moss Mill Road and U.S. Route 30


Liberty Street
 
Between Broadway and Bellevue Avenue (N.J. Route 54)


Line Street

[Added 1-27-1975 by Ord. No. 1-1975]
 
Between Egg Harbor Road and Grand Street


Line Street

[Added 1-27-1975 by Ord. No. 1-1975]
 
Between Grand Street and First Road


Orchard Street
 
Between Grand Avenue and First Road


Packard Street
 
Between Bellevue Avenue (N.J. Route 54) and Fairview Avenue


Park Avenue
 
Between Egg Harbor Road and Central Avenue


Passmore Avenue
 
Between First Road and Egg Harbor Road


Pleasant Avenue
 
Between Grand Avenue and First Road


Second Road
 
Between Chew Road and Twelfth Street (N.J. Route 54)


Second Road
 
Between Twelfth Street and the Town of Hammonton-Township of Winslow
Corporate Line


Second Street
 
Between Bellevue Avenue (N.J. Route 54) and Fairview Avenue


Second Street
 
Between Cherry Street and Vine Street


Third Street
 
Between Bellevue Avenue (N.J. Route 54) and Central Avenue


Third Street
 
Between Central Avenue and Chestnut Street


Valley Avenue
 
Between Broadway and Bellevue Avenue (N.J. Route 54)


Valley Avenue
 
Between Central Avenue and Broadway


Washington Street
 
Between Orchard Street and Fairview Avenue


West End Avenue
 
Between Twelfth Street (N.J. Route 54) and Thirteenth Street


Woodlawn Avenue
 
Between Liberty Street and U.S. Route 30




 



§ 271-22. County through streets designated.



   Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, under the authority
and direction of, and subject to the limitations of a certain resolution of
the Atlantic County Board of Freeholders adopted March 12, 1958, the
following Atlantic County roads and streets as described and designated are
hereby designated as "through streets." Stop signs shall be installed on all
intersecting roadways pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-141 as amended.



 

Name of County Street or Road
 
Designation and Description




Broadway
 
From Central Avenue to U.S. Route 30


Central Avenue
 
From N.J. Route 54 (Bellevue Ave.) to U.S. Route 30


Egg Harbor Road
 
From and including where it intersects with Moss Mill Road to N.J. Route 54
(Bellevue Avenue)


Egg Harbor Road
 
From and including where it intersects Moss Mill Road to U.S. Route 30


Egg Harbor Road
 
From Thirteenth Street and Fairview Avenue to northern Hammonton Town line
(Hammonton-Camden County line)


Fairview Avenue
 
From and including where it intersects with Egg Harbor Road and Railroad
Avenue to Third Street; and from Third Street to U.S. Route 30


Main Road
 
From Pleasant Mills Road to U.S. Route 30


Middle Road
 
From U.S. Route 30 to U.S. Route 206


North Third Street and Wilsey Mill Road
 
From N.J. Route 54 (Bellevue Avenue) to the northern Town line


Pleasant Mills Road
 
From U.S. Route 30 and eastern Hammonton Town line (Hammonton-Mullica
Township line)


Railroad Avenue
 
From Orchard Street to Thirteenth Street and Railroad Avenue


Thirteenth Street
 
From and including where it intersects with Chew Road to and including where
it intersects Egg Harbor Road and Railroad Avenue




 



§ 271-23. Stop intersections designated.



   Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the following are
hereby designated as "stop intersections." "Stop" signs shall be installed as
provided therein.



 

Intersection
 
Stop Sign on




Cherry Street and Second Street
 
Second Street


Chestnut Street and Third Street
 
Third Street


East Lane and Lake Shore Drive

[Added 2-22-1988 by Ord. No. 2-1988]
 
East Lane


Grand Street and Ninth Street

[Added 1-27-1975 by Ord. No. 1-1975]
 
Grand Street


Horton Street and Orchard Street
 
Orchard Street


Jacobs Street and Madison Avenue

[Added 1-27-1975 by Ord. No. 1-1975]
 
Jacobs Street


Jacobs Street and Monroe Avenue

[Added 1-27-1975 by Ord. No. 1-1975]
 
Jacobs Street


Jacobs Street and West End Avenue

[Added 1-27-1975 by Ord. No. 1-1975]
 
Jacobs Street


Lake Shore Drive and Kings Lane

[Added 2-22-1988 by Ord. No. 2-1988]
 
Kings Lane


Liberty Street and Pleasant Street
 
Pleasant Street


Madison Street and Wilbur Avenue

[Added 1-27-1975 by Ord. No. 1-1975]
 
Madison Street


Monroe Avenue and Wilbur Avenue

[Added 1-27-1975 by Ord. No. 1-1975]
 
Monroe Avenue


Moss View Avenue and Mill Run Avenue

[Added 2-22-1988 by Ord. No. 2-1988]
 
Moss View Avenue


Ninth Street and Grand Street

[Added 7-24-1989 by Ord. No. 23-1989]
 
Facing traffic on Grand Street on either side of Ninth Street


Orchard Street and Washington Street
 
Washington Street


Peach Street and Packard Street
 
Packard Street


Pleasant Street and Horton Street
 
Horton Street


Poplar Street and Moss View Drive

[Added 2-22-1988 by Ord. No. 2-1988]
 
Poplar Avenue


Pratt Street and Tilton Street
 
Tilton Street


Thirteenth Street and First Road
 
First Road


Vine Street and Second Street
 
Second Street




 



§ 271-24. Four-way stop intersections designated.



[Added 8-26-1991 by Ord. No. 16-1991; amended 12-9-1991 by Ord. No. 29-1991]



   Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the following
described are hereby designated as "four-way stop intersections." "Stop"
signs shall be installed as provided therein.



 

Intersection
 
Location of Stop Sign




East Pleasant Street and Tilton Street
 
All intersection corners


Fourteenth Street and First Road

[Added 3-8-1993 by Ord. No. 4-1993]
 
All intersection corners


Grand Street and Pleasant Street

[Added 7-27-1992 by Ord. No. 26-1992]
 
All intersection corners


Grape Street and Valley Avenue
 
All intersection corners


Line Street and Grand Street
 
All intersection corners


Orchard Street and West End Avenue

[Added 12-14-1992 by Ord. No. 36-1992]
 
All intersection corners


Passmore Avenue and Grand Street
 
All intersection corners


Peach Street and Packard Street
 
All intersection corners


Pine Road and Union Road
 
All intersection corners


Pleasant Street and Fourth Street
 
All intersection corners


Pratt Street and Packard Street

[Added 7-27-1992 by Ord. No. 26-1992]
 
All intersection corners


Third Street and Peach Street
 
All intersection corners


Thirteenth Street and North 1st Road
 
All intersection corners




 



§ 271-24A. Three-way stop intersections designated. 



[Added 8-24-2015 by Ord. No. 011-2015]



 

Intersection


Packard Street and Grape Street



 



[Added 8-24-2015 by Ord. No. 011-2015]



§ 271-25. Yield intersections designated.



   Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the following
intersections are hereby designated as "yield intersections." Yield
Right-of-Way" signs shall be installed as provided herein.



 

Intersection
 
Yield Sign on



(Reserved)




 



§ 271-26. Turn prohibitions.



   A.   Left turn prohibited.



 

Intersection
 
Turn Prohibited
 
Movement Prohibited


Driveway at Block 403, Lot 1

[Added 9-26-2005 by Ord. No. 36-2005]
 
Left turn
 
Left turns entering and exiting the proposed Route 54 driveway access for the
property at Block 403, Lot 1


Easterly intersection of Rt. 542 and US Rt. 30

[Added 3-18-2013 by Ord. No. 002-2013]
 
 
 
Westbound lane of Rt. 542 reserved for right turn only


4th Street and Warren E. Sooy School

[Added 2-26-2018 by Ord. No. 006-2018]
 
Left turn from all exits of school
 
Left turn onto 4th Street


4th Street and Road to Excellence

[Added 2-26-2018 by Ord. No. 006-2018]
 
Left turn
 
Left turn onto 4th Street



 



   B.   Right turns only. No person shall make a turn at the location
listed below other than a right turn movement:



[Added 7-25-2005 by Ord. No. 27-2005]



 


Intersection

 

Movement Permitted



Route US 30 and 8th Street
 
Northbound from 8th Street to eastbound onto Route US 30



 



§ 271-27. Speed zones along county roads.



   Speed limits are hereby established for the roadways listed below.
Signs shall be installed in accordance with the appropriate Department of
Transportation Letter of Authorization.



 

Name of Road
 
Zone Description
 

Maximum Speed Limit (mph)





13th Street (a/k/a) County Road 78 from Chew Road to Pennsylvania Reading
Seashore Lines Railroad Grade Crossing
 
(1) From Second Road to 1,500 feet south of center of 1st Road
 

45



 
(2) From 500 feet south of center of 1st Road to Pennsylvania Reading
Seashore Lines Railroad Grade Crossing
 

40



Central Avenue (County Road 542 or County Road 11)
 
(1) Bellevue Avenue to center of Peach Street
 

25



 
(2) Center of Peach Street to center of Maple Street
 

35



 
(3) Center of Maple Street to center of Park Avenue
 

40



 
(4) Center of Park Avenue to U.S. Route 30
 

45



Chew Road (County Road 559)
 
(1) Second Road to 1,350 feet north of the center of 13th Street
 

40



 
(2) 1,350 feet north of the center of 13th Street to 15th Street
 

50



Egg Harbor Road (all County Road 2 and County Road 561 from Moss Mill Road to
Bellevue Avenue
 
(1) U.S. Route 30 to 600 feet north of center of Weymouth Road
 

40



 
(2) 600 feet north of center of Weymouth Road to center of Walmer Street
 

50



 
(3) Center of Walmer Street to center of Grape Street
 

40



 
(4) Center of Grape Street to Fairview Avenue
 

35



 
(5) Fairview Avenue to northerly Hammonton Town line
 

50



Fairview Avenue (County Road 78)
 
(1) From Pennsylvania Reading Seashore Lines Railroad Grade Crossing to
center line of Liberty Street (except for Zone 3)
 

40



 
(2) From Liberty Street to U.S. Route 30 (except for Zone 3)
 

45



 
(3) In the Hammonton Junior-Senior High School Zone, during recess or while
children are going to or leaving school, during opening or closing hours
 

30



First Road (County Road 88)
 
(1) Mays Landing to center of 12th Street
 

50



 
(2) Center of 12th Street to center of 13th Street
 

40



 
(3) Center of 13th Street to 15th Street
 

45



 
(4) Between U.S. Route 54 and 15th Street

[Added 2-13-1989 by Ord. No. 4-1989; amended 12-9-1991 by Ord. No. 26-1991]
 

35



Railroad Avenue (County Road 561 or County Road 28)
 
Orchard Street to Fairview Avenue
 

40



Second Road (County Road 559)
 
Weymouth Road (in Hamilton Township) to Chew Road
 

50





 



§ 271-28. Speed zones along Town roads.



   Speed limits are hereby established for the roadways listed below.
Signs shall be installed in accordance with the appropriate Department of
Transportation Letter of Authorization.



 

Name of Road
 
Zone Description
 

Maximum Speed Limit  (mph)





Academy Drive

[Added 6-21-1999 by Ord. No. 13-1999]
 
Entire length
 

35



Basin Road

[Added 12-11-2017 by Ord. No. 024-2017]
 
Entire length
 

35



Eighth Street

[Added 6-22-1992 by Ord. No. 24-1992]
 
Entire length
 

35



Eleventh Street

[Added 3-25-1991 by Ord. No. 5-1991]
 
From the center of First Road to the center of Second Road
 

35



Fifteenth Street

[Added 10-28-1996 by Ord. No. 14-1996]
 
Between the intersection of County Road 561 and the intersection of 14th
Street
 

25



First Road

[Added 3-25-1991 by Ord. No. 5-1991]
 
From the center of U.S. Route 54 to the center of Fifteenth Street
 

35



Fourteenth Street

[Added 10-28-1996 by Ord. No. 14-1996]
 
Between the intersection with Egg Harbor Road to the town's boundary line
 

25



Francis Street

[Added 7-23-2012 by Ord. No. 020-2012]
 
Between North Third Street and Egg Harbor Road
 

25



Jerry Lane

[Added 4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 7-2012]
 
Entire length
 

25



Lahn Lane

[Added 4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 7-2012]
 
Entire length
 

25



Lakeview Drive

[Added 3-9-1987 by Ord. No. 4-1987; amended 12-19-1991 by Ord. No. 27-1991]
 
Entire length
 

25



Myrtle Street

[Added 11-19-2001 by Ord. No. 34-2001]
 
Entire length
 

35



Ninth Street

[Added 2-26-2001 by Ord. No. 2-2001]
 
Between South Second Road and South Egg Harbor Road
 

35



Old Forks Road

[Added 7-28-2003 by Ord. No. 14-2003]
 
(1) Between Third Street and Route U.S. 30, except for zone (2)
 

40



 
(2) Hammonton High School Zone, during recess, while the presence of children
is clearly visible from the roadway or while children are going to or leaving
school, during opening or closing hours
 

30



Old Forks Road

[Added 12-11-2017 by Ord. No. 024-2017]
 
Entire length
 

25



Pine Road

[Added 12-14-1992 by Ord. No. 37-1992]
 
Entire length
 

35



Pleasant Street

[Added 12-14-1992 by Ord. No. 37-1992]
 
From North Third Street to Tilton Street
 

15



Seventh Street

[Added 10-22-2007 by Ord. No. 32-2007]
 
From Moss Mill Road to Boyer Avenue Recreation Complex
 

15



Tenth Street

[Added 6-25-2018 by Ord. No. 024-2018]
 
Between Chew Road and First Road
 

25



Third Street
 
(1) Chestnut Street to the center of Peach Street
 

30



 
(2) From the center of Peach Street to the center of Bellevue Avenue
 

25



 
(3) From the center of Bellevue Avenue to the center of Fairview Avenue
 

30



 
(3A) In the St. Joseph's School Zone, during recess or while children are
going to or leaving school, during opening or closing hours
 

25



 
(4) From the center of Fairview Avenue to the center of Francis Street
 

45



 
(5) From the center of Francis Street to the northern Town line
 

50



Thirteenth Street

[Added 10-22-1984 by Ord. No. 19-1984]
 
From Second Road to Chews Road
 

40



Walnut Street

[Added 6-25-2012 by Ord. No. 15-2012]
 
Between N. Third St. and Old Forks Rd.
 

25



Wilsey Mill Road

[Added 6-22-1992 by Ord. No. 24-1992]
 
Entire length
 

35





 



§ 271-29. No-passing zones.



[Added 10-9-1989 by Ord. No. 31-1989]



   A.   Purpose. It is deemed to be in the public interest and
necessary to protect the public health and safety of the residents of the
Town of Hammonton and those individuals traversing within said Town that the
no-passing zone study conducted by New Jersey Department of Transportation
along certain designated highways in the Town of Hammonton be implemented and
put in place.



   B.   No-passing zones designated. It is hereby ordained that the
streets or parts of streets described below are hereby designated as
no-passing zones, and the proper municipal officials are hereby authorized,
empowered and directed to do all things necessary for the marking of said
roadway consistent with Department of Transportation regulations in order to
give notice that such area is a no-passing zone.



 

Name of Street
 
Direction
 
Location




Fifteenth Street

[Added 5-21-2007 by Ord. No. 10-2007]
 
Both
 
From Second Road to Chew Road County Route 559


Fourteenth Street

[Added 5-21-2007 by Ord. No. 10-2007]
 
Both
 
From Mays Land-Blue Anchor Road County Route Spur 561 to Egg Harbor Road
County Route 561


Grand Street

[Added 8-22-1994 by Ord. No. 23-1994]
 
Both
 
Entire length


Lakeview Drive

[Added 9-14-1992 by Ord. No. 30-1992]
 
Both
 
From Egg Harbor Road, 2,750 feet


Line Street
 
Both
 
From South First Road to Egg Harbor Road


Ninth Street

[Added 4-12-1993 by Ord. No. 6-1993]
 
Both
 
From Moss Mill Road to Grand Street


Old Forks Road

[Added 11-18-2002 by Ord. No. 41-2002]
 
Both
 
From Third Street to U.S. Route 30 (White Horse Pike)


Old Forks Road

[Added 10-23-1989 by Ord. No. 36-1989]
 
Northeast- erly
 
From Camden County Line to White Horse Pike


Orchard Street
 
Both
 
From North First Road to the railroad crossing


Passmore Avenue
 
Both
 
From South First Road to Egg Harbor Road


Ranere Avenue (Fifteenth Street)
 
Both
 
From the railroad crossing to Wilsey Mill Road (County Route 724)


Second Road

[Added 5-21-2007 by Ord. No. 10-2007]
 
Both
 
From Chew Road County Route 559 to Fifteenth Street


Third Street

[Added 2-28-2005 by Ord. No. 1-2005]
 
Both
 
From Central Avenue County Route 542 to Peach Street


Thirteenth Street

[Added 5-21-2007 by Ord. No. 10-2007]
 
Both
 
From Second Road to Chew Road County Route 559




 



§ 271-30. Crosswalks.



[Added 8-28-1995 by Ord. No. 19-1995]



   A.   Purpose. Pedestrian safety is a major concern to the governing
body of the Town of Hammonton. To promote an atmosphere where individuals can
traverse by foot in the downtown area of the Town of Hammonton, the governing
body of Hammonton is creating crosswalks. These crosswalks will also serve to
promote ease of shopping in downtown Hammonton.



   B.   Crosswalks designated. The locations described below are hereby
designated as "crosswalks":



[Added 8-28-1995 by Ord. No. 19-1995]



 

Name of Street
 

Crossing Type

 
Location


Bellevue Avenue
 
 
At the intersection of Central Avenue and Bellevue Avenue


Bellevue Avenue
 
 
At the intersection of Second Street and Bellevue Avenue


Central Avenue (County Route 542)

[Added 6-25-2007 by Ord. No. 19-2007]
 
Pedestrian
 
Beginning at a point 290 feet west of the westerly curbline of U.S. Route 30
(White Horse Pike) and extending to a point 10 feet westerly there from


Liberty Street

[Added 1-21-2008 by Ord. No. 1-2008]
 
Pedestrian
 
940 feet (more or less) in a southwesterly direction from the center line of
Fairview Avenue


Peach Street

[Added 1-21-2008 by Ord. No. 1-2008]
 
Pedestrian
 
Beginning at St. Joseph's High School in an easterly direction to the Masonic
Building


Vine Street

[Added 7-28-2008 by Ord. No. 25-2008]
 
Pedestrian
 
From the center line of Central Avenue (County Route 542) and extending to a
point 10 feet southwesterly there from



 



   C.   Signage. At each crosswalk signage shall be placed warning the
motoring public that the area is used by pedestrians and that the motoring
public is required to yield to all pedestrian traffic.



§ 271-30A.   The Road to Excellence. 



[Added 4-14-2014 by Ord. No. 008-2014]



   A.   The provisions of Title 39 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated
be and hereby are made applicable to vehicular traffic utilizing The Road to
Excellence; and



   B.   The Hammonton Police Department and all other duly appointed
law enforcement entities shall have the authority to enforce any and all
provisions of Title 39 of the New Jersey Statutes to those vehicles and/or
individuals making use of said roadway; and



   C.   The Town of Hammonton shall, by this action, assume no
responsibility for making any expenditure for physical improvements to the
roadway or adjacent areas including, but not limited to, signage
installation; and



   D.   The Town of Hammonton shall have no responsibility for the
maintenance of said roadway; and



   E.   In the event any claim is made against the Town of Hammonton by
reason of the action taken pursuant to this section, the HBOE shall indemnify
and hold the governing body harmless from any costs or expenses incurred
thereby.



Article V.
Regulations for Vehicles in Excess of Certain Weights



[Added 5-27-2003 by Ord. No. 8-2003]



§ 271-31. Purpose.



   The purpose of this article is to promote the public health, safety and
welfare by prohibiting the parking of certain vehicles on streets and public
rights-of-way which, because of the size of the vehicle, obscures vision and
hinders the safe movement of traffic along the street or right-of-way.



§ 271-32. Definitions.



   For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:



   OWNER OF TRAILER/RECREATIONAL VEHICLE



   The owner of the trailer or recreational vehicle, as defined herein
above, shall be, in the case of registered vehicles or trailers, the owner as
it appears on the registration and/or title of said vehicle or trailer as
that is issued through the New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles and/or the
Division of Motor Vehicles of any other state.



   PARKING



   The standing or waiting on a street, road or highway of a vehicle not
actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers or merchandise,
unless in abeyance to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES OR CAMPER



   This shall include any vehicle generally known as a recreational
vehicle or as a camper, whether or not it is required to be registered by the
New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles and/or the Division of Motor Vehicles
of any other state. It shall include all such recreational vehicles or
campers with or without mode power and shall include, without limitation,
recreational vehicles and campers with engines or the capacity to travel and
move without being towed by another vehicle.



   STANDARD OF 7,000 POUNDS



   For the purpose of this Ordinance, any vehicle whose registered gross
weight is 7,000 pounds or greater shall be subject to the terms and
provisions of this Ordinance.



   STORE OR STORAGE



   To keep or permit a vehicle, trailer, camper or recreational vehicle to
be situated on a street, avenue, terrace, road or right-of-way or any part
thereof, in a stationary position for a period of time in excess of 30
minutes or such time as is reasonably necessary under the circumstances for
the loading and unloading or cleaning of said vehicle, trailer, camper or
recreational vehicle.



   STREET



   Any street, avenue, terrace, road or public right-of-way contained
within the geographic limits of the Town of Hammonton.



   TRAILER



   A separate vehicle, not driven or propelled by its own power, but drawn
by some independent power. "Trailer" shall mean every vehicle designed
carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle. It shall
include and not be limited to campers, camping popup-trailers, boat trailers,
trailers used in the transportation of any and all property or equipment
including, without limitation, motorcycles, jet skis, lawn-cutting equipment,
and construction equipment. It shall include but not be limited to trailers
which are open and those which are completely enclosed and shall include any
trailer regardless of the gross weight vehicle and/or carrying capacity of
same and shall include all such trailers whether or not they are required to
be or are in fact registered as a motor vehicle and/or trailer through the
State of New Jersey or any other state.



   VEHICLES



   Vehicles shall include but not be limited to, cars, trucks, vans, buses
and trailers.



§ 271-33. Acts prohibited.



   A.   All vehicles with a gross weight of 7,000 pounds or more
including cars, trucks, vans, trailers, buses or any sort, nature or type,
shall not be permitted to park on any street, avenue, terrace, road or public
right-of-way, or any portion thereof. Moreover, any vehicle over 7,000 pounds
shall not be permitted to park on any such street or terrace except for such
reasonable amount of time for the pickup or delivery of persona or materials
on such street, avenue, terrace, road or public right-of-way, or any portion
thereof.



   B.   No trailer, camper or recreational vehicle shall be permitted
to be parked or stored on any street, avenue, terrace, road or public
right-of-way, or any portion thereof. The registered owner of said trailer,
camper or recreational vehicle or vehicles of 7,000 pounds or more to the
extent they are registered or by law are required to be registered, shall be
responsible for any violation of this article. In those instances where
vehicles, trailers, campers or recreational vehicles are not registered and
are not by law required, in that instance the actual owner of the trailer,
camper or recreational vehicle and/or the individual who caused it to be
parked or stored shall be responsible for violations of this article.



§ 271-34. Entity or person liable/responsible.



   No individual shall permit any vehicle with a gross weight of 7,000
pounds or more, or trailer, camper or recreational vehicle owned by them, as
defined herein, to park and/or be stored on any street, avenue, terrace, road
or public right-of-way, or any portion thereof in the Town of Hammonton.



§ 271-35. Violations and penalties.



   Violations of this article, unless another penalty is expressly
provided by New Jersey Statutes, every person convicted of a violation of a
provision of this chapter or any supplement thereto shall be liable to a
penalty for a first offense of not more than $50 or imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 15 days, or both, and for a second offense of not more than
$100 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.



Article VI.
Observance of Lawful Orders and Posted Traffic Regulations.



[Added 12-15-2003 by Ord. No. 31-2003]



§ 271-36. Orders and regulations to be observed.



   No person shall disobey or fail to follow the order, direction or other
signal of any police officer, New Jersey State Trooper or other properly
authorized law enforcement official within the Town; nor shall any person
disobey or fail to follow the traffic instruction on any properly posted
traffic control device or traffic signal within the Town.



§ 271-37. Violations and penalties.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction, be punished for each offense by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both.



Article VII.
Discourteous, Inconvenient, Annoying or Alarming Conduct from Operation or
Use of Motor Vehicle



[Added 5-19-2008 by Ord. No. 18-2008]



§ 271-38. Prohibitions; enforcement; violations and penalties.



   A.   No person shall operate or use any motor vehicle in such a
fashion which is discourteous and/or which causes public inconvenience,
annoyance or alarm to other operators of motor vehicles and/or pedestrians
and/or residents within the confines of the Town of Hammonton.



   B.   Any officer or member of the Hammonton Police Department shall
have the power and authority to arrest, without warrant, any person found by
him/her violating any of the provisions of this article or committing any of
the acts herein specifically or generally set forth.



   C.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction, be punished for each offense by a fine not to exceed
$1,000 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both.



   D.   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this
article is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutionally erroneous and/or
incorrect, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of this article.



   E.   All ordinances or parts of ordinances of the Town of Hammonton,
heretofore adopted, which are inconsistent with any of the terms and
provisions of this article are hereby repealed to the extent of any
inconsistency.



   F.   This article shall take effect immediately upon its final
passage and publication as provided by law.



CHAPTER 273.
VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Town of Hammonton 7-26-2004
by Ord. No. 17-2004. Amendments noted where applicable.]



   § 273-1.   Definitions.



   § 273-2.   Operation on public property.



   § 273-3.   Operation on private property.



   § 273-4.   Noise.



   § 273-5.   Operation of motor-driven vehicles in careless, reckless
or negligent manner.



   § 273-6.   Use by public employees.



   § 273-7.   Violations by persons under 18 years of age.



   § 273-8.   Violations and penalties.



   § 273-9.   Engine braking prohibited.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 200.



   Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 271.



§ 273-1. Definitions.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:



   MOTOR-DRIVEN VEHICLES



   Includes but is not limited to two- or four-wheeled motor vehicles such
as motor scooters, trail bikes, go-carts, swamp buggies, go-boards and
snowmobiles and any other motor-driven vehicle not registered under Title 39,
Motor Vehicles and Traffic Regulations of the New Jersey Statutes, as amended.



   PUBLIC PROPERTY



   Includes all streets, sidewalks, easements, parking lots or any other
areas dedicated or commonly used for vehicular or pedestrian traffic.



   TOWN-OWNED LAND



   Includes all parks, recreation areas, ball parks, lake areas, storage
facilities, garage areas, Board of Education property and any and all other
Town or publicly owned land and premises.



§ 273-2. Operation on public property.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit to be operated
any motor-driven vehicle, as defined herein, within the Town of Hammonton
upon public property or Town-owned property as defined herein.



§ 273-3. Operation on private property.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit operation of
any motor-driven vehicle, as defined herein, within the Town of Hammonton
unless the operator of said motor-driven vehicle has received the express
written prior permission of the owner of said property or occupant to so
operate said vehicle. If said express written permission is presented, the
operator shall keep same on his person for display.



§ 273-4. Noise.



   It shall be unlawful to operate a motor-driven vehicle creating a loud
or unusual noise so as to disturb or interfere with the peace and quiet of
others, and no person shall operate such a motor vehicle before the hours of
9:00 a.m. and after the hours of 7:00 p.m., prevailing time or sunset,
whichever shall first occur.



§ 273-5. Operation of motor-driven vehicles in careless, reckless or
negligent manner.



   No person shall operate any type of motor-driven vehicle, as herein
defined, in the Town of Hammonton in a careless, reckless or negligent manner
so as to endanger or to likely endanger the safety or property of any person,
including the operator, or the property of any person.



§ 273-6. Use by public employees.



   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, it shall be
unlawful for any employee of the Town of Hammonton to operate motor-driven
vehicles, as defined herein, for the purpose of maintenance, repair or the
performance of any public work within the scope of his/her employment.



§ 273-7. Violations by persons under 18 years of age.



   Any person under the age of 18 years who violates or fails to comply
with this chapter shall be penalized in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter. Upon a second or subsequent violation, it shall be reputably
presumed that any person under 18 years of age and who resides with his/her
guardian is operating said motor-driven vehicle with permission of said
parents or guardians.



§ 273-8. Violations and penalties.



   Unless otherwise specified herein for violation of any provision of
this ordinance, the maximum penalties upon conviction shall be a fine not
exceeding $500 or by imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days, or any combination herein.



§ 273-9.  Engine braking prohibited.



[Added 9-26-2016 by Ord. No. 018-2016]



   A.   Purpose.  The Mayor and Council of the Town of Hammonton have
determined that the use of "engine braking," as defined by this section,
causes unwanted noise, pollutants and disturbances in the Town, and are a
detriment to the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the
Town of Hammonton.



   B.   Definitions.  As used in this section, the following terms
shall have the meanings indicated:



      ENGINE BRAKING — The use or operation of any engine brake,
compression brake or mechanical exhaust device designed to aid in the
braking, decompression, or deceleration of any motor vehicle which results in
the excessive, loud, unusual or explosive noise from such vehicle.



   C.   Prohibition.  It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor
vehicle to use or operate or cause to be used or operated, at any time and on
any road within the Town of Hammonton, any engine brake, mechanical exhaust
or decompression device which results in the practice known as "engine
braking."



   D.   Signage.  Appropriate signage shall be placed at reasonable
locations within the Town warning the public about the prohibition of "engine
braking." 



   E.   Exceptions. This prohibition shall not apply to the application
of unmuffled engine or compression brakes or a mechanical exhaust device
where necessary for the protection of persons and/or property which cannot be
avoided by an alternative braking system or where the application is
necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the community. Sounds created
by emergency equipment for emergency purposes are exempt from this section.



   F.   Violations and penalties.  Unless another penalty is expressly
provided by New Jersey Statute, any person, partnership, company, or
corporation convicted of a violation of this section shall be subject to one
or more of the following: a fine of not more than $1,000, imprisonment for a
period not to exceed 90 days or a period of community service not to exceed
90 days.



CHAPTER 274.
VEHICLES, MUNICIPALLY OWNED



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton
9-25-1989 by Ord. No. 26-1989. Amendments noted where applicable.]



   § 274-1.   Removal outside town limits; consent required.



   § 274-2.   Emergency aid to neighboring municipalities.



   § 274-3.   Nonapplicability to vehicle repairs.



   § 274-4.   Violations and penalties.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 271.



   Ethical standards concerning use of public vehicles — See Ch. 22.



§ 274-1. Removal outside town limits; consent required.



   The fire apparatus, fire-fighting equipment and vehicles, emergency
apparatus, equipment and vehicles, highway apparatus, equipment and vehicles
and police apparatus, equipment and vehicles owned by the Town of Hammonton
shall not be taken outside the Town of Hammonton limits of said town by any
person or persons other than an authorized employee or representative of the
Town of Hammonton without first obtaining the consent of the Mayor and
Council of said Town of Hammonton, expressed in a duly adopted resolution
thereof, except as hereinafter provided.



§ 274-2. Emergency aid to neighboring municipalities.



   The Hammonton fire companies by their proper officers and members, the
Hammonton Rescue Squad by its proper officers and members, the Hammonton
Highway Department by its proper supervisors and workers and the Hammonton
Police Department by its proper supervisors and workers may, from time to
time, in case of emergency, take said fire apparatus, fire-fighting equipment
and vehicles, emergency apparatus, equipment and vehicles, highway apparatus,
equipment and vehicles and police apparatus, equipment and vehicles into any
neighboring municipality to render aid in the event of an emergency, when
such aid shall have been requested by the officials of such neighboring
municipality or by the officers of the Fire Department thereof; provided,
however, that such municipality or the Fire Department thereof shall have
agreed to bring its fire apparatus, fire-fighting equipment and vehicles,
emergency apparatus, equipment and vehicles, highway equipment and vehicles
and police apparatus, equipment and vehicles into said Town of Hammonton, in
case of emergency, to render aid in an emergency, whenever such aid may have
been requested by the officials of this town or the officers of this town's
fire company.



§ 274-3. Nonapplicability to vehicle repairs.



   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit the taking of
the fire apparatus, fire-fighting equipment and vehicles, emergency
apparatus, equipment and vehicles, highway apparatus, equipment and vehicles
and police apparatus, equipment and vehicles of said Town of Hammonton
outside the limits thereof by persons having lawful custody of such apparatus
and equipment and vehicles for the purpose of having the same repaired.



§ 274-4. Violations and penalties.



   Any person who shall violate any of the terms or provisions of this
chapter or do any act or thing herein prohibited shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to one or more of the following: a fine of not more than
$1,000, imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days or a period of
community service not to exceed 90 days, as shall be determined and imposed
by the Municipal Judge before whom such person shall be tried and convicted;
provided, however, that such Municipal Judge shall have the power, in his/her
discretion, to impose both fine and imprisonment not exceeding the respective
maximum limits herein fixed.



CHAPTER 275.
WATER



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton as
indicated in article histories. Amendments noted where applicable. Editor's
Note: Ordinance No. 5-2006 adopted Ch. 6, Art. VI, and provided for the
elimination of the Municipal Utilities Advisory Committee (MUAC). Per §
6-41, MUAC references, any references to the MUAC in this chapter shall be
construed as making reference to “Mayor and Council” or its water and
sewer subcommittee. ]



ARTICLE I.
General Regulations; Charges



   § 275-1.   Purpose.



   § 275-2.   Violation of written rules.



   § 275-2.1. Connection requirement.



   § 275-3.   Charges for connection and hookup.



   § 275-4.   (Reserved)



   § 275-5.   Turn-on and turnoff charges.



   § 275-6.   Fire protection.



   § 275-7.   Water rates.



   § 275-8.   Charges for water used during construction.



   § 275-9.   Payment of water bills; late payment penalties.



   § 275-10.   Time limit for appeals and requests for refunds for
bills and assessment.



   § 275-11.   Violations and penalties.



   § 275-12.   Review and recommendations.



   § 275-12A.   Inspection.



ARTICLE II.
Tie-Ins and New Water Mains



   § 275-13.   Approval required.



   § 275-14.   Submission of copies of plans.



   § 275-15.   Exception.



   § 275-16.   Minimum requirements for plans.



   § 275-17.   Approval standard.



   § 275-18.   Application fee.



   § 275-19.   Review of plans after corrections.



   § 275-20.   Specifications.



   § 275-21.   Testing.



   § 275-22.   Cost sharing for extension of water distribution system.



   § 275-23.   Charges for water service lateral connection fees.



   § 275-24.   Exemption from water service lateral connection fees.



   § 275-25.   Reservation of water service lateral connections.



   § 275-26.   Violations and penalties.



ARTICLE III.
Water Connections Within Groundwater Impact Area



   § 275-27.   Purpose.



   § 275-28.   Condition of NJDEP grant.



   § 275-29.   Violations and penalties.



   § 275-30.   2008 expanded applicability to Basin Road, Pine Road,
Oak Road, Union Road and U.S. Route 30 (White Horse Pike).



ARTICLE IV.
Water Conservation



   § 275-31.   Purpose and intent; water conservation methods.



   § 275-32.   Authorization to declare a state of water supply
conservation.



   § 275-33.   Water conservation stages.



   § 275-34.   Notice of declaration.



   § 275-35.   Effect of declaration.



   § 275-36.   Termination of declaration.



   § 275-37.   Inspections.



   § 275-38.   Prohibited use of water.



   § 275-39.   Continued prohibited use of water; notice of violation;
abatement by Town.



   § 275-40.   Violations and penalties.



   § 275-41.   Water conservation tax credit/rebate program.



GENERAL REFERENCES



   Water and sewer subcommittee — See Ch. 6, Art. VI.



   Water quality — See Ch. 175, § 175-137.



   Sewers — See Chs. 223 and 226.



Article I.
General Regulations; Charges



[Amended 2-9-1981 by Ord. No. 1-1981; 6-13-1983 by Ord. No. 3-1983; 3-26-1984
by Ord. No. 4-1984; 7-25-1988 by Ord. No. 17-1988; 12-14-1992 by Ord. No.
34-1992]



§ 275-1. Purpose.



   The purpose of this article is to conform to existing procedures and
address the issues encountered by the Municipal Water Department. Editor's
Note: The Water Department was inactivated 1-24-2011 by Ord. No. 3-2011. See
now Ch. 53, Department of Public Utilities; Superintendent of Public Works.
The governing body has previously abolished, by ordinance, the Board of Water
Commissioners. The governing body has created and appointed an advisory
committee entitled the Municipal Utilities Advisory Committee to review and
make recommendations to the Mayor and Council on utility issues. It is also
determined to be in the public interest that the Water Department collect
revenues necessary to balance the Department budget, but no revenues shall be
accumulated beyond that amount necessary to cover operating expenses and
anticipated capital cost.



§ 275-2. Violation of written rules.



[Amended 7-23-2001 by Ord. No. 26-2001]



   Any person, corporation or firm who shall violate any of the printed
rules and regulations of the Water Department Editor's Note: The Water
Department was inactivated 1-24-2011 by Ord. No. 3-2011. See now Ch. 53,
Department of Public Utilities; Superintendent of Public Works. shall be
subject to the penalties as set forth in § 275-11.



§ 275-2.1. Connection requirement.



[Amended 3-25-2002 by Ord. No. 8-2002]



   A.   The owner of every existing house, building or structure and
the owner of every house, building or structure hereafter to be constructed
or acquired, which may be occupied or used by human beings, located on a
street along the line of a municipal water main now or hereafter constructed
or acquired in the Town of Hammonton, where such house, building or structure
is located not more than 200 feet from said water main, is and shall be
required to connect to the municipal water system where no on-site well
exists.



   B.   The owner of every existing house, building or structure which
is now serviced by an on-site well for potable water shall be required to
make connection to the municipal water main upon the failure of the existing
on-site well. For the purpose of this section, "failure of an existing well"
shall be defined as any well which requires replacement and/or redrilling.



§ 275-3. Charges for connection and hookup.



[Amended 6-20-1994 by Ord. No. 16-1994]



   A.   Where there are no connections already made to the curbs from
the water mains, there shall be a charge of $1,500, called a "connection
fee," per unit, for the privilege of connecting to the town's water mains.



   B.   Charges for hookup. In addition to the aforementioned
connection fee, the following charges are assessed:



      (1)   The fee for a one-inch tap shall be $725, which includes
a corporation stop, service pipe to the curb, curb stop, curb stop box and
labor. There shall also be a charge for the water meter, meter horn, county
road opening permit, state road opening permit and road restoration. The
aforementioned additional charges shall be set forth in a schedule prepared
by the Water Superintendent and adopted by the Mayor and Council at the first
regular meeting of each year.



      (2)   The fee for a two-inch tap fee shall be $1,340, which
includes a corporation stop, service pipe to the curb, curb stop, curb stop
box and labor. There shall also be a charge for the water meter, meter horn,
county road opening permit, state road opening permit and road restoration.
The aforementioned additional charges shall be set forth in a schedule
prepared by the Water Superintendent and adopted by the Mayor and Council at
the first regular meeting of each year.



      (3)   For the installation of any tap larger than two inches
on any type of service, the charge will be based on time and material
expended. If, however, the owner decides to hire a private contractor to
handle the installation, the owner shall still be responsible to pay a fee to
the Town of Hammonton for the purpose of having the Water Department Director
Editor's Note: The Water Department was inactivated 1-24-2011 by Ord. No.
3-2011. See now Ch. 53, Department of Public Utilities; Superintendent of
Public Works. or selected personnel oversee the installation. The charge for
this service shall be made on a time basis.



      (4)   If existing lines are modified to increase
three-fourths-inch equipment to any greater size, the additional equipment
which must be installed shall be charged on a time-and-cost basis.



§ 275-4. (Reserved) 4a



4a.   Editor’s Note: Former § 275-4, Service and Maintenance Charges
for Meters, was repealed 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 030-2013.



§ 275-5. Turn-on and turnoff charges.



   Whenever a connection has already been made and it is desired to either
turn off the water or, when the water has been turned off, to open the same,
there shall be a charge of $25 for either one of these services.



§ 275-6. Fire protection.



   All buildings which maintain fire protection, either by the
installation of sprinkler systems for the purpose of fire protection or by
the installation of a private fire hydrant, shall be required to install a
meter approved by the Water Department 5 and shall also be required to pay a
fee of $400 for the privilege of having municipal water service for the fire
protection. The fee shall be an annual charge.



§ 275-7. Water rates.



[Amended 12-19-1994 by Ord. No. 36-1994; 5-12-1997 by Ord. No. 4-1997;
5-14-2012 by Ord. No. 10-2012; 3-23-2015 by Ord. No. 006-2015]



   For the use of water, there shall be charged the following semi-annual
rates, to begin the billing cycle following adoption of Ord. No. 006-2015:



   A.   For the first 3,000 cubic feet or less: $140.



   B.   From 3,001 to 5,000 cubic feet: $32 per 1,000 cubic feet.



   C.   From 5,001 to 10,000 cubic feet: $34 per 1,000 cubic feet.



   D.   For each 1,000 cubic feet over 10,000 cubic feet: $36.



§ 275-8. Charges for water used during construction.



   For the use of water during construction, there shall be a rate charge
of $50 for residential construction and $100 for all other types of
construction.



§ 275-9. Payment of water bills; late payment penalties.



[Amended 12-19-1994 by Ord. No. 36-1994; 5-12-1997 by Ord. No. 4-1997;
5-14-2012 by Ord. No. 10-2012; 3-23-2015 by Ord. No. 006-2015]



   Assessed and minimum meter rates are payable quarterly, in advance. All
water rates are to be charged from the date the water is turned on. For water
consumption in excess of the minimum quantity, the charge as per meter
statement will be made at the close of each six months. The bill shall be due
when rendered. If any bill is not paid when due, interest will be assessed
per 54:4-67. If a bill is more than 45 days past due, water service may be
terminated.



§ 275-10. Time limit for appeals and requests for refunds for bills and
assessment.



[Added 10-26-1998 by Ord. No. 28-1998]



   A.   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish a time
limit for appeals and requests for refunds for municipal water and sewer
bills and assessments.



   B.   Definition. For the purpose of this section a municipal water
and sewer bill or assessment shall include but not be limited to connection
fees, hookup fees, user fees, minimum and excess water and sewer readings
upon which bills are calculated.



   C.   Applicability. The limitations outlined herein shall be
applicable to all persons, organizations, partnerships, corporations, or any
legal entity which is owner of record or recipient of the municipal sewer or
water bills or assessments.



   D.   Time for appeals and requests for refund. Appeals and requests
for refund from municipal water and sewer bills and assessments shall be
taken within 180 days from the date when the bill or assessment first becomes
due. Any appeal or request for refund filed after the one-hundred-eighty-day
time for appeal shall be time barred.



   E.   Filing of appeal (place and manner). An appeal or request for
refund shall be considered timely made pursuant to this section when a
written request for appeal or refund is made and filed with the
Clerk/Administrator's Office of the Town of Hammonton for Mayor and Council
consideration within the 180 day time period.



§ 275-11. Violations and penalties.



[Amended 5-16-2016 by Ord. No. 009-2016]



   A.   Any person violating a provision of this article shall, upon
conviction in the Hammonton Municipal Court, be subject to one or more of the
following: a fine of not more than $1,000, imprisonment for a period not to
exceed 90 days or a period of community service not to exceed 90 days.



   B.   If a person has previously been convicted for a violation of §
275-12A in the Hammonton Municipal Court then, upon a second conviction in
the Hammonton Municipal Court for a violation of § 275-12A, the Town of
Hammonton may proceed to install a meter pit which shall be located inside
the property line.  The Town reserves the right to determine the size and
kind of meter pit for the premises.  The Town of Hammonton shall send an
itemized bill/invoice for the cost of the installation of the meter pit to
the property owner.  This bill/invoice shall be payable within 30 days of
the town sending the owner the bill/invoice.  If the owner fails to pay the
bill/invoice within 30 days of the town sending the owner the bill/invoice,
then such amount, together with an administrative fee of $500 to address the
town's administrative expenses shall be a lien against the property and
recorded and collected as provided by the statutes of the State of New
Jersey. 



§ 275-12. Review and recommendations.



   Specifications for all tie-in and new water main systems shall be
subject to review by the Municipal Utilities Advisory Committee. The
Committee shall make any recommendation to the Mayor and Council, who shall
be responsible to make the final decision.



§ 275-12A.  Inspection.



[Added 5-16-2016 by Ord. No. 009-2016]



   All premises receiving water from the Town of Hammonton shall be
subject to inspection and access between sunrise and sunset by the Town of
Hammonton's employees or any other person duly authorized and appointed by
the town to perform inspections of water meters for the purpose of
determining the rate of water consumption.  It shall be a violation of this
article for any person to hinder, obstruct, delay, resist or prevent any such
inspection as is described herein and such person shall be subject to the
violations and penalties set forth in § 275-11, above.



Article II.
Tie-Ins and New Water Mains



[Adopted 10-25-1976 by Ord. No. 21-1976]



§ 275-13. Approval required.



Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I). No person shall hereafter be permitted to tie a water
service line or new water main into the existing water system of the Town of
Hammonton until the plan or plans of such tie-in or main shall have been
submitted to and approved by the Water Superintendent. Such approval must be
in writing or be stamped on such plan or plans.



§ 275-14. Submission of copies of plans.



   Any person hereunder desiring to tie a water service line or new main
into the existing water system of the Town of Hammonton shall make a map or
plat of the area where the tie-in or main is desired, showing the existing
lines of the water system of the Town of Hammonton, together with the
proposed new lines, and shall submit three copies of such plan, together with
an estimate of the amount of water to be consumed, to the Water
Superintendent for approval or rejection. If approved, such approval shall be
certified thereon and signed by the Water Superintendent, and no such tie-in
or new main shall be permitted until it shall have been so approved.



§ 275-15. Exception.



   No such request for approval as set forth in §§ 275-13 and 275-14 of
this article shall be required for the tie-in of single-family dwellings
fronting on an existing water main; however, the tie-in of such single-family
dwellings shall continue to be governed in accordance with the provisions of
Article I of this chapter.



§ 275-16. Minimum requirements for plans.



   The minimum requirements for tie-in or new main plans shall be as
follows:



   A.   All plans shall be in triplicate, drawn to a scale of not more
than 100 feet to the inch and shall be clearly and neatly drawn.



   B.   All plans shall show the proposed and existing waterlines and
mains, together with street and boundary lines in the area to be affected by
the proposed tie-in or new main.



   C.   The proposed use to be made of the water supply shall be set
forth, together with estimates of the amount of water to be consumed, which
may be based on the number of units if it is to be put to a residential use
or may be based on industry surveys if it is a commercial use.



   D.   The materials and specifications for all water improvements
shall be set forth.



   E.   Any proposed additions to, alterations of or extensions to
off-site existing water mains shall be shown on the plans in their entirety.



§ 275-17. Approval standard.



   Requests and applications for connections to the existing water system
of the Town of Hammonton or for extending the existing water mains of the
Town of Hammonton shall not be approved by the Water Superintendent if such
facilities will cause detriment to the available pressure in the water system
or if sufficient pressure does not exist in the system to adequately service
both the current and proposed users of the system after the proposed
extension has been completed and placed in use. For the purpose of this
article, a proposed user of the system shall be defined as any person(s)
possessing an approved water service lateral connection.



§ 275-18. Application fee.



   Subject to the exceptions provided for in § 275-15, the applicant for
a tie-in under this article shall pay to the Water Superintendent an
application fee in accordance with the following schedule:



   A.   Filing fee: $50.



   B.   Plan review fee:



      (1)   Eight-inch or less line: $0.10 per foot; over eight-inch
line: $0.15 per foot; minimum charge of $250 for over eight-inch line.



      (2)   Water supplier storage facilities: a deposit of 2% of
the engineer's estimate of costs.



   C.   Inspection fees for supply, storage and/or plumbing facilities
and distribution facilities: a deposit of 6% of the engineer's estimate of
costs.



§ 275-19. Review of plans after corrections.



   Additional reviews of plans after required corrections are made will be
at a rate similar to § 275-18 above.



§ 275-20. Specifications.



   Specifications for all tie-in and new water main systems shall be
subject to the approval of the Water Superintendent, both as to adequacy of
materials and design. Lists of acceptable materials are available from the
Water Superintendent.



§ 275-21. Testing.



   Prior to allowing any improvement to be tied into the water system of
the Town of Hammonton, it shall be tested by the applicant and at the
applicant's expense under the supervision of the Engineer and Water
Superintendent.



§ 275-22. Cost sharing for extension of water distribution system.



   Any proposed extension of the Town of Hammonton water system main lines
may require the contribution of funds on the part of the applicant. In
determining the amount of such contribution, the Superintendent shall take
into consideration the fair share of the cost of the general improvement to
be made by the applicant, together with the total cost of the improvement and
any such share that may be assessable to property owners and any share which
is to be paid by the Town of Hammonton. The undertaking of cost sharing for
the installation of any improvements or extensions to the water system main
lines by the Water Superintendent of the Town of Hammonton is subject to the
availability of municipal funds. All contributions required of applicants
must be deposited with the Water Superintendent prior to the advertising of
bids for construction of the improvement.



§ 275-23. Charges for water service lateral connection fees.



   A.   In addition to those charges, rates and fees set forth within
this article, there shall be charged a water service lateral connection fee
for each additional connection to the existing water supply system of the
Town of Hammonton made subsequent to the enactment of this article.



   B.   Connection fees for new and additional connections, as defined
herein, shall be payable in advance to the Water Superintendent of the Town
of Hammonton, in accordance with the following fee schedule:



 

 

Connection

 

Domestic Consumer Unit





 
Single-family homes
 

1



 
Rented rooms, each room available for rent
 

1/4



 
Single-family with place of business, including professional offices
 

11/4



 
Hotel or apartment house (for each living unit)
 

1



 
Motel (for each living unit)
 

1/2



 
Apartments (for each living unit)
 

1



 
Schools (for each 30 pupils and faculty)
 

1



 
Churches
 

1



 
Clubs, societies, service organizations (with bar and/or restaurant
facilities, 1 additional unit)
 

1



 
Gymnasiums in schools, etc.
 

2



 
Public buildings (for each 5 employees)
 

1



 
Service stations, without car wash facilities
 

2



 
Service stations, with car washing facilities
 

3



 
Diner, tavern or restaurant
 


 
 
1 to 50 seating capacity
 

3



 
 
Each additional 15 seating capacity or segment thereof
 

1



 
Soda fountain and/or luncheonette
 


 
 
For first 10 seating capacity
 

1



 
 
For each additional 20 seats or segment thereof
 

1



 
Laundromat or self-service laundry
 


 
 
For each washer over 12 pounds' capacity
 

1



 
 
For each washer of not more than 12 pounds' capacity
 

1/2



 
Supermarkets (for each 5 employees)
 

1



 
Drive-in restaurants
 


 
 
Seating capacity under 10
 

3



 
 
Seating capacity for additional 15 seats or fraction thereof
 

1



 
Business establishment, not otherwise classified whether part of dwelling or
not (for each 15 employees or segment thereof)
 

1



 
Industrial plant (for each 5 employees)
 

1



 
Amusement park
 

5



 
Public recreational facilities
 

5



 
Bakery (with baking facilities, whether part of a dwelling or not)
 

2





 



   C.   Charges for water service lateral connection fees shall be in
the amount of $600 per domestic consumer unit.



[Amended 7-25-1988 by Ord. No. 17-1988]



§ 275-24. Exemption from water service lateral connection fees.



   A.   Any and all property owners and/or their successors in interest
currently participating under the assessment of benefits program with
reference to the municipal water system of the Town of Hammonton shall not be
required to pay the water service lateral connection fee set forth in §
275-23, subject to the following limitations:



      (1)   Each person who qualified under this section shall
receive at least one water service lateral connection equivalent to one
domestic consumer unit per each building lot currently under assessment of
benefit.



      (2)   In order for any person to qualify under the provisions
of this section, said person shall be required to file, within one year from
date of enactment, an application, in writing, with the Water Department of
Town of Hammonton Editor's Note: The Water Department was inactivated
1-24-2011 by Ord. No. 3-2011. See now Ch. 53, Department of Public Utilities;
Superintendent of Public Works. requesting utilization of municipal water
services.



   B.   In the event that any lot owner so qualifying under this
article requests a water service lateral connection of greater capacity than
that described as one domestic consumer unit, said person shall receive a
credit in an amount equal to that of one domestic consumer unit, said sum to
be deducted from the appropriate water service lateral connection fee for the
requested usage.



§ 275-25. Reservation of water service lateral connections.



   In the event that any person(s), including a corporation, requests and
obtains the necessary permits to connect to the then existing municipal water
supply system and fails to complete said connection and/or fails to become a
user of said system within a period of one year commencing upon the approval
of said connection, said person(s) shall thereafter become liable for the
payment of the minimum water rate, as set forth within this article.



§ 275-26. Violations and penalties.



   Any person convicted of violating any provision of this article shall
be subject to one or more of the following: a fine of not more than $1,000,
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days or a period of community
service not to exceed 90 days.



Article III.
Water Connections Within Groundwater Impact Area



[Adopted 4-26-1993 by Ord. No. 9-1993; amended in its entirety 11-24-2008 by
Ord. No. 38-2008]



§ 275-27. Purpose.



   The Town of Hammonton has qualified for grant money from the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP). This grant money must be used
to install the Town's water distribution system in the area known as the
"Lakeview Gardens Section" of the Town of Hammonton and designated by the
NJDEP as within the groundwater impact area. Those properties so affected are
listed in List A attached hereto and have been so designated by the NJDEP
because of the indication of contaminates in their well water. Editor's Note:
Said List A is on file in the office of the Town Clerk/Municipal
Administrator. It is the express purpose of the Town of Hammonton to provide
potable, drinkable water to its citizenry.



§ 275-28. Condition of NJDEP grant.



   An express condition of the NJDEP grant is that all wells within the
groundwater impact area must be capped, and the property owners must connect
with the Town of Hammonton's water distribution system. All those property
owners with improvements on their lots or with a need for water shall, upon
completion of the waterline improvements in the groundwater impact area,
connect to the water distribution system and cap all existing wells.



§ 275-29. Violations and penalties.



   Anyone not connecting to the system and/or failing to cap their well
when required to do so shall be subject to one or more of the following: a
fine of not more than $1,000, imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days
or a period of community service not to exceed 90 days.



§ 275-30. 2008 expanded applicability to Basin Road, Pine Road, Oak Road,
Union Road and U.S. Route 30 (White Horse Pike).



   A.   The terms and conditions applicable to the original version of
this article adopted as Ordinance Number 9-1993 on April 26, 1993, shall also
be applicable to the 2008 water main extension project for the area bounded
and/or adjacent to the following roadways: Basin Road, Pine Road, Oak Road,
Union Road and U.S. Route 30 (White Horse Pike).



   B.   The Town of Hammonton has qualified for grant money to install
a public water distribution system in this portion of Hammonton as more fully
described in List B attached hereto due to the possible presence of
contaminants in the potable well water servicing properties in this area
Editor's Note: Said List B is on file in the office of the Town
Clerk/Municipal Administrator. (hereinafter referred to as the groundwater
impact area "GIA"). The Town may grant exemptions from the well-sealing
requirement as set forth above for those wells for which the NJDEP has issued
a preliminary review letter noting the conditions of exemption and by the
property owner presenting satisfactory proof that he/she has agreed to abide
by those conditions, as well as any other conditions to be imposed by the
Town of Hammonton, New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection or any
other governmental entity.



   C.   The properties so exempted must be zoned for agricultural use
and must, at the time of application for exemption, be actively utilized for
such agricultural purposes such that it qualifies or is capable of qualifying
for farmland assessment.



   D.   In all other respects, Ordinance Number 9-1993 shall remain in
full force and effect.



Article IV.
Water Conservation



[Adopted 8-24-2009 by Ord. No. 16-2009]



§ 275-31. Purpose and intent; water conservation methods.



   A.   It is hereby declared that the pubic health, safety and welfare
require that the Town of Hammonton maximize the beneficial use of its
available natural resources and that the water or unreasonable use or
unreasonable method of use of water be prevented. The conservation of such
potable water resource is to be extended with a view to the reasonable and
beneficial use thereof as is necessary for sanitary, domestic and
fire-fighting purposes in the interests of the people of the Town of
Hammonton. Each resident and business within the Town of Hammonton connected
to the public water supply is encouraged to support and use water
conservation measures throughout the year in order to preserve and protect
this valuable commodity. The Water Superintendent of the Town of Hammonton
will provide pubic notice during the year listing various methods that the
general public and business sector can use to conserve water use for the
benefit of all.



   B.   Listed below are some of the measures that should be used to
conserve water:



      (1)   Check regularly to make sure all pipes, faucets, toilets
and other systems and equipment are free of leaks and drips.



      (2)   Water lawn no more frequently than every other day and
limit irrigation time to 30 minutes within each zone. (See Subsection B(10)
below for specific restrictions during the months of June, July, August and
September.)



      (3)   Install rain sensor gauges to lawn sprinkler systems to
prevent irrigation during rain events.



      (4)   Install drip irrigation where possible within landscaped
areas to avoid excessive water use.



      (5)   Install low-volume toilets.



      (6)   Install low-flow shower heads.



      (7)   All faucets should be equipped with aerators. Aerator
screens should be cleaned on a regular basis.



      (8)   Use water intermittently when brushing teeth and washing
dishes and utensils.



      (9)   Run dishwashers and washing machines only with full
loads.



      (10)   During the months of June, July, August and September,
the following lawn irrigation practices (manual and automatic) shall apply.



         (a)   House numbers ending in an even number: lawns may
be irrigated on Monday, Wednesday and Friday.



         (b)   House numbers ending in an odd number: lawns may
be irrigated on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday.



         (c)   Lawn irrigation systems shall not be used on
Sundays.



         (d)   In the event of a rain event producing
precipitation in excess of 0.75 inch within a twenty-four-hour period
preceding the designated irrigation day, lawn irrigation systems shall not be
utilized.



         (e)   Installation of al new automatic lawn irrigation
systems must include the installation of a rain sensor gauge in order to
conserve public water.



         (f)   Lawn irrigation systems should be periodically
checked to ensure that excess watering does not result in the flow of water
into the street gutterline or onto adjacent properties.



§ 275-32. Authorization to declare a state of water supply conservation.



   A.   The Mayor and Council of the Town of Hammonton, by and through
the Town of Hammonton Water Department, Editor's Note: The Water Department
was inactivated 1-24-2011 by Ord. No. 3-2011. See now Ch. 53, Department of
Public Utilities; Superintendent of Public Works. may declare a State of
Water Supply Conservation upon a recommendation by the Water Superintendant
and by a majority vote of the Water Subcommittee of the Public Works and
Transportation Committee, or its successor, that conservation measures are
necessary and appropriate to ensure an adequate supply of water to all water
customers of the Town of Hammonton.



   B.   In case of an emergency in which, in the opinion of the Water
Department's Superintendent, the available supply of water becomes
dangerously low, the Town of Hammonton Water Department through the Water
Subcommittee of the Public Works and Transportation Committee, or its
successor, is hereby authorized to recommend to the full Mayor and Council to
declare by resolution the existence of a water emergency.



   C.   The resolution (hereinafter referred to as the "declaration")
by the Town of Hammonton shall state that an emergency exists requiring the
implementation of such measures for the conservation of water for domestic
and sanitary purposes and fire protection as are specified in § 275-33.



§ 275-33. Water conservation stages.



   A.   It is unlawful for any customer of the Town of Hammonton to
make, cause, use or permit the use of water from the Town of Hammonton for
residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, governmental or any other
purpose in a manner contrary to any provision herein, or in an amount in
excess of that use permitted by the blowing conservation stages which shall
be placed into effect pursuant to action taken by the Town of Hammonton, or
its designees, in accordance with these provisions.



   B.   Uses of water in violation of the standards set forth herein
shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following practices:



      (1)   A customer shall not let water leave the customer's
property by drainage onto adjacent properties or public or private roadways,
streets or storm sewer systems due to excessive irrigation and/or uncorrected
leaks.



      (2)   A customer will not fail to repair a water leak upon
notice by the Superintendant or his authorized designee to repair said leak.



   C.   The following stages shall take effect upon issuance of a
Declaration as herein provided.



      (1)   Stage 1: water alert mandatory compliance. Upon
implementation by the Town of Hammonton and publication of notice in one or
more of the Town's official newspapers, the following Stage 1 water
conservation measures shall apply:



         (a)   Lawn watering and landscape irrigation, including
construction irrigation, is permitted only during designated hours on
designated days, regardless of the particular month.



            [1]   Watering is permitted at any time if:



               [a]   A hand-held hose equipped with a
positive shut-off nozzle is used; or



               [b]   A hand-held container is used; or



               [c]   A drip irrigation system is used.



            [2]   Commercial nurseries, commercial sod farms
and similarly situated establishments are exempt from Stage 1 irrigation
restrictions but will be required to curtail all nonessential water use.



         (b)   The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers,
boats, airplanes and other types of mobile equipment, is permitted at any
lime with a hand-held bucket or a hand-held hose equipped with a positive
shut-off nozzle for quick rinses. Washing may be done at any time on the
immediate premises of a commercial car wash or commercial service station, or
by a mobile car wash or on-site car wash using high-pressure washing
equipment. Further, such washings are exempted from those regulations where
the health, safety and welfare of the public is contingent upon frequent
vehicle cleanings, such as garbage trucks and vehicles to transport food and
perishables.



         (c)   Irrigation of golf courses, parks, school grounds
and recreation fields is permitted only during designated hours on designated
days, except golf course greens which may be irrigated to remain viable.



         (d)   The overfilling of swimming pods and spas is
prohibited. The filling or refilling of ponds and artificial lakes is
prohibited.



         (e)   Use of water from fire hydrants shall be limited
to firefighting, related activities or other activities necessary to maintain
the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Hammonton.



         (f)   All restaurants are prohibited from serving water
to their customers except when specifically requested by the customers.



         (g)   Water shall not be used to wash down sidewalks,
driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, patios or other paved areas, except
to alleviate immediate fire or sanitation hazards. High-pressure washing of
such surfaces will be permitted.



         (h)   Ornamental fountains and garden ponds may operate
if they recirculate water. Ornamental fountains and garden ponds that do not
recycle water are prohibited.



         (i)   Construction operations receiving water from a
construction meter or water truck shall not use water unnecessarily for any
purposes other than those required by regulatory agencies. Construction
projects requiring watering for new landscaping materials should adhere to
the designated irrigation hours associated with Subsection C(1)(a) of Stage 1.



      (2)   Stage 2: water warning mandatory compliance. Stage 2
applies during periods when the Town of Hammonton will not be able to meet
all of the water demands of its customers. Upon implementation by the Town of
Hammonton and publication of notice, the following water conservation
measures shall apply except when reclaimed water is used:



         (a)   Lawn watering and landscape irrigation, including
with a hand-held hose equipped with a positive shut-off nozzle, is permitted
only during designated hours on designated days, regardless of the months of
the year. Watering is permitted at any hour, on any day, if a hand-held
container or drip irrigation system is used.



         (b)   Commercial nurseries shall reduce water by an
amount to be determined by the Town of Hammonton Water Department Editor's
Note: The Water Department was inactivated 1-24-2011 by Ord. No. 3-2011. See
now Ch. 53, Department of Public Utilities; Superintendent of Public Works.
Superintendent.



         (c)   The washing of automobiles, truth, trailers,
boats, airplanes and other types of mobile equipment is permitted only during
designated hours on designated days with a hand-held bucket or a hand-held
hose equipped with a positive shut-off nozzle for quick rinses. Washing is
permitted at any time on the immediate premises of a commercial car wash. The
use of water by all types of commercial car washes not using partially
reclaimed or recycled water shall be reduced in volume by an amount
determined by the Town of Hammonton Water Department. Further, such washings
are exempt from these regulations where the health, safety and welfare of the
public is contingent upon frequent vehicle cleanings, such as garbage trucks
and vehicles to transport food and perishables.



         (d)   The overfilling of swimming pools and spas is
prohibited. The filling or refilling of ponds and artificial lakes is
prohibited.



         (e)   Watering golf courses, parks, school grounds and
recreation fields is permitted only during designated hours on designated
days, except golf course greens.



         (f)   Use of water from fire hydrants shall be limited
to firefighting or other activities immediately necessary to maintaining the
heath, safety and welfare of the citizens of Hammonton.



         (g)   All restaurants are prohibited from serving water
to their customers except when specifically requested by the customers.



         (h)   Water shall not be used to wash down sidewalks,
driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, patios or other paved areas, except
to alleviate immediate fire or sanitation hazards.



         (i)   The operation of any ornamental fountain or
similar structure is prohibited except for short periods of time to prevent
damage.



      (3)   Stage 3: water emergency mandatory compliance. Stage 3
applies when a major failure of any supply or distribution facility, whether
temporary or permanent, occurs in the water distribution system of the Town
of Hammonton water and sewer facilities. Upon declaration of Town of
Hammonton and publication of notice, the following measures shall apply
except when reclaimed water is used:



         (a)   All outdoor irrigation of turf and ground covers
is prohibited with the exception of plant materials classified to be rare,
exceptionally valuable or essential to the well-being of the public at large
or rare animals. Irrigation of trees and shrubs is permitted only by
hand-held hose equipped with a positive shut-off nozzle, hand-held container,
or drip irrigation system. Greywater may be used in accordance with
appropriate regulatory agency guidelines and regulations to irrigate fruit
trees, ground covers and ornamental trees and shrubs. Greywater is defined as
household wastewater other than toilet waste.



         (b)   The use of water at commercial nurseries,
commercial sod farmers and similarly situated establishments shall be reduced
in volume by an amount determined by the Town of Hammonton Water Department.
Editor's Note: The Water Department was inactivated 1-24-2011 by Ord. No.
3-2011. See now Ch. 53, Department of Public Utilities; Superintendent of
Public Works. Greywater may be used in accordance with the appropriate
regulatory agencies to irrigate fruit trees, ground covers and ornamental
trees and shrubs.



         (c)   The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers,
boats, airplanes and other types of mobile equipment is prohibited. The use
of water by all types of commercial car washes or commercial vehicle service
stations and not in the immediate interest of the public health, safety and
welfare shall be reduced in volume by an amount determined by the Town of
Hammonton Water Department. Further, such washings are exempt from these
regulations where the health, safety and welfare of the public is contingent
upon frequent vehicle cleanings such as garbage trucks and vehicles used to
transport food and perishables.



         (d)   The filling, refilling or adding of water to
swimming pools, spas, ponds and artificial lakes is prohibited.



         (e)   The watering of all golf course areas, except
greens, is prohibited.



         (f)   Use of water from fire hydrants shall be limited
to fire fighting or other activities immediately necessary to maintain the
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Hammonton.



         (g)   All restaurants are prohibited from serving water
to their customers except when specifically requested by the customers.



         (h)   Water shall not be used to wash down sidewalks,
driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, patios or other paved areas, except
to alleviate immediate fire or sanitation hazards.



         (i)   The operation of any ornamental fountain or
similar structure is prohibited except for short periods of time to prevent
damage.



         (j)   The use of water for commercial, manufacturing or
processing purposes shall be reduced in volume by an amount determined by the
Town of Hammonton Water Department.



         (k)   All sales of non-reclaimed water outside of the
Towns limits shall be discontinued, with the exception of sales previously
approved by the Town of Hammonton.



         (l)   No new construction meters will be issued.
Construction water shall not be used for earth work or road construction
purposes. Construction projects necessary to maintaining the health, safety
and welfare of the public are exempt from these regulations.



         (m)   Except as to property for which a building permit
has been heretofore issued, no new building permit(s) shall be provided,
except in the following circumstances:



            [1]For projects necessary to protect the public's
health, safety, and welfare;



            [2]When using reclaimed water;



            [3]When the recipient of the building permit can
demonstrate that no net increase in water use will occur.



      (4)   In the case of any emergency declaration as is described
herein, the terms of the curtailment may be modified by amendment from time
to time based on any change in emergent conditions.



§ 275-34. Notice of declaration.



   Immediately following the passage of any of the water supply
conservation declarations hereinbefore described, a copy of the declaration
shall be published in one or more of the Town's official newspapers and
posted in the municipal building, police headquarters, construction office
and the office of the Town of Hammonton Water and Sewer Department. Editor's
Note: The Water and Sewer Departments were inactivated 1-24-2011 by Ord. No.
3-2011. See now Ch. 53, Department of Public Utilities; Superintendent of
Public Works.



§ 275-35. Effect of declaration.



   The Declaration of a state of water supply conservation shall be
conclusive of the fact of the existence of such stage of water supply
conservation and shall be binding upon all persons and users upon the filing
of the same in the office of the Town Clerk and the publication thereof in
one or more of official Town newspapers.



§ 275-36. Termination of declaration.



   The declaration shall continue in full force and effect except as
amended, until terminated by a resolution of termination adopted by the
Council of the Town of Hammonton.



§ 275-37. Inspections.



   All premises receiving water from the Town of Hammonton water and sewer
system shall be subject to inspection between sunrise and sunset by the Town
of Hammonton's employees or any other person duly authorized and appointed by
the Town or Authority to perform inspections to oversee compliance during
each stage of water supply conservation. It shall be a violation of this
article for any person to hinder, obstruct, delay, resist or prevent any such
inspection as is described herein.



§ 275-38. Prohibited use of water.



   It shall be a violation of this article for any person to use water
from the Town of Hammonton's water system at any time in a manner prohibited
by any declaration issued pursuant to this article.



§ 275-39. Continued prohibited use of water; notice of violation; abatement
by Town.



   A.   In the event that there is on any premises a continuing usage
of water from the Town of Hammonton water system by any person in a manner
prohibited by any declaration issued pursuant to this article, such
continuing usage is hereby declared to be a violation of this article and the
Authority Rules and Regulations.



   B.   The owner, occupant and/or operator of the premises whereon the
violation is occurring shall be served with written notice of the violation
by the delivery to any such owner, occupant and/or operator or the agent or
employee of any of same actually on the premises. If no such person is
present the notice shall be posted on the premises.



   C.   If, after the passage of one hour from the delivery or posting
of such notice, the violation has not been abated, any employee of the Town
of Hammonton is hereby authorized to enter upon the premises to abate the
violation and discontinue water service. Thereafter, the Town or the Water
and Sewer Department, Editor's Note: The Water and Sewer Departments were
inactivated 1-24-2011 by Ord. No. 3-2011. See now Ch. 53, Department of
Public Utilities; Superintendent of Public Works. as the case may be, shall
assess the costs of such abatement against the owner, operator and/or
occupant of the premises.



§ 275-40. Violations and penalties.



   A.   Any person found guilty of violating any portion of this
article shall be subject to a fine according to the following schedule:



      (1)   First offense: written warning;



      (2)   Second offense: Fine of $50.



      (3)   Third offense: Fine of $100 to $300; and



      (4)   Fourth or multiple offense: A fine not to exceed $500
and up to 30 days' community service.



   B.   Any person found guilty of violating § 275-39 shall be subject
to a fine of $500 for each twenty-four-hour period or part thereof for which
it can be proven that the violation occurred.



   C.   Any violation occurring within 24 hours of any declaration
issued pursuant to this article shall result in a warning and shall not be
considered an offense.



§ 275-41. Water conservation tax credit/rebate program. 



[Added 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 29-2013]



   The town hereby creates and adopts a "Town of Hammonton Water
Conservation Tax Credit/Rebate Program". The town will provide a tax credit
to customers using the public water supply system and a rebate to all other
residential water consumers based on the installation and use of a variety of
water-conserving technologies and appliances. The tax credit/rebate will be
applied under the following conditions:



   A.   The resident must submit a complete "Application for Water Tax
Credit/Rebate" (to be developed by the town's Business Administrator and
which shall include a Certification as to the accuracy of the representations
contained therein), including receipt(s) documenting the purchase and
installation of the device or appliance.



   B.   The town may, at its own prerogative or as otherwise required
by law or regulation, conduct an inspection of the residence to verify proper
installation of the device(s).



   C.   Tax credits/rebates are available only for those technologies,
devices, and appliances that carry the US EPA "Energy Star" or "Water Sense"
labels, or are approved and endorsed as a bona-fide water-saving technology
by the NJ Department of Environmental Protection through the Energy and
Environmental Technology Verification Program or its successor.



   D.   Residents may propose additional technologies, devices, or
appliances that have a proven track record of saving water and the town will
investigate the possible addition of these to the approved list. No guarantee
is offered that a submitted device not already on the list will be approved
for a tax credit/rebate.



   E.   No credits/rebates or combination of credits/rebates may
surpass $100 per year. 



   F.   The tax credit/rebate amount will be applied, in the case of a
municipal water user, to the next billing cycle and, in the case of a
non-municipal water system user, in the form of a rebate via mail as soon as
possible following approval of their application and the availability of
funds.  If there are insufficient funds to provide credits/rebates in a
billing cycle, the credit/rebate will be addressed in the next billing
cycle. 



   G.   In the event a user is approved for multiple devices, the
cumulative effect of more than one device will be calculated and an
appropriate tax credit/rebate will be applied.



   H.   Credits/Rebates will be available as follows:



      1.   $100 or 50 percent off the purchase of a permanent,
mechanical pool cover, whichever is less,



      2.   $50 for each Water Sense certified toilet,



      3.   $25 off or half the purchase price of a rain sensor,
whichever is less,



      4.   $100 off the purchase of a water-smart lawn irrigation
system,



      5.   $75 for a high efficiency ("HE") clothes washer,



      6.   $50 for an Energy Star dishwasher, and



      7.   $100 or 50 percent of the purchase price of technologies
certified by the NJ DEP under the Energy and Environmental Technology
Verification Program, whichever is less.



      8.   The list of qualifying credits/rebates may be expanded to
include new technologies, appliances, or devices, upon review and approval by
Council, with the new qualifying rebates to become eligible upon the first of
the year following their approval.



   I.   Funding for this program is subject to the annual appropriation
of funds by Town Council. Such appropriation shall only be made following
certification by the Town Business Administrator, or his designee, that such
allocation will have no deleterious effect upon the safe and continuing
operation of the town's water utility system and/or the town's general fund.



 


Notes

5 
5.   Editor's Note: The Water Department was inactivated 1-24-2011 by Ord.
No. 3-2011. See now Ch. 53, Department of Public Utilities; Superintendent of
Public Works.



DISPOSITION LIST



§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.



The following is a chronological listing of the ordinances of the Town of
Hammonton that have been adopted since the republication of the Code in 2000
and included therein. [Enabling ordinances which are not general and
permanent in nature are considered to be non-Code material and are not
included herein.] Information regarding legislation which is not included in
the Code nor on this list is available from the office of the Town
Clerk/Administrator. The last legislation reviewed for the republication of
the Code was Ord. No. 35-2000, adopted 9-25-2000. A complete listing,
including disposition, of all legislation reviewed in conjunction with the
original publication of the Code is on file in the office of the Town Cleric
Administrator.



 

Ord. No.
 
Adoption Date
 
Subject
 
Disposition




36-2000
 
9-25-2000
 
Land development amendment
 
Ch. 175


41-2000
 
12-18-2000
 
Tobacco products: vending machines and self-service displays
 
Ch. 259, Art. I


42-2000
 
12-18-2000
 
Land development amendment
 
Ch. 175


1-2001
 
2-26-2001
 
Land development amendment
 
Ch. 175


2-2001
 
2-26-2001
 
Vehicles and traffic amendment
 
Ch. 271


11-2001
 
3-26-2001
 
Property maintenance amendment
 
Ch. 211


13-2001
 
3-26-2001
 
Land development amendment
 
Ch. 175


14-2001
 
3-15-2001
 
Land development amendment
 
Ch. 175


15-2001
 
4-23-2001
 
Fire prevention amendment
 
Ch. 144


16-2001
 
4-23-2001
 
Solid waste: convenience station
 
Ch. 241, Art. I


23-2001
 
5-21-2001
 
Sewer use and rents amendment
 
Ch. 226, Art. I


24-2001
 
5-21-2001
 
False alarms
 
Ch. 74, Art. I


25-2001
 
7-23-2001
 
Rent control amendment
 
Ch. 217


26-2001
 
7-23-2001
 
Adoption of Code by Mayor and Common Council
 
Ch. 1, Art. I


27-2001
 
9-24-2001
 
Zoning Map amendment
 
NCM


29-2001
 
9-24-2001
 
Police Department amendment
 
Ch. 51, Art. I


31-2001
 
10-22-2001
 
Deputy Clerk amendment
 
Ch. 35, Art. X


32-2001
 
10-22-2001
 
Municipal Airpott amendment
 
Ch. 72


34-2001
 
11-19-2001
 
Vehicles and traffic amendment
 
Ch. 271


1-2002
 
2-25-2002
 
Vehicles and traffic amendment
 
Ch. 271


2-2002
 
2-25-2002
 
On-street handicapped parking spaces
 
Ch. 271


3-2002
 
2-25-2002
 
Vehicles and traffic amendment
 
Ch. 271


4-2002
 
2-25-2002
 
Police Department amendment
 
Ch. 51, Ait. I


5-2002
 
2-25-2002
 
Employee health benefits amendment
 
Ch. 48, Art. Ill


7-2002
 
3-25-2002
 
Vehicles and traffic amendment
 
Ch. 271


8-2002
 
3-25-2002
 
Mandatory water connection
 
Ch. 275, Art. 1


9-2002
 
3-25-2002
 
Fire prevention
 
Ch. 144


12-2002
 
3-25-2002
 
Land development amendment
 
Ch. 175


13-2002
 
3-25-2002
 
Sewer connections amendment
 
Ch. 226


14-2002
 
4-22-2002
 
Towing amendment
 
Ch. 261


15-2002
 
4-22-2002
 
Vehicles and traffic amendment
 
Ch. 271.


17-2002
 
4-22-2002
 
Zoning Map amendment
 
NCM


18-2002
 
4-22-2002
 
Airport amendment
 
Ch. 72


20-2002
 
 
 
Land development amendment
 
Tabled


28-2002
 
6-17-2002
 
Land development amendment
 
Ch. 175


29-2002
 
6-17-2002
 
Vehicles and traffic amendment
 
Ch. 271


30-2002
 
6-17-2002
 
Land development amendment
 
Ch. 175


32-2002
 
8-26-2002
 
Land development amendment
 
Ch. 175


34-2002
 
8-26-2002
 
Land development amendment
 
Ch. 175


38-2002
 
10-28-2002
 
Hazardous materials cleanup and removal
 
Ch". 162


40-2002
 
11-18-2002
 
Land development amendment
 
Ch. 175


41-2002
 
11-18-2002
 
Vehicles and traffic amendment
 
Ch. 271


42-2002
 
11-18-2002
 
Vehicles and traffic amendment
 
Ch. 271


2-2003
 
1-27-2003
 
Licensing of businesses
 
Repealed by Ord. 1-2004


7-2003
 
5-27-2003
 
Land development amendment
 
Ch. 175


8-2003
 
5-27-2003
 
Vehicles and traffic amendment
 
Ch. 271


11-2003
 
6-23-2003
 
Land development amendment
 
Ch. 175


12-2003
 
6-23-2003
 
Control of dogs
 
Ch. 82, Art. IV


14-2003
 
7-28-2003
 
Vehicles and traffic amendment
 
Ch. 271


15-2003
 
7-28-2003
 
Vehicles and traffic amendment
 
Ch, 271


17-2003
 
 
 
Land development amendment
 
Tabled


18-2003
 
 
 
Compression release engine brakes
 
Tabled


23-2003
 
10-27-2003
 
Zoning Map amendment
 
NCM


24-2003
 
10-27-2003
 
Land development amendment
 
Ch. 175


25-2003
 
 
 
Protective custody for persons arrested for drunk driving
 
Tabled


27-2003
 
11-17-2003
 
Employee Handbook
 
Ch. 48, Art. VI


29-2003
 
 
 
Hotel and motel room occupancy tax
 
Not adopted


31-2003
 
12-15-2003
 
Vehicles and traffic amendment
 
Ch. 271


1-2004
 
2-23-2004
 
Business registration
 
Ch. 109


4-2004
 
3-22-2004
 
Board of Park Commissioners amendment
 
Ch. 6, Art. II


5-2004
 
3-22-2004
 
Redevelopment plan
 
Ch. 213


12-2004
 
5-24-2004
 
Shade Tree Commission amendment
 
Ch. 6, Art. I


13-2004
 
6-28-2004
 
Handicapped parking zones amendment
 
Ch. 197, Art. III


16-2004
 
7-26-2004
 
Fees: vital statistics records
 
Ch. 134, Art. II


17-2004
 
7-26-2004
 
Motor-driven vehicles
 
Ch. 273


18-2004
 
7-26-2004
 
Land development amendment
 
Ch. 175


21-2004
 
8-23-2004
 
Land development amendment
 
Ch. 175


22-2004
 
8-23-2004
 
Land development amendment (wireless telecommunications facilities)
 
Ch. 175


24-2004
 
10-25-2004
 
Licensing of dogs amendment
 
Ch. 82, Art. I


25-2004
 
10-25-2004
 
Peddlers, hawkers, vendors, solicitors, canvassers and seasonal sales vendors
 
Ch. 204, Art. III


27-2004
 
11-15-2004
 
Land development amendment
 
Ch. 175


28-2004
 
11-15-2004
 
Land development amendment
 
Ch. 175


29-2004
 
11-15-2004
 
Employee handbook adopted
 
See Ch. 19


30-2004
 
12-20-2004
 
Municipal Court discovery fees
 
Ch. 14, Art. V


1-2005
 
2-28-2005
 
Vehicles and traffic amendment
 
Ch. 271


3-2005
 
2-28-2005
 
Vehicles and traffic amendment
 
Ch. 271


4-2005
 
3-21-2005
 
Solid waste amendment
 
Ch. 241


8-2005
 
5-23-2005
 
Special Law Enforcement Officers
 
Ch. 51, Art. VI


19-2005
 
 
 
Special event vendors
 
Tabled


27-2005
 
7-25-2005
 
Vehicles and traffic amendment
 
Ch. 271


28-2005
 
7-25-2005
 
Jake brakes
 
Repealed by Ord. No. 44-2005


29-2005
 
7-25-2005
 
Sewer use and rents amendment
 
Ch. 226, Art. I


30-2005
 
7-25-2005
 
Special event vendor's license
 
Ch. 204, Art. IV


31-2005
 
7-25-2005
 
Land development amendment
 
Ch. 175


36-2005
 
9-26-2005
 
Vehicles and traffic amendment
 
Ch. 271


37-2005
 
9-26-2005
 
Sex offender residency
 
Repealed by Ord. No. 13-2009


41-2005
 
 
 
Compression release engine brakes amendment
 
Tabled


42-2005
 
11-21-2005
 
Employee Handbook amendment
 
See Ch. 19


44-2005
 
12-19-2005
 
Compression release engine brakes repealer
 
Ch. 190, Art. I


2-2006
 
2-13-2006
 
Alcoholic beverages amendment
 
Ch. 75


3-2006
 
3-27-2006
 
Historic Preservation Commission amendment
 
Ch. 6, Art. V


5-2006
 
4-24-2006
 
Water and Sewer Subcommittee
 
Ch. 6, Art. VI


9-2006
 
6-26-2006
 
Business registration amendment
 
Ch. 109


10-2006
 
6-26-2006
 
Junkyards amendment
 
Ch. 172


11-2006
 
6-26-2006
 
Launderettes amendment
 
Ch. 180


12-2006
 
6-26-2006
 
Licensing of dogs amendment
 
Ch. 82, Art. I


15-2006
 
 
 
Sale of land
 
Tabled


16-2006
 
8-28-2006
 
Land development amendment; open space and recreation repealer
 
Chs. 175; 195, reference only


19-2006
 
9-25-2006
 
Rental property
 
Repealed by Ord. No. 4-2007


21-2006
 
12-18-2006
 
Election districts amendment
 
Ch. 16


4-2007
 
4-4-2007
 
Rental property repealer
 
Repealer only


5-2007
 
4-4-2007
 
Rental property
 
Ch. 216


6-2007
 
4-23-2007
 
Personnel policies: holidays, sick leave and vacations amendment
 
Ch. 48, Art. I


8-2007
 
4-23-2007
 
Fees: vital statistics records amendment
 
Ch. 134, Art. II


9-2007
 
5-21-2007
 
Vehicles and traffic amendment
 
Ch. 271


10-2007
 
5-21-2007
 
Vehicles and traffic amendment
 
Ch. 271


12-2007
 
5-21-2007
 
Hammonton Lake Water Quality Advisory Committee
 
Ch. 6, Art. VII


13-2007
 
5-21-2007
 
Land development amendment
 
Ch. 175


14-2007
 
5-21-2007
 
Land development amendment (stormwater management)
 
Ch. 175


19-2007
 
6-25-2007
 
Vehicles and traffic amendment
 
Ch. 271


20-2007
 
6-25-2007
 
Boats on Hammonton Lake amendment
 
Ch. 99


26-2007
 
8-27-2007
 
Police Department rules and regulations
 
Ch. 51, Art. I, footnote only


30-2007
 
9-24-2007
 
Purchasing amendment
 
Ch. 55


32-2007
 
10-22-2007
 
Vehicles and traffic amendment
 
Ch. 271


33-2007
 
12-17-2007
 
Employee handbook amendment
 
See Ch. 19


34-2007
 
12-17-2007
 
Environmental Commission amendment
 
Ch. 6, Art. III


35-2007
 
12-17-2007
 
Hammonton Lake Water Quality Advisory Committee amendment
 
Ch. 6, Art. VII


36-2007
 
12-17-2007
 
Personnel policies: review process for Town employees amendment
 
Ch. 48, Art. IV


1-2008
 
1-21-2008
 
Vehicles and traffic amendment
 
Ch. 271


2-2008
 
1-21-2008
 
Solid waste: trash collection amendment
 
Ch. 241, Art. II


4-2008
 
2-25-2008
 
Property maintenance amendment
 
Ch. 221


5-2008
 
3-17-2008
 
Fire Department: cost reimbursement
 
Ch. 25, Art. IV


8-2008
 
3-17-2008
 
Board of Park Commissioners amendment
 
Ch. 6, Art. II


9-2008
 
4-28-2008
 
Personnel policies: holidays, sick leave and vacations amendment
 
Ch. 48, Art. I


10-2008
 
4-28-2008
 
Personnel policies: health benefits for full-time employees amendment
 
Ch. 48, Art. III


11-2008
 
4-28-2008
 
Shade Tree Commission repealer
 
Ch. 6, Art. I, footnote only


12-2008
 
4-28-2008
 
False alarms amendment
 
Ch. 74, Art. I


13-2008
 
4-28-2008
 
Solid waste amendment
 
Withdrawn


14-2008
 
4-28-2008
 
Rent control amendment
 
Ch. 217


15-2008
 
4-28-2008
 
Rent Control Board amendment
 
Ch. 6, Art. IV


18-2008
 
5-19-2008
 
Vehicles and traffic amendment
 
Ch. 271


23-2008
 
7-28-2008
 
Purchasing amendment
 
Ch. 55


24-2008
 
8-25-2008
 
Personnel policies: Defined Contribution Retirement Program
 
Ch. 48, Art. VI


25-2008
 
7-28-2008
 
Vehicles and traffic amendment
 
Ch. 271


29-2008
 
9-22-2008
 
Drug-free school zones amendment
 
Ch. 125, Art. I


32-2008
 
10-27-2008
 
Vehicles and traffic amendment
 
Ch. 271


33-2008
 
11-24-2008
 
Officers and employees: Deputy Clerk amendment
 
Ch. 35, Art. X


34-2008
 
11-24-2008
 
Employee handbook amendment
 
See Ch. 119


35-2008
 
11-24-2008
 
Officers and employees: Municipal Housing Liaison
 
Ch. 35, Art. XI


36-2008
 
11-24-2008
 
Alarm systems: false alarms amendment
 
Ch. 74 Art. I


37-2008
 
11-24-2008
 
Fences and barriers: construction and maintenance amendment
 
Ch. 137 Art. I


38-2008
 
11-24-2008
 
Water connections within groundwater impact area amendment
 
Ch. 275 Art. III


4-2009   
 
3-23-2009
 
Personnel policies: Defined Contribution Retirement Program amendment
 
Ch. 48 Art. VI


6A-2009
 
4-27-2009
 
Games of chance: issuance of licenses
 
Ch. 157 Art. III


8-2009   
 
 
 
Peace and good order amendment
 
Tabled


10-2009
 
 
 
Vehicles and traffic amendment
 
Tabled


12-2009
 
5-26-2009
 
Peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants: special event vendor license
amendment
 
Ch. 204 Art. IV


13-2009
 
6-22-2009
 
Sex offender residency repealer
 
Ch. 228, reference only


14-2009
 
7-27-2009
 
Peace and good order amendment
 
Ch. 202


15-2009
 
9-28-2009
 
Land development amendment
 
Ch. 175


16-2009
 
8-24-2009
 
Water conservation
 
Ch. 275 Art. IV


17-2009
 
8-24-2009
 
Land development amendment
 
Ch. 175


18-2009
 
8-24-2009
 
Towing amendment
 
Ch. 261


19-2009
 
8-24-2009
 
Parks and recreation areas amendment
 
Ch. 200


20-2009
 
10-26-2009
 
Vehicles and traffic amendment
 
Ch. 271


21-2009
 
10-26-2009
 
Alcoholic beverages amendment
 
Ch. 75


23-2009
 
10-26-2009
 
Employee handbook amendment
 
See Ch. 19


29-2009
 
12-21-2009
 
Rental property amendment
 
Ch. 216


30-2009
 
12-21-2009
 
False alarms amendment
 
Ch. 74 Art. 1


1-2010   
 
1-25-2010
 
Purchasing amendment
 
Ch. 55


2-2010
 
2-22-2010
 
Employee handbook amendment
 
Pending codification


3-2010
 
3-22-2010
 
Land development mendment
 
Ch. 175


5-2010
 
3-22-2010
 
Vehicles and traffic amendment
 
Ch. 271


6-2010
 
4-26-2010
 
Trash collection amendment
 
Ch. 241, Art. II


9-2010
 
6-28-2010
 
Land development amendment
 
Repealed by Ord. No. 20-2010


10-2010
 
6-28-2010
 
Construction of curbs and sidewalks amendment
 
Repealed by Ord. No. 19-2010


11-2010
 
6-28-2010
 
Utility restoration monitoring
 
Ch. 269


12-2010
 
6-28-2010
 
Fire Department: cost reimbursement amendment
 
Disposition Ch. 25, Art. IV


14-2010
 
6-28-2010
 
Personnel policies: Defined Contribution Retirement Program
 
Ch. 48, Art. VI


16-2010
 
8-23-2010
 
Environmental Commission amendment; trees
 
Ch. 6, Art. III; Ch. 267


18-2010
 
9-13-2010
 
Peddlers, hawkers, vendors, solicitors, canvassers and seasonal sales vendors
 
Ch. 204, Art. III


19-2010
 
9-13-2010
 
Construction of curbs and sidewalks repealer
 
Repealer only


20-2010
 
9-13-2010
 
Land development repealer
 
Repealer only


21-2010
 
9-27-2010
 
Land development amendment
 
Ch. 175


22-2010
 
9-27-2010
 
Construction of curbs and sidewalks required amendment
 
Ch. 247, Art. IV


1-2011
 
1-24-2011
 
Personnel policies: review process for Town employees amendment
 
Ch. 48, Art. IV


2-2011
 
1-24-2011
 
Purchasing amendment
 
Ch. 55


3-2011
 
1-24-2011
 
Public Utilities Department; Public Works Superintendent
 
Ch. 53


4-2011
 
3-28-2011
 
Land development amendment (wind and solar energy systems)
 
Ch. 175


5-2011
 
4-18-2011
 
Property maintenance amendment
 
Ch. 211


6-2011
 
4-18-2011
 
Land development amendment
 
Ch. 175


7-2011
 
4-18-2011
 
Rental property amendment
 
Ch. 216


8-2011
 
4-18-2011
 
Fees: vital statistics records amendment
 
Ch. 134, Art. II


10-2011
 
4-18-2011
 
Licensing of dogs amendment
 
Ch. 82, Art. I


15-2011
 
7-25-2011
 
Vehicles and traffic amendment
 
Ch. 271


16-2011
 
7-25-2011
 
Junior firefighters program amendment
 
Ch. 25, Art. III


18-2011
 
10-24-2011
 
Streets and sidewalks amendment
 
Ch. 247


19-2011
 
10-24-2011
 
Prohibited acts amendment
 
Ch. 202


23-2011
 
11-28-2011
 
Land development amendment
 
Ch. 175


24-2011
 
11-28-2011
 
Redevelopment plan amendment
 
Ch. 213


25-2011
 
12-19-2011
 
Personnel policies amendment
 
Ch. 48


2-2012
 
3-26-2012
 
Personnel policies repealer
 
Repealer only


4B-2012
 
3-26-2012
 
Clerk/Municipal Administrator
 
Ch. 35, Art. IV


4C-2012
 
3-26-2012
 
Public Works Manager
 
Ch. 54


5-2012
 
4-16-2012
 
Police department amendment
 
Ch. 51, Art. I


6-2012
 
4-16-2012
 
Personnel policies: resignation/ retirement paperwork
 
Ch. 48


7-2012
 
4-16-2012
 
Vehicles and traffic amendment
 
Ch. 271


8-2012
 
5-14-2012
 
Sewer rates
 
Ch. 226


10-2012
 
5-14-2012
 
Water rates
 
Ch. 275


12-2012
 
5-14-2012
 
Election districts
 
Ch. 16


14-2012
 
6-25-2012
 
Review process for Town employees
 
Ch. 48


15-2012
 
6-25-2012
 
Vehicles and traffic amendment
 
Ch. 271


020-2012
 
7-23-2012
 
Vehicles and traffic amendment
 
Ch. 271


022-2012
 
8-27-2012
 
Towing amendment
 
Ch. 261


025-2012
 
11-26-2012
 
Taxicabs
 
Ch. 257


027-2012
 
12-17-2012
 
Vehicles and traffic amendment
 
Ch. 271


002-2013
 
3-18-2013
 
Vehicles and traffic amendment
 
Ch. 271


004-2013
 
3-18-2013
 
Discovery fees
 
Ch. 14


005-2013
 
4-22-2013
 
Land development amendment
 
Ch. 175


007-2013
 
5-28-2013
 
Property maintenance code
 
Ch. 211


008-2013
 
5-28-2013
 
Property maintenance code
 
Ch. 211


011-2013
 
7-22-2013
 
Land development amendment
 
Ch. 175


012-2013
 
6-24-2013
 
Vehicles and traffic amendment
 
Ch. 271


013-2013
 
7-22-2013
 
Parks and recreation amendment
 
Ch. 41


015-2013
 
8-26-2013
 
Dealers of precious metals, gems and secondhand goods
 
Ch. 122


020-2013
 
9-23-2013
 
Control of invasive plant species
 
Ch. 170


023-2013
 
10-28-2013
 
Vehicles and traffic amendment
 
Ch. 271


024-2013
 
10-28-2013
 
Licensing of dogs amendment
 
Ch. 82


027-2013
 
11-18-2013
 
Parks and recreation areas amendment
 
Ch. 200


029-2013
 
12-16-2013
 
Water conservation amendment
 
Ch. 275


030-2013
 
12-16-2013
 
Water repealer
 
Repealer only


001-2014
 
1-27-2014
 
Vehicles and traffic amendment
 
Ch. 271


003-2014
 
2-24-2014
 
Peddlers, solicitors, and transient merchants amendment
 
Ch. 204


008-2014
 
4-14-2014
 
Vehicles and traffic amendment
 
Ch. 271


017-2014
 
8-25-2014
 
Parks and recreation areas amendment
 
Ch. 200


018-2014
 
8-25-2014
 
Streets and sidewalks amendment
 
Ch. 247


036-2014
 
12-15-2014
 
Prohibition of use of tobacco amendment
 
Ch. 233


001-2015
 
1-26-2015
 
Police department amendment
 
Ch. 51, Art. I


002-2015
 
2-23-2015
 
Public utilities department amendment
 
Ch. 53


006-2015
 
3-23-2015
 
Sewer and water rates amendments
 
Ch. 226, 275


007-2015
 
4-20-2015
 
Solid waste: construction dumpsters
 
Ch. 241, Art. V


008-2015
 
5-18-2015
 
Streets and sidewalks amendment
 
Ch. 247


011-2015
 
8-24-2015
 
Vehicles and traffic amendment
 
Ch. 271


015-2015
 
9-28-2015
 
Animals amendment
 
Ch. 82


016-2015
 
9-28-2015
 
Public assemblies amendment
 
Ch. 85


017-2015
 
10-26-2015
 
Personnel policies amendment
 
Ch. 48


019-2015
 
9-28-2015
 
Property maintenance amendment
 
Ch. 211


25-2015
 
12-14-2015
 
Taxation amendment
 
Ch. 254


003-2016
 
2-22-2016
 
Land development amendment
 
Ch. 175


006-2016
 
4-18-2016
 
Property maintenance amendment
 
Ch. 211


008-2016
 
5-16-2016
 
Sewers amendment
 
Ch. 226


009-2016
 
5-16-2016
 
Water amendment
 
Ch. 275


010-2016
 
5-16-2016
 
Streets and sidewalks amendment
 
Ch. 247


012-2016
 
12-19-2016
 
Land development amendment
 
Ch. 175


013-2016
 
7-25-2016
 
Solid waste amendment
 
Ch. 241


014-2016
 
7-25-2016
 
Sewers amendment
 
Ch. 226


018-2016
 
9-26-2016
 
Vehicles and traffic amendment
 
Ch. 273


021-2016
 
11-21-2016
 
Parking amendment
 
Ch. 271


001-2017
 
1-23-2017
 
Peddlers, solicitors, and transient merchants amendment
 
Ch. 204


005-2017
 
3-20-2017
 
Alarm systems amendment
 
Ch. 74


008-2017
 
3-20-2017
 
Dog parks
 
Ch. 82, Art. V


009-2017
 
3-20-2017
 
Taxation amendment
 
Ch. 254


010-2017
 
6-19-2017
 
Land development amendment
 
Ch. 175


012-2017
 
5-15-2017
 
Streets and sidewalks amendment
 
Ch. 247


016-2017
 
7-24-2017
 
Vehicles and traffic amendment
 
Ch. 271


021-2017
 
10-23-2017
 
Vehicles and traffic amendment
 
Ch. 271


024-2017
 
12-11-2017
 
Vehicles and traffic amendment
 
Ch. 271


001-2018
 
1-22-2018
 
Land development amendment
 
Ch. 175


005-2018
 
2-26-2018
 
Fire prevention
 
Ch. 144


006-2018
 
2-26-2018
 
Vehicles and traffic amendment
 
Ch. 271


007-2018
 
2-26-2018
 
Peddlers, solicitors, and transient merchants amendment
 
Ch. 204


010-2018
 
3-26-2018
 
Parks and recreation areas amendment
 
Ch. 200


011-2018
 
3-26-2018
 
Hammonton Lake Water Quality Advisory Committee 
 
Ch. 6


012-2018
 
3-26-2018
 
Streets and sidewalks amendment
 
Ch. 247


013-2018
 
4-23-2018
 
Fire prevention
 
Ch. 144


024-2018
 
6-25-2018
 
Vehicles and traffic amendment
 
Ch. 271


 
 
 
 
 
 
 




 



Land Use Legislation
of the
Town of Hammonton



COUNTY OF ATLANTIC
STATE OF NEW JERSEY



 



Current through Ordinance 001-2018, passed 1-22-2018



Chapter 175
LAND DEVELOPMENT



ARTICLE I
General Provisions



   § 175-1.   Purpose.



   § 175-2.   Conformance required.



   § 175-3.   Interpretation.



   § 175-4.   Authority to be exclusive.



   § 175-5.   Effect on powers of governing body.



   § 175-6.   Citizens' Advisory Committee.



   § 175-7.   Zoning Officer.



   § 175-8.   Compensation of board members.



ARTICLE II
Definitions



   § 175-9.   Word usage.



   § 175-10.   Terms defined.



ARTICLE III
Master Plan; Capital Improvement Program



   § 175-11.   Master Plan.



   § 175-12.   Capital improvement program.



ARTICLE IV
Planning Board; Preservation Board



   § 175-13.   Establishment; membership.



   § 175-14.   Terms of members; vacancies; removal.



   § 175-15.   Voting by absent members.



   § 175-16.   Alternate members.



   § 175-17.   Officers; other staff and services.



   § 175-18.   Rules and regulations.



   § 175-19.   Powers and duties.



   § 175-20.   Time limit for decisions.



   § 175-21.   Certificate of appropriateness.



ARTICLE V
Zoning Board of Adjustment



   § 175-22.   Establishment.



   § 175-23.   (Reserved)



   § 175-24.   Voting by absent members.



   § 175-25.   (Reserved)



   § 175-26.   Officers; other staff and services.



   § 175-27.   Rules and regulations.



   § 175-28.   General powers and duties.



   § 175-29.   Additional powers.



   § 175-30.   Appeals and applications.



   § 175-31.   Time limit for decisions.



ARTICLE VI
Provisions Applicable to Both Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment



   § 175-32.   Conflicts of interest.



   § 175-33.   Meetings.



   § 175-34.   Minutes.



   § 175-35.   Twenty-one-day requirement.



   § 175-36.   Hearings.



   § 175-37.   Notification of Pinelands Commission.



   § 175-38.   Public notice requirements for hearings.



   § 175-39.   List of property owners.



   § 175-40.   Decisions.



   § 175-41.   Publication of decisions.



   § 175-42.   Proof of payment of taxes; corporate disclosure.



   § 175-43.   Appeal to Town Council.



   § 175-44.   Information to be available to Environmental Commission.



   § 175-45.   Certificate of subdivision approval.



ARTICLE VII
Fees



   § 175-46.   Payment of fees; escrow; agreement.



   § 175-47.   Subdivision review fees.



   § 175-48.   Categories of site plan fees.



   § 175-49.   Site plan review fees.



   § 175-50.   Other fees and escrows.



   § 175-50.1.   Development fees.



ARTICLE VIII
Development Review and Approval



   § 175-51.   Definitions.



   § 175-52.   Review requirements; exemptions; waivers; deviations.



   § 175-53.   Concept design review.



   § 175-54.   Filing of applications with Pinelands Commission.



   § 175-55.   Minor subdivision review.



   § 175-56.   Review of major subdivisions and planned development.



   § 175-57.   Minor site plan review.



   § 175-58.   Major site plan review.



   § 175-59.   Conditional use review.



   § 175-60.   Pinelands Commission review.



   § 175-61.   Procedure for application for development of
single-family dwellings.



   § 175-62.   Conditional approvals.



   § 175-63.   Standards for development review.



ARTICLE IX
Plat Detail and Data



   § 175-64.   Plat conformity required.



   § 175-65.   Conceptual plan.



   § 175-66.   Minor subdivision plat.



   § 175-67.   Preliminary major subdivision and planned development
plans.



   § 175-68.   Final plat for major subdivision and planned
development.



   § 175-69.   Minor site plan.



   § 175-70.   Preliminary major site plan.



   § 175-71.   Final major site plan.



ARTICLE X
Guaranties; Inspections; Acceptance of Improvements



   § 175-72.   Guaranties for on-tract improvements.



   § 175-73.   Guaranties for off-tract improvements.



   § 175-74.   Certification or guaranty required; estimate of
guaranty.



   § 175-75.   Approval by Town Attorney.



   § 175-76.   Bonding and cash requirements.



   § 175-77.   Inspections and tests.



   § 175-78.   Reduction of guaranty.



   § 175-79.   Conditions for acceptance of improvements; maintenance
guaranty.



   § 175-80.   Certificate of occupancy.



ARTICLE XI
Effect of Approvals



   § 175-81.   Preliminary approval of major subdivisions and major
site plans.



   § 175-82.   Final approval of major subdivisions and major site
plans.



   § 175-83.   Approval of minor subdivisions.



   § 175-84.   Approval of minor site plan.



   § 175-85.   Suspension of running period of approval.



ARTICLE XII
Design, Performance and Evaluation Standards



   § 175-86.   General standards.



   § 175-87.   Accessory buildings.



   § 175-88.   Agricultural management.



   § 175-89.   Air quality.



   § 175-90.   Blocks.



   § 175-91.   Buffer areas; motor vehicle screening and storage.



   § 175-92.   Building design.



   § 175-93.   Outdoor furnishings in Downtown Districts.



   § 175-94.   Corner lots.



   § 175-95.   Curbs.



   § 175-96.   Easements.



   § 175-97.   Energy conservation.



   § 175-98.   Fences and walls.



   § 175-99.   Environmental impact statement.



   § 175-100.   Fire management.



   § 175-101.   Fire hydrants.



   § 175-102.   Fish and wildlife.



   § 175-103.   Floodplain regulations.



   § 175-104.   Forestry.



   § 175-105.   Grading and filling.



   § 175-106.   Height limitations.



   § 175-107.   Historical, archaeological and cultural preservation.



   § 175-108.   Home occupations.



   § 175-109.   Home professional office.



   § 175-110.   Homeowners' association.



   § 175-111.   Hotels and motels.



   § 175-112.   On-site lighting.



   § 175-112.1.   Lot grading and drainage.



   § 175-113.   Lots.



   § 175-114.   Mobile agricultural employee housing.



   § 175-115.   Mobile homes.



   § 175-116.   Monuments.



   § 175-117.   Nonconforming uses, structures or lots.



   § 175-118.   Off-street parking and loading.



   § 175-119.   Contributions for off-tract improvements.



   § 175-120.   Performance standards.



   § 175-121.   Number of principal structures and uses permitted.



   § 175-122.   Public utilities.



   § 175-123.   Open space and recreation.



   § 175-124.   Service stations and car washes.



   § 175-125.   Shade trees.



   § 175-126.   Sidewalks.



   § 175-127.   Sight triangles.



   § 175-128.   (Reserved)



   § 175-129.   Soil erosion and sediment control.



   § 175-130.   Soil removal and redistribution.



   § 175-131.   Storage of recreational vehicles and boats.



   § 175-132.   Storage of commercial vehicles.



   § 175-133.   (Reserved)



   § 175-134.   Streets.



   § 175-135.   Swimming pools.



   § 175-136.   Vegetation.



   § 175-137.   Water quality.



   § 175-138.   Waste management.



   § 175-139.   Water supply.



   § 175-140.   Wetlands.



   § 175-141.   Yard areas.



ARTICLE XIII
Zoning



   § 175-142.   Zoning districts designated.



   § 175-143.   Zoning Map.



   § 175-144.   Zone boundaries.



   § 175-145.   General regulations.



   § 175-146.   Preservation Area.



   § 175-146.1.   Special Agricultural Production District.



   § 175-147.   Forest Area.



   § 175-148.   Agricultural Production District.



   § 175-149.   Agricultural Production/Compatible Light Industry
District.



   § 175-150.   Rural Residential District.



   § 175-151.   Residential-1 District.



   § 175-152.   Residential-2 District.



   § 175-153.   Residential-3 District.



   § 175-154.   (Reserved)



   § 175-154.1.   Gateway District, Avenue.



   § 175-154.2.   Gateway District, Boulevard.



   § 175-154.3.   Gateway District, Crossroads.



   § 175-154.4.   Downtown District, Near Town.



   § 175-154.5.   Downtown District, In Town Railway.



   § 175-154.6.   Downtown District, In Town.



   § 175-154.7.   Downtown District, Downtown.



   § 175-154.8.   Conditional Uses, Downtown and Gateway Districts.



   § 175-154.9.   Downtown Improvement District.



   § 175-155.   Highway Business District.



   § 175-156.   General requirements for business districts.



   § 175-157.   Industrial Park District.



   § 175-158.   Multi-Use District.



   § 175-158.1.   Inclusionary Development Zone.



   § 175-159.   Recreation Zone.



   § 175-160.   Building types.



   § 175-161.   Signs.



   § 175-162.   (Reserved)



ARTICLE XIV
Penalties; Enforcement; Duration of Variances



   § 175-163.   Violations and penalties.



   § 175-164.   Enforcement.



   § 175-165.   Duration of variances.



ARTICLE XV
Outstanding Permits, Approvals and Variances



   § 175-166.   Effect on outstanding permits, approvals and variances.



ARTICLE XVI
Repealer; Severability; When Effective



   § 175-167.   Repealer.



   § 175-168.   Severability.



   § 175-169.   When effective; filing with county; amendments.



ARTICLE XVII
Stormwater Management



   § 175-170.   Scope and purpose.



   § 175-171.   Requirements for site development stormwater plan.



   § 175-172.   Methodologies for calculation of stormwater runoff
rate and volume, stormwater runoff quality and groundwater recharge.



   § 175-173.   Stormwater management performance standards for major
development.



   § 175-174.   Design construction and safety standards for
structural stormwater; management measures.



   § 175-175.   Inspection, maintenance and repair of stormwater
management measures.



   § 175-176.   Definitions.



   § 175-177.   Violations and penalties.



   § 175-178.   When effective.



   § 175-179.   Appendices.



   § 175-180.   Additional sources for technical guidance.



ARTICLE XVIII
Personal Wireless Telecommunications Facilities



   § 175-181.   Purpose.



   § 175-182.   Development.



   § 175-183.   Design standards.



   § 175-184.   Collocation policy.



ARTICLE XIX
Wind and Solar Energy Systems



   § 175-185.   Purpose.



   § 175-186.   Small wind energy systems and solar energy systems
permitted as accessory uses; restrictions.



   § 175-187.   Development requirements for wind energy systems.



   § 175-188.   Development requirements for solar energy systems.



   § 175-189.   General requirements for all small wind energy systems
and solar energy systems.



   Drawing: 2-Lot



   Drawing: 3-Lot



[HISTORY: Adopted by the Mayor and Common Council of the Town of Hammonton
9-10-1984 by Ord. No. 17-1984. 1 Amendments noted where applicable.]



1.   Editor's Note: This ordinance was reaffirmed as the Land Use
Ordinance of the Town 6-26-2000 by Ord. No. 16-2000, which stated: “The
Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Hammonton, adopted by the Mayor and Common
Council of the Town of Hammonton 9-10-1984 by Ord. No. 17-1984, and
amendments thereto, as revised and codified by General Code Publishers Corp.
and renumbered as Chapter 175, is hereby approved, adopted, ordained and
enacted the land use legislation of the Town of Hammonton.”



HOW TO USE THE NEW CODE ELEMENTS



The downtown provisions of Hammonton's Land Development Ordinance can be used
by following these SIX simple steps:



1.   Zoning Map. Locate your property on the Zoning Map (§ 175-143) and
use the corresponding color key to identify your property's District.



2.   District Standards. Find the District Standards  (§ 175-154.1
through § 175-154.8) for the district in which your property is located.



3.   Building Types. Determine the Building Types that can be built in
your specific Zoning District by examining  Figure 160B in § 175-160.



4.   Bulk Requirements. Follow the Building Type Bulk Requirements (§
175-160) for the specific Building Type.



5.   Compliance. Comply with additional standards by reviewing Article XII
for specifications regarding design, performance, and evaluation.*



6.   Application. Proceed to Development Review and Approval (Article
VIII) to prepare for permit application submittal.



* The remaining  Sections are used as regulatory support documents to advise
the user on special circumstances or uses. These include General Standards
and methods and standards for handling off-street parking. Comply with these
sections if applicable and refer to the Definitions for more information.



ARTICLE I
General Provisions



§ 175-1. Purpose.



   There is hereby ordained by the Town Council for the Town of Hammonton,
Atlantic County, New Jersey, pursuant to the provisions of the New Jersey
Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.) and to implement the
Pinelands Protection Act (N.J.S.A. 13:18A-1 to 18A-29) and the Pinelands
Comprehensive Management Plan, a land development ordinance for the purpose
of and in order to: effectuate the Master Plan, enacted to guide the
appropriate development and redevelopment of land in a manner which will
promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare; regulate the
use of land within zoning districts; secure safety from fire, flood, panic
and other natural and man-made disasters; provide adequate light, air and
open space; limit and restrict buildings according to their type and the
nature and extent of their use and regulate the nature and extent of the use
of land for all purposes; regulate the bulk, height, number of stories and
size of buildings and other structures; avoid a conflict with the development
and general welfare of neighboring municipalities, the county and the state;
establish appropriate population densities and concentrations contributing to
the well-being of persons, neighborhoods, communities and regions and the
preservation of the environment; provide sufficient space for residential,
recreational, commercial and industrial uses and open space; encourage the
location and design of transportation routes which will promote the free flow
of traffic while discouraging the location of such facilities and routes
which result in congestion or blight; promote a desirable visual environment
through creative development techniques and good civic design and
arrangement; promote the conservation of open space and valuable natural
resources and to prevent urban sprawl and degradation of the environment
through improper use of land; encourage coordination of various public and
private procedures and activities shaping land development with a view to
lessening the cost of such development and to the more efficient use of land;
encourage planned development which incorporates the best features of design
and relates the type, design and layout of residential, commercial,
industrial and recreational development to the particular site; encourage
senior citizen community housing construction; promote the conservation of
energy through the use of planning practices designed to reduce energy
consumption and to provide for maximum utilization of renewable energy
sources; and preserve and protect the significant and unique resources of the
Pinelands.



§ 175-2. Conformance required.



   From and after the effective date of this chapter, the use of all land
and every building or portion of a building erected, altered with respect to
height and area, added to or relocated and every use within a building or use
accessory thereto, in the Town of Hammonton, shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter. Any existing building or structure and any
existing use of a building or land not in conformity with the regulations
herein prescribed shall be regarded as nonconforming, but may be continued,
extended or changed subject to the special regulations herein provided.



§ 175-3. Interpretation.



   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall
be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the
provisions of this chapter impose greater restrictions than those of any
statute, other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall
be controlling. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance or
regulation impose greater restrictions than this chapter, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance or regulation shall be controlling.



§ 175-4. Authority to be exclusive.



   Any power expressly authorized by this chapter (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq.) to be exercised by the Planning Board and/or the Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall not be exercised by any other body, except as otherwise
provided herein.



§ 175-5. Effect on powers of governing body.



   Nothing herein shall be construed to contravene any other ordinance or
state statute providing for procedures for governing bodies. (See N.J.S.A.
40:55D-9a.)



§ 175-6. Citizens' Advisory Committee.



   The Mayor may appoint one or more persons as a Citizens' Advisory
Committee to assist or collaborate with the Planning Board in its duties.
Such person or persons shall have no power to vote or take other action
required of the Board. Such person or persons shall serve at the pleasure of
the Mayor. (See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-27a.)



§ 175-7. Zoning Officer.



   There is hereby established the office of Zoning Officer, who shall be
appointed by the Town Council. The Zoning Officer shall, along with the
Construction Code Official and his office, enforce the provisions of this
chapter.



§ 175-8. Compensation of board members.



   The Town Council may, upon adoption of a salary ordinance, adopt a
manner of payment of a salary and/or the reimbursement of expenses for the
members of the Planning Board and the Zoning Board of Adjustment.



ARTICLE II
Definitions



§ 175-9. Word usage.



   A.   Any word or term not defined shall be utilized with a meaning
of standard usage for the context in which the word is used.



   B.   In the interpretation of this chapter, the following words and
their derivations shall have the meanings herein given. Except when the
context clearly requires otherwise:



      (1)   Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include
other tenses and derivative forms.



      (2)   Words in the singular shall include the plural, and
words in the plural shall include the singular.



      (3)   The masculine gender shall include the feminine, and the
feminine gender shall include the masculine.



      (4)   The word "shall" is mandatory.



      (5)   The word "may" is permissive.



      (6)   In case of any difference of meaning or implication
between the text of this chapter and any caption, the text shall control.



§ 175-10. Terms defined.



   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:



   ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT — A single bedroom and associated living
area, kitchen and bathroom facilities within an accessory structure in DT-1,
DT-2, DT-3, or GW-1 Zones on a lot for which residential use is allowable. To
be occupied by no more than two people.



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE — Except as otherwise expressly authorized
by the provisions of this chapter, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. and/or the
Pinelands Comprehensive Management Plan, and/or § 175-160 “Accessory
Structure Building Type in Downtown and Gateway Districts,” is a building,
structure or use which:



[Amended 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   A.   Is subordinate and incidental to and serves a principal
building or a principal use.



   B.   Is subordinate in area, extent and purpose to the principal
structure or principal building or a principal use.



   C.   Contributes primarily to the comfort, convenience or necessity
of the occupants, business or industry of the principal structure or
principal use served.



[Amended 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



   D.   Is located on the same parcel as the principal structure or
principal use served.



[Amended 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



   ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Clerk of the town, unless a different
town official or officials have been designated by ordinance or statute.



   ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having as a substantial or
significant portion of its stock-in-trade books, magazines, other
periodicals, films and other viewing materials which are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating
to specified sexual activity, sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas.



   ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — Any structure used for presenting
films, slides or pictures distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activity,
sexual conduct or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons
therein.



   ADVERSE EFFECT — Conditions or situations, whether existing or
proposed, creating, imposing, aggravating or leading to impractical, unsafe
or unsatisfactory conditions on a property proposed for development or on
adjacent property, including but not limited to: improper circulation and
drainage rights-of-way; inadequate drainage facilities; insufficient street
widths, unsuitable street grades, unsuitable street locations to accommodate
prospective traffic or to coordinate and compose a convenient system;
disruptive environmental impacts; locating lots in a manner not adaptable for
the intended purpose without danger to health or peril from flood, fire,
erosion or other menace; providing for lots of insufficient size and neither
providing nor making future allowance for access to the interior portion of
the lot or for other facilities required by this chapter.



   AFFORDABLE HOUSING — Housing which falls within the financial means
of a household in accordance with economic guidelines as may be established
and published from time to time by the United States Department of Housing
and Urban Development and the State of New Jersey.



[Amended 12-27-1999 by Ord. No. 35-1999]



   AGRICULTURAL COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — A retail sales establishment
primarily intended to sell agricultural products produced in the Pinelands.
An agricultural commercial establishment may be seasonal or year-round and
may or may not be associated directly with a farm; however, it does not
include supermarkets, convenience stores, restaurants and other
establishments which coincidentally sell agricultural products, nor does it
include agricultural production facilities such as a farm itself, nor
facilities which are solely processing facilities.



[Added 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



   AGRICULTURAL EMPLOYEE HOUSING — Residential dwellings for the
seasonal use of employees of an agricultural or horticultural use which,
because of their character or location, are not to be used for permanent
housekeeping units and which are otherwise accessory to a principal use of
the lot for agriculture.



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



   AGRICULTURAL OR HORTICULTURAL PURPOSE OR USE — The use of land for
the activity of producing for sale or for home use or consumption plants or
animals useful to man, including but not limited to: forages or sod crops;
grains and feed crops; dairy animals and dairy products; poultry and poultry
products; livestock, including beef cattle, sheep, swine, horses, ponies,
mules or goats and including the breeding and grazing of any or all of such
animals; bees and apiary products; fur animals; trees and forest products;
fruits of all kinds, including grapes, nuts and berries; vegetables; nursery,
floral, ornamental and greenhouse products; or any land devoted to and
meeting the requirements and qualifications for payments or other
compensation pursuant to a soil conservation program under an agency of the
federal government.



   AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS PROCESSING FACILITY — A facility designed,
constructed and operated for the express purpose of processing agricultural
products grown in the Pinelands, including washing, grading and packaging of
those products.



[Added 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



   ALTERATIONS or ADDITIONS — As applied to a building or a structure, a
change or rearrangement in the structural parts, in the existing facilities
or in the means of egress; or an enlargement, whether by extension of a side
or by increasing in height; or the moving from one location or position to
another. In Zoning District B-1, also means any change in the front facade of
any structure or any site element normally visible to the public.



   ALTERNATE DESIGN PILOT PROGRAM TREATMENT SYSTEM — An individual or
community on-site waste water treatment system that has the capability of
providing a high level of treatment, including a significant reduction in the
level of total nitrogen in the wastewater, limited to the following systems
authorized for use for residential development by the pilot program
established in N.J.A.C. 7:50-10, Part IV:



[Added 5-27-2003 by Ord. No. 7-2003]



   A.   Ashco RFS III;



   B.   FAST;



   C.   Cromaglass;



   D.   Bioclere; and



   E.   Amphidrome.



   AMENDMENT — A means for making changes in this chapter or to the
certified Master Plan herein as expressly authorized.



   ANIMALS, THREATENED OR ENDANGERED — As specifically set forth in the
Comprehensive Management Plan, Section 6-302, Fish and Wildlife. (See
N.J.A.C. 7:50-3.12.)



   ANTENNA — A system of electrical conductors that transmits or
receives radio frequency signals for communications purposes.



[Added 8-23-2004 by Ord. No. 22-2004]



   ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A structure, other than a
telecommunications tower, which is attached to a building upon which one or
more antennas are located.



[Added 8-23-2004 by Ord. No. 22-2004]



   APPLICANT — A developer, landowner or person with an enforceable
proprietary interest submitting an application for development.



   APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Any application filed with any
approving authority for any approval, authorization or permit which is a
prerequisite to initiating development in the Pinelands Area, except as
provided in § 175-60A.



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



   APPROVING AUTHORITY — The Planning Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment
or other board, agency or official, when acting pursuant to the authority of
this chapter, with authority to approve or disapprove subdivisions, site
plans, construction permits, building permits or other applications for
development approval.



   APRON SHOPFRONT — A building type that is typically a commercial
property that has been converted from single houses and expanded with an
apron, which is created when commercial design elements are added to the
ground floor space between the original structure and the sidewalk.



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   ARTIFICIAL REGENERATION — The establishment of tree cover through
direct or supplemental seeding or planting.



[Added 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 005-2013]



   ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY — A facility licensed by the New Jersey
Department of Health and Senior Services pursuant to N.J.A.C. 8:36-1 et seq.
which is designed and operated to provide apartment-style housing and
congregate dining while assuring that a coordinated array of supportive
personal and health services are available, as needed, to four or more adult
persons unrelated to the proprietor. Each unit in an assisted living facility
shall offer, at a minimum, one unfurnished room, a private bathroom, a
kitchenette and a lockable door on the unit entrance. "Assisted living
facility" shall include assisted living residences and assisted living
programs as defined at N.J.A.C. 8:36-1.3.



[Added 5-21-2007 by Ord. No. 13-2007]



   BANK OR SAVINGS INSTITUTION — An officially chartered institution
empowered to receive deposits, make loans, and provide checking and saving
account services, all at a profit.



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   BAR OR TAVERN — An establishment in which alcoholic beverages are
served, primarily by the drink, and where food or packaged liquors may also
be served or sold.



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   BASEMENT — That portion of a building which is partly below and
partly above grade and having at least 1/2 its height above grade. (See
"grade," "story" and "cellar.")



   BEDDING — A silvicultural practice involving the preparation of land
before planting in the form of small mounds so as to concentrate topsoil and
elevate the root zone of seedlings above temporary standing water.



[Added 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 005-2013]



   BLOCK — A unit of land bounded by streets or by a combination of
streets and public land, railroad rights-of-way, waterways, or any other
barrier to the continuity of development.



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT — The Board established pursuant to Article V
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69) of this chapter and known legally as the "Zoning Board
of Adjustment."



   BROADCAST SCARIFICATION — A silvicultural practice involving the
dragging of cut trees or other objects across a parcel to remove or reduce
above-ground shrub cover, debris, leaf litter and humus without disturbance
to mineral soil horizons and associated roots.



[Added 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 005-2013]



   BUFFER — A strip of land containing natural woodlands, earth mounds
and/or planted screening material and separating one kind of land use or one
property from another and which is more specifically defined in § 175-91 of
this chapter.



   BUILDING  — Any structure, either temporary or permanent, which:



   A.   Has a roof.



   B.   Is designed, used or intended to be used for any use or
occupancy, including but not limited to the sheltering or protection of
persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind.



   C.   Forms, by a combination of materials, a construction adapted to
such occupancy.



   BUILDING AND STRUCTURE HEIGHT — The dimension of a building, measured
from the average slope point of grade along the building's perimeter to the
highest point along the roofline. This dimension is expressed in both feet
and stories.



[Amended 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   BUILDING AREA — The area included within surrounding exterior walls
(or exterior walls and fire walls), exclusive of vent shafts, courts,
cornices, eaves and gutters. Areas of the building not provided with
surrounding walls shall be included in the building area if included within
the horizontal projection of the roof or floor above.



   BUILDING COVERAGE — The square footage or other area measurement by
which all buildings occupy a lot, as measured on a horizontal plane around
the periphery of the foundations, and including the area under the roof of
any structure supported by columns, but not having walls, as measured around
the outside of the outermost extremities of the roof above the columns.



   BUILDING, EXISTING — Any building erected prior to the adoption of
this chapter, or one for which a legal building permit has been issued.



   BUILDING LINE — The line parallel to the street line at a distance
there from equal to the depth of the required front yard. A building shall
not extend beyond this line, except for encroachments as otherwise allowed in
this chapter.



[Amended 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   BUILDING SITE — The area occupied by a building or structure,
including the yards and courts required for light and ventilation and such
areas that are prescribed for access to the street.



   BUILDING TYPE — A structure that is determined by a building's
height, scale, use, and location of the building on its lot.



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   BULK REGULATIONS — Standards applying to individual lots that control
the placement, intensity, and character of development and include the amount
of open space on the lot, the height of structures, setbacks from property
lines and public rights-of-way, impervious coverage, floor area ratio, and
density.



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   BUSINESS — Retail business and service establishments, including
retail shops, personal service establishments, business and professional
offices, banks and fiduciary institutions, eating and drinking
establishments, hotels and motels, commercial recreation and public assembly
halls, funeral homes, commercial parking lots and the like.



   CAMOUFLAGE — A design technique which is planned to enhance
compatibility with the adjacent land uses and environment, including but not
limited to architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, antennas
integrated into architectural elements, and telecommunications towers
designed to appear as light poles, power poles and trees. It also includes
the use of appropriate landscape designs. The term "camouflage" does not
necessarily exclude the use of lattice, guyed or monopole tower designs. 



[Added 8-23-2004 by Ord. No. 22-2004]



   CAMPER — A portable structure, which is self-propelled or mounted on
or towed by another vehicle, designed and used for temporary living for
travel, recreation, vacation or other short-term uses. "Camper" does not
include mobile homes or trailers.



[Added 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



   CAMPSITE — A place used or suitable for camping on which temporary
shelter, such as a tent or camper, may be placed and occupied on a temporary
and seasonal basis. 



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT — A governmental acquisition of real property or
major construction project.



   CARTWAY — The hard or paved surface portion of a street customarily
used by vehicles in the regular course of travel. Where there are curbs, the
cartway is the portion between the curbs. Where there are no curbs, the
cartway is that portion between the edges of the paved or graded width.



   CELLAR — That portion of a building which is partly or completely
below grade and having at least ½ its height below grade. (See "grade,"
"story" and "basement.")



   CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — A certificate issued pursuant to §
175-21 of this chapter and N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.156.



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989 2 ]



   CERTIFICATE OF FILING — The certificate issued by the Pinelands
Commission which is a prerequisite to the filing of a complete application
for major development with any local approving agency (N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.34 and
50-4.82). 



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



   CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY — The certificate issued by the
Construction Code Official which permits the use of a building in accordance
with the approved plans and specifications and which certifies compliance
with the provisions of law for the use and occupancy of the building in its
several parts, together with any special stipulations or conditions of the
building permit.



   CERTIFIED COUNTY MASTER PLAN OR ORDINANCE — Any county master plan or
ordinance certified by the Pinelands Commission pursuant to the Comprehensive
Management Plan (N.J.A.C. 7:50-3.21 through 50-3.30) as being in conformance
with the minimum standards of said plan.



   CERTIFIED MUNICIPAL MASTER PLAN OR LAND USE ORDINANCE — Any municipal
master plan or land use ordinance certified by the Commission pursuant to the
Comprehensive Management Plan (N.J.A.C. 7:50-3.31 through 50-3.50) as being
in conformance with the minimum standards of said plan.



   CHANGE OF USE — An alteration to a heretofore existing building from
one type of use group to a new use group which imposes provisions of law
governing building construction, equipment or means of egress, and which
provisions are special to the form of use proposed.



   CIRCULATION — Systems, structures and physical improvements for the
movement of people, goods, water, air, sewage or power by such means as
streets, highways, railways, waterways, towers, airways, pipes and conduits,
and the handling of people and goods by such means as terminals, stations,
warehouses and other storage buildings or transshipment points. 3



   CIVIC BUILDING — A building type that contains a public or civic use
of special significance to residents, employees, or visitors. Civic buildings
are used for the following purposes: community services, daycare, education,
government, places of worship, or social services. Civic buildings do not
include retail buildings, residential buildings, or buildings with private
offices.



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   CIVIC USE — Use of a lot, building, or structure by a house of
worship, library, school, or municipal use.



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   CLEARCUTTING — A silvicultural practice involving removal of an
entire forest stand in one cutting for purposes of regeneration either
obtained artificially, by natural seed or from advanced regeneration. Clear
cutting typically results in the removal of all woody vegetation from a
parcel in preparation for the establishment of new trees; however, some trees
may be left on the parcel.



[Added 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 005-2013]



   CMP — The Comprehensive Management Plan for the Pinelands.



   COAH — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing.



[Added 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 28-2002; amended 8-26-2002 by Ord. No. 32-2002]



   COLOCATION — Use of a common PWTF, or a common site, by two or more
wireless license holders, or by one wireless license holder for more than one
type of communications technology, and/or placement of a PWTF on a structure
owned or operated by a utility or other public entity.



[Added 8-23-2004 by Ord. No. 22-2004]



   COMMENCEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION — Actual construction on a parcel of
land in accordance with a permit issued by the applicable approving authority
of a form and character such that the work performed is not usable for any
other form of development except that authorized by the issued permit.



   COMMERCIAL FOREST — Any parcel of land five acres or larger used for
profit or gain by the cutting of trees for sale as fuel or wood products.



   COMMON OPEN SPACE — An open space area within or related to a site
designated as a development and designed and intended for the use or
enjoyment of residents and owners of the development. Common open space may
contain such complementary structures and improvements as are necessary and
appropriate for the use or enjoyment of residents and owners of the
development.



   COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR THE DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED — Any community
residential facility licensed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:11B-1 et seq.,
providing food, shelter and personal guidance, under such supervision as
required, to not more than 15 developmentally disabled or mentally ill
persons who require assistance, temporarily or permanently, in order to live
in the community, and shall include, but not be limited to: group homes,
halfway houses, intermediate care facilities, supervised apartment living
arrangements and hotels. It shall not be considered a health care facility
within the meaning of the Health Care Facilities Planning Act, N.J.S.A.
26:2H-1 et seq. In the case of such residence housing mentally ill persons,
such residence shall have been approved for a purchase of service contract or
an affiliation agreement pursuant to such procedures as shall be established
by regulation of the Division of Mental Health and Hospitals of the
Department of Human Services.



   COMMUNITY SHELTER FOR VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE — Any shelter
approved for a purchase of service contract and certified pursuant to
standards and procedures established by regulation of the Department of Human
Services pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:14-1 et seq., providing food, shelter,
medical care, legal assistance, personal guidance and other services to not
more than 15 persons who have been victims of domestic violence, including
any children of such victims, who temporarily require shelter and assistance
in order to protect their physical or psychological welfare.



   COMPLETE APPLICATION — An application form completed as specified by
this chapter and the rules and regulations of the approving board and all
accompanying documents required by this chapter for approval of the
application for development, including, where applicable, but not limited to,
a site plan or subdivision plat, provided that the board may require such
additional information not specified in this chapter or any revisions in the
accompanying documents as are reasonably necessary to make an informed
decision as to whether the requirements necessary for approval of the
application for development have been met. The application shall not be
deemed incomplete for lack of any such additional information or any
revisions in the accompanying documents so required by the municipal agency.
An application shall be certified as complete immediately upon the meeting of
all requirements specified in the ordinance and in the rules and regulations
of the board and shall be deemed complete as of the day it is so certified by
the administrative officer for purposes of the commencement of the time
period for action by the board.



   COMPREHENSIVE MANAGEMENT PLAN — The plan and amendments adopted by
the Pinelands Commission pursuant to Section 7 of the Pinelands Protection
Act and to be cited as "N.J.A.C. 7:50 et seq."



   CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
only upon a showing that such use in the specified location will comply with
the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such use as
contained in this chapter and upon the issuance of an authorization therefor
by the Planning Board.



   CONSTRUCTION — The erection, reconstruction, alteration, conversion,
demolition, removal or equipping of buildings or structures.



   CONTIGUOUS LANDS — Land which is connected or adjacent to other land
so as to permit the land to be used as a functional unit, provided that
separation by lot line, streams, dedicated public roads which are not paved,
rights-of-way and easements shall not affect the contiguity of land unless a
substantial physical barrier is created which prevents the land from being
used as a functional unit. 



[Amended 6-28-1993 by Ord. No. 13-1993]



   COPPICING — A silvicultural practice involving the production of
forest stands from vegetative sprouting by the trees that are harvested
(stump sprouts, root suckers, and naturally rooted layers). Coppicing
typically involves short rotations with dense stands of short trees.



[Added 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 005-2013]



   CORNICE LINE — A prominent, continuous, horizontally projecting
feature surmounting a building's front facade, dividing it horizontally for
compositional purposes.



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   COTTAGE HOUSE — A variant of the single house with a lower allowable
height and smaller side and front setbacks. It is intended for smaller lots.



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   COUNTY — The County of Atlantic unless otherwise specified.



   COUNTY MASTER PLAN — A composite of the Master Plan for the physical
development of Atlantic County with the accompanying maps, plats, charts and
descriptive and explanatory matter adopted by the County Planning Board
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-2 and 40:27-4 or their successor statutes.



   COUNTY PLANNING BOARD — The County Planning Board, as defined and
organized pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.1, of the county in which the land or
development is located. Said Board is responsible for county planning.



   CROSSWALK — An Americans with Disabilities Act and Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices compliant path clearly delineated on a street,
parking lot, or access drive to indicate where pedestrians should cross.



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   CURB CUT — A break in the curb line and sidewalk for means of ingress
or egress of motor vehicles.



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   DATE OF SUBMISSION OF AN APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The date of
filing offered by the Board Secretary.



   DAY — For purposes of computing time limits, refers to a calendar day.



   DAYCARE — A use category, applicable to certain building types in
certain Downtown and Gateway Districts, for daytime training, supervision,
recreation, and often medical services for children of preschool age, for the
disabled, or for the elderly.



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   DENSITY, GROSS — The total number of units in the proposed
development divided by the total number of acres of the proposed development
site.



   DENSITY, NET — The total number of dwelling units in a proposed
development divided by the total number of acres of the proposed development
site, exclusive of commercial and industrial uses and land to be dedicated to
a public agency or government.



   DEVELOPER —



   A.   The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any land
proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the holder of an
option or contract to purchase, or other person having an enforceable
proprietary interest in such land.



   B.   Any person or persons or entity who seeks building permits or
certificates of occupancy as a result of residential development. 



[Added 8-23-2004 by Ord. No. 21-2004]



   DEVELOPMENT — The change of or enlargement of any use or disturbance
of any land, the performance of any building or mining operation, the
division of land into two or more parcels and the creation or termination of
rights of access or riparian rights, including but not limited to:



   A.   A change in type of use of a structure or land.



   B.   A reconstruction, alteration of the size or material change in
the external appearance of a structure or land.



   C.   A material increase in the intensity of use of land, such as an
increase in the number of businesses, manufacturing establishments, offices
or dwelling units in a structure or on land.



   D.   Commencement of resource extraction, drilling or excavation on
a parcel of land.



   E.   Demolition of a structure or removal of trees.



   F.   Deposit of refuse, solid or liquid waste or fill on a parcel of
land.



   G.   In connection with the use of land, the making of any material
change in noise levels, thermal conditions or emissions of waste material.



   H.   Alteration, either physically or chemically, of a shore, bank
or floodplain, seacoast, river, stream, lake, pond, wetlands or artificial
body of water.



   I.   Commencement of forestry activities. 



[Added 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



   DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED PERSON — A person who is developmentally
disabled, as defined in N.J.S.A. 30:11B-2.



   DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL — Any approval granted by any town approving
authority.



   DEVELOPMENT FEES — Money paid by an individual, person, partnership,
association, company or corporation for the improvement of property as
permitted in COAH's rules. 



[Added 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 28-2002; amended 8-26-2002 by Ord. No. 32-2002]



   DEVELOPMENT, PUBLIC — Any development by a public agency.



   DEVELOPMENT REGULATION — A zoning ordinance, subdivision ordinance,
site plan ordinance, official map ordinance or other municipal regulation for
the use and development of land, or amendment thereto, adopted and filed.



   DISKING — A silvicultural practice involving the drawing of one or
more heavy, round, concave, sharpened, freely rotating steel disks across a
site for the purposes of cutting through soil and roots or cutting and
turning a furrow over an area.



[Added 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 005-2013]



   DISPLAY WINDOWS — Windows on the ground story of a building that
allow visibility into and out of a retail space and are used for retail
display. 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   DISTRICT — A portion of the territory of the town within which
certain regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof apply.



   DIVISION — The Division of State and Regional Planning in the
Department of Community Affairs.



   DOWNTOWN BUILDING — A multistory building type with one or more
dwellings or offices in upper stories and retail or office uses on the ground
floor. 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   DOWNTOWN DISTRICT — One of a group of districts in Hammonton
surrounding Bellevue Avenue generally referred to as the downtown area. 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by
drains, grading or other means, including control of runoff to minimize
erosion and sedimentation during and after construction or development and
means necessary for water supply preservation or prevention or alleviation of
flooding.



   DRAINAGE AND UTILITY RIGHT-OF-WAY — The lands required for the
installation and maintenance of stormwater and sanitary sewers, water pipes
or drainage ditches and other utilities or lands required along a natural
stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the flow
of water therein to safeguard the public against flood damage.



   DRUM CHOPPING — A silvicultural practice involving the drawing of a
large cylindrical drum with cutting blades mounted parallel to its axis
across a site to break up slash, crush scrubby vegetation prior to burning or
planting or to chop up and disturb the organic turf and roots in the upper
foot of soil.



[Added 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 005-2013]



   DUPLEX — A detached building occupying a single lot where the family
dwelling units are separated by a horizontal floor, unpierced except for
access to the outside or to a common basement or cellar.



   DWELLING, SEMIDETACHED — A building occupying a single lot, separated
into two dwelling units by a vertical party wall, unpierced except for access
to the outside or to a common basement or cellar.



   DWELLING UNIT/APARTMENT, MULTIPLE-FAMILY — A suite of rooms designed
for or occupied by one family or household and situated in a building
containing three or more such suites of rooms. Such units may share some
facilities, utilities or services, such as entrance halls, electric or water
connections, basement areas, heating plant or refuse disposal facilities.



   DWELLING UNIT or DWELLING — One or more rooms used or intended to be
used for living purposes by one or more persons living together and
maintaining a common household, having separate cooking and sanitary
facilities and accessible from the outdoors, either directly or through an
entrance hall shared with other dwelling units except in the case of
accessory dwelling units. Not included are mobile homes, hotels, motels,
lodging houses, boardinghouses or tourist homes. 



[Amended 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   DWELLING UNIT, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED (townhouse, rowhouse) — A
dwelling unit which is one of a group of three or more attached dwelling
units separated by vertical party walls, each having separate front and rear
or front and side entrances from the outside and a full complement of
utilities and facilities for use as a dwelling unit.



   DWELLING UNIT, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED — A building on a lot designed
and occupied exclusively as a residence for one family or household, which
has yard or open areas on all sides, having no common walls with any other
building.



   DWELLING UNIT, TWIN OR TWO-FAMILY — A building on a lot designed and
occupied exclusively as a residence for two families or households, which has
a common wall separating two units, each of which has a full complement of
utilities and facilities for use as a dwelling and separate means of ingress
and egress.



   EAVE LINE — For a pitched roof, the lowest point of the primary roof
structure. 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   EAVE LINE — The distance of a building measured from grade to the
eave line. 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION LINES — All electric lines other than electric
transmission lines.



[Added 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



   ELECTRIC TRANSMISSION LINE  — Electric lines which are part of an
electric company's transmission and sub transmission system, which provide a
direct connection between a generating station or substation of the utility
company and:



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



   A.   Another substation of the utility company.



   B.   A substation of or interconnection point with another
interconnecting utility company.



   C.   A substation of a high-load customer of the utility.



   ENLARGEMENT — An addition to the floor area of an existing building,
an increase in the size of any other existing structure or an increase in the
portion of a tract of land occupied by an existing use.



   ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION — A town advisory body created pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq.



   EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The value of a property determined by the
Municipal Tax Assessor through a process designed to ensure that all property
in the municipality is assessed at the same assessment ratio or ratios
required by law. Estimates at the time of issuance of a building permit may
be obtained utilizing estimates for construction cost. Final equalized
assessed value will be determined at project completion by the Municipal Tax
Assessor. 



[Added 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 28-2002; amended 8-26-2002 by Ord. No. 32-2002]



   EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.



   EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR — The chief administrative officer of the
Pinelands Commission or any representative designated by such chief
administrative officer to perform any functions delegated to such chief
administrative officer pursuant to any provision of the Plan.



   FAMILY — Any number of persons, related or not, living and cooking
together as a single housekeeping unit.



   FAMILY, IMMEDIATE — Those persons related by blood or legal
relationship in the following manner: grandparents, grandchildren, parents,
sons, daughters, brothers and sisters, nieces and nephews, aunts and uncles
and first cousins, husbands and wives, great-grandparents and
great-grandchildren. 



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989; 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



   FARM, ACCESSORY USES — Buildings incidental to farms, such as:
greenhouses; buildings for housing seasonal workers for the farm's own use;
barns; packing, grading and storage buildings; buildings for keeping poultry
and permitted livestock; and garages for the keeping of equipment and trucks
used in farm operations.



   FARM BUILDING — Any building used for the housing of agricultural
equipment, produce, livestock or poultry or for the incidental or customary
processing of farm products, provided that such building is located on,
operated in conjunction with and is necessary to the operation of a farm, as
defined by this chapter.



   FARM, PRINCIPAL USES — A tract of contiguous property of at least
five acres used for the growing and harvesting of crops and the raising and
breeding of certain animals, including truck farms, fruit farms, nurseries
and greenhouses, dairies and livestock produce.



   FINAL APPROVAL — The official action of the approving board taken on
a preliminary approved major subdivision or site plan after all conditions,
engineering plans and other requirements have been completed or fulfilled and
the required improvements have been installed or guaranties properly posted
for their completion or approval conditioned upon the posting of such
guaranties.



   FISH AND WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT — The changing of the characteristics
and interactions of fish and wildlife populations and their habitats in order
to promote, protect and enhance the ecological integrity of those populations.



   FLOOD FRINGE — That portion of the flood hazard area outside of the
floodway.



   FLOOD HAZARD AREA — The floodway and relative flat areas adjoining
the floodway which have been or may be hereafter covered by floodwater and
which area, the improper development and general use of which, would
constitute a threat to the public's safety, health and general welfare. The
flood hazard area shall constitute the total area inundated by the flood
hazard design flood.



   FLOODPLAIN — The general flat terrain subject to periodic flooding
adjacent to streams, ponds, lakes or swamps.



   FLOODWAY — The channel of a natural stream and portions of the
floodplain adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to carry and
discharge the floodwater or flood flow of any natural stream. This shall
constitute the portions of the floodplain needed for the passage of the
floodway design flood without an appreciable rise in the water surface
profile.



   FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several
floors of a building, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls
or from the center line of a wall separating two buildings.



   FORESTRY



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989; 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997;
4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 005-2013]



    — The planting, cultivating and harvesting of trees for the
production of wood products, including firewood or for forest health. It
includes such practices as reforestation, site preparation and other
silvicultural practices, including but not limited to artificial
regeneration, bedding, broadcast scarification, clear cutting, coppicing,
disking, drum chopping, group selection, individual selection, natural
regeneration, root raking, seed tree cut, shelter wood cut and thinning. For
purposes of this chapter, the following activities shall not be defined as
forestry:



   A.   Removal of trees located on a parcel of land one acre or less
on which a dwelling has been constructed;



   B.   Horticultural activities involving the planting, cultivating or
harvesting of nursery stock or Christmas trees;



   C.   Removal of trees necessitated by the development of the parcel
as otherwise authorized by this chapter;



   D.   Removal of trees necessary for the maintenance of utility or
public rights-of-way;



   E.   Removal or planting of trees for the personal use of the parcel
owner; and



   F.   Removal of trees for public safety.



   FORESTRY MANAGEMENT PLAN — As set forth in the Comprehensive
Management Plan (N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.9) and § 175-104 of this chapter.



   FOREST STAND — A uniform group of trees of similar species,
composition, size, age and similar forest structure. 



[Added 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989; amended 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 005-2013]



   FRONT FACADE — The side of a building that faces a street: corner
buildings have two front facades.



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   FRONT SETBACK — Location along a line drawn parallel with the street
line or the front lot line and drawn through the point of a building or
structure nearest to the street line or front lot line to establish the
closest distance the front of the Building can be placed in relation to the
front lot line.



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   FUNERAL PARLOR — A building used for the preparation of the deceased
for burial and the display of the deceased and rituals connected therewith
before burial or cremation.



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   GARAGE, PRIVATE — A building for housing motor vehicles, with no
provision for repairing or servicing such vehicles for profit.



   GARAGE, PUBLIC — A building or part thereof, other than a private
garage, used for the storage, care or repair of motor vehicles for profit,
including any sale of motor vehicles, fuels or accessories, or in which any
such vehicles are kept for hire.



   GASOLINE FILLING STATIONS — Any area of land, including structures
thereon, that is used for the sale of gasoline or other motor vehicle fuel,
oil or lubricating substance and which may include the sale of motor vehicle
accessories and facilities for polishing, greasing, washing, spraying, dry
cleaning or otherwise cleaning or servicing such motor vehicles.



   GATEWAY DISTRICT — One of a group of districts clustered around the
intersection of White Horse Pike and Route 54, within which certain
regulations and requirements apply. 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   GOVERNING BODY — The Town Council.



   GRADE —



   A.   For buildings adjoining one street only, the elevation of the
established curb at the center of the wall adjoining the street.



   B.   For buildings adjoining more than one street, the average of
the elevations of the established curbs at the center of all walls adjoining
streets.



   C.   For buildings having no wall adjoining the street, the average
level of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building. All walls
approximately parallel to and not more than 15 feet from a street line are to
be considered as adjoining a street.



   GROUND FLOOR — The first floor of a building that is level with or
elevated above the sidewalk, excluding basements and cellars.



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   GROUND FLOOR RESIDENCE — Residence on the ground floor. 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   GROUP SELECTION — A silvicultural practice whereby a group of trees
is periodically selected to be removed from a large area so that age and size
classes of the reproduction are mixed.



[Added 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 005-2013]



   HABITAT — The natural environment of an individual animal or plant,
population or community.



   HEALTH CARE FACILITY — The office of a medical doctor, doctor of
dentistry, osteopath, chiropractor or similar practitioner, office or clinic,
hospital, convalescent home, nursing facility or any other facility, which
use is involved with the physical health of its users. 3



   HISTORIC DISTRICT — An area designated by the Pinelands Commission,
pursuant to the Comprehensive Management Code (N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.154), as
having such historic, prehistoric, architectural, cultural or archaeological
importance as to merit special protection, or such an area designated as the
"Hammonton Historic District" on the Zoning District Map, subject to the
regulations of § 175-107 of this chapter. 



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



   HISTORIC RESOURCE — Any site, building, area, district, structure or
object important in American history or prehistory, architecture, archaeology
and culture at the national, state, county, local or regional level. 



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989; 6-12-1989 by Ord. No. 19-1989;
7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997] 4



   HOME OCCUPATION — As defined in § 175-108 of this chapter.



   HOME PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — As defined in § 175-109 of this chapter.



   HOSPITAL — General hospital, as set forth in N.J.A.C. 8:43G-1.3(b)1,
which shall include any hospital licensed by the New Jersey Department of
Health and Senior Services, or any successor agency thereto, which maintains
and operates organized facilities and services, including satellite or
hospital-based off-site ambulatory care fealties, for the diagnosis,
treatment or care of persons suffering from acute illness, injury or
deformity and in which all diagnosis, treatment, and care are administered by
or performed under the direction of persons licensed to practice medicine or
osteopathy in the State of New Jersey. 



[Added 3-22-2010 by Ord. No. 3-2010]



   HOUSE OF WORSHIP — A special purpose building or structure, or a
special purpose group of buildings or structures, that is architecturally
designed, particularly adapted, and specifically constructed for the primary
use of conducting, on a regular basis, formal, organized religious services
and associated accessory uses, by a nonprofit, recognized, religious
congregation or body. 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   HYDROPHYTES — Any plant growing in water or in substrate that is at
least periodically deficient in oxygen as a result of excessive water content.



   IMPERMEABLE SURFACE — Any surface which does not permit fluids to
pass through or penetrate its pores or spaces, typically having a maximum
permeability for water of 10-7 cm/second at the maximum anticipated
hydrostatic pressure. The term "impermeable" is equivalent in meaning.



[Amended 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 005-2013]



   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any surface that has been compacted or covered
with a layer of material so that it prevents, impedes or slows infiltration
or absorption of fluid, including stormwater directly into the ground, and
results in either reduced groundwater recharge or increased stormwater runoff
sufficient to  be classified as impervious in Urban Areas by the United
States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service
Title 210 - Engineering,  210-3-1 - Small Watershed Hydrology (WINTR-55)
Version 1.0. Such surfaces may have varying degrees of permeability.



[Added 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 005-2013]



   INDIVIDUAL SELECTION — A silvicultural practice whereby single trees
are periodically selected to be removed from a large area so that age and
size classes of the reproduction are mixed.



[Added 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 005-2013]



   INDUSTRIAL — Manufacturing plants of a type which carry on processes
within completely enclosed buildings; wholesale distribution centers for
wholesale sales, storage and distribution, including facilities for bulk
storage; enclosed service and repair facilities; equipment sales and service;
business offices and office buildings; industrial plants not involving the
synthesis of chemical products for direct industrial sale; research
laboratories; and other light industrial uses of the same general character.



   INSTITUTIONAL USE — Any land used for the following public or private
purposes: educational facilities, including universities, colleges,
elementary and secondary and vocational schools, kindergartens and nurseries;
cultural facilities, such as libraries, galleries, museums, concert halls,
theaters and the like; hospitals, including such educational, clinical,
research and convalescent facilities as are integral to the operation of the
hospital; medical and health service facilities, including nursing homes,
supervised residential institutions, rehabilitation therapy centers and
public health facilities; law enforcement facilities; military facilities;
religious buildings; churches; cemeteries; public office buildings; and other
similar facilities. 



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



   INTERESTED PARTY OR PERSON —



   A.   In a criminal or quasi-criminal proceeding, any citizen of the
State of New Jersey.



   B.   In the case of a civil proceeding in any court or in an
administrative proceeding before a municipal agency, any person, whether
residing within or without the municipality, whose right to use, acquire or
enjoy property is or may be affected by any action taken under this chapter
or whose rights to use, acquire or enjoy property under this chapter or under
any other law of this state or of the United States have been denied,
violated or infringed upon by an action or a failure to act under this
chapter.



   INTERIM RULES AND REGULATIONS — The regulations adopted by the
Pinelands Commission pursuant to the Pinelands Protection Act to govern the
review of applications from the adoption of the regulations until the
Pinelands Comprehensive Management Plan took effect on January 14, 1981.
These regulations were formerly codified as N.J.A.C. 7:1G-1 et seq. 



[Added 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



   INTERIOR LOT LINE — Any lot line other than one adjoining a street or
public space.



   JUNK- OR SALVAGE YARD — Any area or structure used or intended to be
used for conducting and operating of the business of selling, buying, storing
or trading in used or discarded metal, glass, paper, cordage or any used or
disabled fixtures, vehicles or equipment of any kind.



   JUNKYARD — Any lot of land on which junk is placed, collected, stored
or kept.



   JUNKYARD, APPROVED CHARITABLE OR NONPROFIT DROP-OFF DEPOSITORIES AND/OR
RECYCLING CENTER — Any state or federally approved tax-exempt charitable or
nonprofit organization may establish drop-off depositories for the purpose of
collecting clothes or other similar items or for collecting materials to be
used in recycling. The location of such depositories shall be reviewed by the
Planning Board.



   JUNKYARD, MOTOR-VEHICLE — Any business or any place of storage or
deposit on property in the Town of Hammonton of two or more unregistered
motor vehicles or two or more automobiles which, in the opinion of the
Director of Public Safety, Construction Subcode Official or Zoning Officer,
are unfit for reconditioning for use for highway transportation or used parts
of motor vehicles or material which has been a part of a motor vehicle, the
sum of which parts or materials shall, in the opinion of the Director of
Public Safety, Construction Subcode Official or Zoning Officer, be equal in
bulk to two or more motor vehicles.



   JUNKYARD, USED BUILDING MATERIAL — Any person, firm or corporation
who purchases, obtains or sells any used lumber or any other type of used
materials.



   JUNKYARD, USED RAGS, GLASS, PAPER AND SCRAP METAL — Any person, firm
or corporation who purchases, obtains or sells any old discarded or unused
waste iron or other metal or substance, glass, paper and rags.



   LAND — Includes the surface and subsurface of the earth, as well as
improvements and fixtures on, above or below the surface and any water found
thereon.



   LANDFILL — Sites, including open dumps, where solid waste, liquid and
dry sewage, sludge and liquid and dry chemical waste are disposed of by land
application, with or without the use of management practices or soil
covering. For the purposes of this chapter, solid waste transfer stations
shall not be considered landfills.



   LANDSCAPING — The installation of plant material or seed as a part of
a development.



   LAND USE ORDINANCES or LAND USE REGULATION — Any county or municipal
ordinance or regulation which, in any way, regulates or affects the
development of land.



   LEACHATE COLLECTOR — Shall have the meaning attributed to the phrase
by, and each such leachate collector shall conform to the requirements of,
the New Jersey Solid Waste Administration.



   LINER BUILDING — A building type that is a building or portion of a
building constructed between the facade of a parking garage, supermarket, or
other large building and that building's lot line to conceal large expanses
of blank wall area. Liner buildings face the street with a facade that has
ample doors and windows opening on to the sidewalk. 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   LIVE-WORK BUILDING — A building type that is a variant of flex
buildings and townhomes that combines living space with work space that is
related to the livelihood of the building's occupants. All of these uses may
occupy any story of the building. A live-work building may include one unit
or multiple units, and may be an attached or detached unit. 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   LOCAL COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — An antenna and any support structure,
together with any accessory facilities, which comply with the standards in
N.J.A.C. 7:50-5.4 and which are intended to serve a limited, localized
audience through point to point communication, including cellular telephone
cells, paging systems and dispatch communications. It does not include radio
or television broadcasting facilities or microwave transmitters. 



[Added 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



   LOCAL PERMITTING OR APPROVING AGENCY — Any county or municipal
official, department, agency or other body authorized to rule on any
application for development.



   LOCAL RETAIL — A use category applicable to certain building types in
certain Downtown and Gateway Districts. Includes (but not limited to) grocery
stores, meat markets, supermarkets, delicatessens, bakeries, drugstores,
furniture stores, sporting good shops, gift shops, hardware stores, package
liquor stores, pet shops, stationery stores, fabric stores, florists and
jewelry stores, galleries, but excluding automobile sales. 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   LOCAL SERVICE — A use category applicable to certain building types
in certain Downtown and Gateway Districts. Includes (but not limited to)
barber- and beauty shops, tailors, photographer's studios, retail
dry-cleaning and laundering operations, appliance repair shops, shoe repair
shops, upholsterers, newspaper/print shops and customer service centers. 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   LOFT BUILDING — A building type that was formerly used as, or has
been built to resemble an industrial factory or mill. Loft buildings contain
multiple dwellings above and beside each other, multiple offices above and
beside each other, and sometimes both. This building type occupies most of
its lot width and is placed close to the sidewalk with parking hidden behind
or next to it. 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   LOT — Any parcel, tract or area of land separated from other parcels
or portions and established by a lawful subdivision, plat, deed, or record,
survey map, by metes and bounds description or otherwise permitted by law and
to be used, developed or built upon as a unit.



   A.   CORNER LOT — A lot with at least two adjacent sides abutting
upon intersecting streets or other public spaces.



   B.   INTERIOR LOT — A lot which faces on one street or with
opposite sides on two streets and any other lot which is not a corner lot.



   LOT AREA — The area contained within lot lines but not including any
portion of a street. The minimum lot area of a lot fronting on a street
proposed to be widened in accordance with the Town Official Map, when
adopted, shall be the minimum area required for the district in which it is
located, plus the additional area needed to anticipate the ultimate widening
of the street.



   LOT COVERAGE or COVERAGE — The area of the lot covered by all
buildings and all impervious surfaces.



   LOT DEPTH — The shortest horizontal distance between the front lot
line and a line drawn parallel to the front line through the midpoint of the
rear lot line.



   LOT FRONTAGE — A lot line or portion thereof which is coexistent with
a single street line. In the case of a street of undefined width, said lot
line shall be assumed to parallel the center line of the street at a distance
25 feet there from. In the case of corner lots, the smaller of the two or
more lot lines coexistent with street lines shall be considered as the
frontage.



   LOT LINE — A line dividing one lot from another or from a street or
any public space.



   LOT WIDTH — The distance between the side lot lines, measured at the
minimum required building setback from the street line.



   LOW INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with an annual income of less than
50% of the median income for Atlantic County or for the Standard Metropolitan
Statistical Area.



   MAINTENANCE BOND — Any security acceptable to the Town Council to
assure the maintenance of duly approved improvements installed by the
developer after the final acceptance of the improvements and in accordance
with this chapter.



   MAINTENANCE GUARANTY — Any security which may be accepted by the town
for the maintenance of any improvements required by this chapter and as set
forth in Article X of this chapter.



   MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Refer to definition of "subdivision, major."



   MANUFACTURED HOME — Any unit of housing consisting of one or more
sections which were substantially constructed off-site and joined together
on-site and which were manufactured in accordance with any construction code
recognized by the United States Government or that of the State of New
Jersey, which is not located in a mobile home park, which meets the Health
Code of the State of New Jersey and that has perimeter walls. The
manufactured housing shall have a width of not less than 22 feet.



   MANUFACTURING — The processing and converting of raw, unfinished or
finished materials or products or any of these into an article or substance
of different character or for use for a different character or for use for a
different purpose; also industries furnishing labor in the case of
manufacturing or the refinishing of manufactured articles.



   MASSAGE PARLOR — Any establishment, public or private, where physical
contact is provided resulting in any specified sexual activity or sexual
conduct.



   MASTER PLAN, TOWN — A composite of one or more written or graphic
proposals for the development of the town as set forth in and adopted
pursuant to § 175-11 of this chapter. (See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.)



   MAYOR — The chief executive of the town.



   MEDIAN INCOME — The median of household income as determined from
time to time by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development
to be the median.



   MENTALLY ILL PERSON — A person who is afflicted with a mental
illness, as defined in N.J.S.A. 30:4-23, 6 but shall not include a person who
has been committed after having been found not guilty of a criminal offense
by reason of insanity or having been found unfit to be tried on a criminal
charge.



   MINOR SUBDIVISION — Refer to definition of "subdivision, minor."



   MIXED-USE BUILDING — A building that includes more than one use:
typically, those having different uses on the first floor and the upper
floors of the building. A common example is a ground story commercial use
with offices and/or residences on upper floors. 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   MOBILE HOME — A structure, use or vehicle which is designed to be
used as living quarters for long-term occupancy and contains plumbing and
electrical connections for attachment to outside systems; and is designed for
transportation after fabrication on streets or highways on its own wheels;
and, upon delivery to the site, is ready for occupancy, except for minor and
incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location on jacks or other
temporary foundations, connections to utilities and the like. 



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



   MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or tract of land under single ownership
which has been planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes for
dwelling purposes.



   MODERATE INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with an annual income which
is less than 80% of the median income for Atlantic County or the Standard
Metropolitan Statistical Area.



   MUNICIPAL AGENCY — The Town Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, or the Town Council when acting pursuant to this chapter and any
agency which is created by or responsible to one or more municipalities when
such agency is acting pursuant to this chapter.



   MUNICIPAL USE — The use of land, building or structures by the town
or by any officially created authority or agency thereof. 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   MUNICIPALITY — The Town of Hammonton, County of Atlantic and State of
New Jersey.



   NATURAL REGENERATION — The establishment of a plant or plant age
class from natural seeding, sprouting, suckering or layering.



[Added 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 005-2013]



   NAVIGABLE WATER — Water capable of being traversed by pleasure craft.



   NONCONFORMING BUILDING — A building legally existing at the effective
date of this chapter which does not conform to the regulations of this
chapter applicable to the district in which the building is located.



   NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area, dimension or location of which
was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter, but
which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it
is located by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment.



   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure, the size, dimension or
location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of
this chapter, but which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning
district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment.



   NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity which was lawful prior to the
adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter, but which fails to conform
to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reason
of such adoption, revision or amendment. 7



   OCCUPANCY — The specific purpose for which land or a building is
used, designed or maintained.



   OFFICIAL COUNTY MAP — The map, with changes and additions thereto,
adopted and established, from time to time, by resolution of the Board of
Chosen Freeholders of Atlantic County pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-5.



   OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted by ordinance pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-32 et seq.



   OFF-SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but
within the property (of which the lot is a part) which is the subject of a
development application or contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.



   OFF-SITE COMMERCIAL ADVERTISING SIGN — A sign which directs attention
to a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered
at a location other than the premises on which the sign is located.



   OFF-TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of a
development application nor on a contiguous portion of a street or
right-of-way.



   ON-SITE — Located on the lot in question.



   ON-TRACT — Located on the property which is the subject of a
development application or on a contiguous portion of a street or
right-of-way.



   OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially
unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or
private use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants
of land adjoining or neighboring such open space, provided that such areas
may be improved with only those buildings, structures and other improvements
that are designed to be incidental to the natural openness of the land, but
not including streets, off-street parking areas, stormwater facilities or any
other areas required to be set aside for buffers or recreation areas by any
other sections of this chapter. 



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



   OWNER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, co partnership,
corporation or trust having sufficient proprietary interest in the land to be
developed in order to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same
under this chapter.



   PAD COMMERCE BUILDING — A building type that comprises one structure
with a single commercial occupant, and is detached with side yards, a front
yard, and a rear yard.



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   PARCEL — Any quantity of land, consisting of one or more lots, that
is capable of being described with such definiteness that its location and
boundaries may be established. 



[Amended 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



   PARK — An improved area of open space, designated or reserved for
public recreational use. 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   PARKING LOT, COMMERCIAL — Any lot or area other than a street which
is devoted to the parking of automobiles, available for public use, whether
in return for a fee or as an accommodation for clients or customers, and
which is not directly operated by and on behalf of the use permitted in the
zone in which located.



   PARKING SPACE — An open space or garage, on a lot, used for parking
motor vehicles to which there is access from a street.



   PARTY WALL — A fire wall on an interior lot line used or adapted for
joint service between two buildings.



   PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Any security, in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter, which may be accepted in lieu of a requirement
that certain improvements be made before the town approves a plat, including
performance bonds, escrow agreements, letters of credit and other similar
collateral or surety agreements.



   PERMEABILITY — The rate at which water moves through a unit area of
soil, rock, or other material at hydraulic gradient of one.



[Added 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 005-2013]



   PERMIT — An official document or certificate issued by the authority
having jurisdiction and authorizing performance of a specified activity.



   PERMITTED USE — Any use of land or buildings as permitted by this
chapter.



   PERSON — An individual, corporation, public agency, business trust,
partnership, co partnership, association, two or more persons having a joint
or common interest or any other legal entity.



   PERSONAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT FACILITIES (hereinafter
referred to as "PWTEFS") — Accessory facilities serving PWTF and
subordinate in area, extent and purpose and on the same lot as a
telecommunications tower, antenna location or antenna support structures.
Such facilities include, but are not limited to, transmission equipment,
storage sheds, storage buildings, electronic cabinets, equipment and security
fencing. 



[Added 8-23-2004 by Ord. No. 22-2004]



   PERSONAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES (hereinafter referred
to as "PWTFS") — Facilities for the provision of wireless communications
services, including but not limited to antennas, antenna support structures,
and telecommunications towers, other than PWTEFs. 



[Added 8-23-2004 by Ord. No. 22-2004]



   PINELANDS — The Pinelands National Reserve and the Pinelands Area.



   PINELANDS AREA — That area designated as such by Section 10(a) of the
Pinelands Protection Act.



   PINELANDS COMMISSION — The Pinelands Commission created pursuant to
Section 5 of the Pinelands Protection Act. 8



   PINELANDS DEVELOPMENT CREDIT — On certain other lands in the
Pinelands Area, a use right allocated to certain lands within the Pinelands
Area pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-5.43 that can be used to secure a residential
density bonus on certain other lands within the town and the Pinelands Area. 



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



   PINELANDS DEVELOPMENT REVIEW BOARD — The agency responsible from
February 8, 1979, until June 28, 1979, for the review of and action on
applications for development in the Pinelands Area which required approvals
of other state agencies, except where the Pinelands Commission acted on
applications during that time period. 



[Added 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



   PINELANDS NATIONAL RESERVE — That area designated as such by Section
3(i) of the Pinelands Protection Act.



   PINELANDS NATIVE FOREST TYPE - See N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.43.



[Added 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 005-2013]



   PINELANDS PROTECTION ACT — N.J.S.A. 13:18A-1 to 18A-29, as amended.



   PINELANDS RESOURCE RELATED USE — Any use which is based on resources
which are indigenous to the Pinelands, including but not limited to forest
products, berry agriculture and sand, gravel clay or ilmenite. [Amended
4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



   PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of a minimum contiguous
size, as specified by this chapter, to be developed according to a plan as a
single entity containing one or more structures with appurtenant common areas
to accommodate commercial or office uses, or both, and any residential and
other uses incidental to the predominant use as may be permitted by this
chapter.



   PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — Planned unit development, planned unit
residential development, planned commercial development or planned industrial
development. 



[Amended 3-25-2002 by Ord. No. 12-2002]



   PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of a minimum contiguous
size, as specified by this chapter, to be developed according to a plan as a
single entity containing one or more structures with appurtenant common areas
to accommodate industrial uses and any other uses incidental to the
predominant use as may be permitted by this chapter.



   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT — An area with a specified minimum
contiguous acreage of five acres or more to be developed as a single entity
according to a plan, containing one or more residential clusters or planned
unit residential developments and one or more public, quasipublic, commercial
or industrial areas in such ranges or ratios of nonresidential uses to
residential uses as shall be specified in this chapter.



   PLANNED UNIT RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area with a specified
minimum contiguous acreage to be developed as a single entity according to a
plan, containing one or more residential clusters, which may include
appropriate commercial or public or quasi-public uses all primarily for the
benefit of the residential development.



   PLANNING BOARD — The Town Planning Board established by § 175-13 of
this chapter. (See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.)



   PLANTING STRIP — The area between the curb and the sidewalk, intended
to provide a buffer between pedestrians and vehicles, where grass and street
trees are often located.



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   PLANTS, THREATENED OR ENDANGERED — A Pinelands plant species whose
survival worldwide, nationwide or in the state is in jeopardy. 



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



   PLAT — One or more maps of a subdivision or a site plan which show
the location, boundaries and ownership of individual properties.



   PODIUM BUILDING — A building type that is a variant of the liner
building, but which has a small footprint on the ground level at the front of
the lot with the rest of the lot devoted to parking spaces and auto
circulation; with larger floors on the second floor (and higher floors, if
applicable) above all or some of the parking spaces. 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   PORCH — A covered area open to the outside except for a roof or
support structures such as columns or railings, adjoining an entrance to a
building.



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — The conferral of certain rights prior to final
approval after specific elements of a development plan have been agreed upon
by the approving board and the applicant and after the applicant has
proceeded in accordance with § 175-70A or 175-67 of this chapter.



   PRELIMINARY FLOOR PLANS AND ELEVATIONS — Architectural drawings
prepared during early and introductory stages of the design of a project
illustrating in a schematic form its scope, scale and relationship to its
site and immediate environs.



   PRESERVATION AREA — That area so designated by Section 10(b) of the
Pinelands Protection Act.



   PRIME AGRICULTURAL LANDS — Those soils designated in the Atlantic
County Soil Survey as Agricultural Capability Classes I and II.



   PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A building in which is conducted the main or
principal use of the lot on which said building is situated.



   PRINCIPAL USE — The main purpose for which a lot or building is used.



   PRIVATE SCHOOL — A secondary or elementary school run and supported
by private individuals or a corporation rather than by a public agency. 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The office of a member of a recognized and
legal profession maintained for the conduct of that profession, limited to
doctors, dentists, architects, engineers, planners, lawyers, real estate
agents, insurance brokers or similar licensed professionals. 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   PROTECTION AREA — All land within the Pinelands Area which is not
included in the Preservation Area.



   PUBLIC AGENCIES — The Government of the United States of America, the
State of New Jersey or any other state, their political subdivisions,
agencies or instrumentalities, or any interstate and regional agencies
exercising sovereign powers of government.



   PUBLIC AREAS —



   A.   Public parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational
areas.



   B.   Other public open spaces.



   C.   Scenic and historic sites.



   D.   Sites for schools and other public buildings and structures.



   PUBLIC DEVELOPMENT — The development or subdivision of land by the
Town Council, School Board or any other officially created municipal agency
or authority.



   PUBLIC DEVELOPMENT PROPOSAL — A master plan, capital improvement
program or other proposal for land development adopted by the appropriate
public body, or any amendment thereto.



   PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — An open space area conveyed or otherwise
dedicated to the town, a town agency, Board of Education, state or county
agency or other public body for recreational or conservational or other
public uses.



   PUBLIC SERVICE INFRASTRUCTURE — Sewer service, gas, electricity,
water, telephone, cable television and other public utilities developed
linearly, roads and streets and other similar services provided or maintained
by any public or private entity. 



[Added 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989 9 ]



   QUORUM — The majority of the full authorized membership of a town
agency.



   REAR SETBACK — Location along a line drawn parallel with the rear lot
line to establish the closest distance the rear of the building can be placed
in relation to the rear lot line.



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   RECOMMENDED MANAGEMENT PRACTICE — The management program which
employs the most efficient use of available technology, natural, human and
economic resources.



   RECORD TREE — The largest tree of a particular species in New Jersey
based on its circumference at 4.5 feet above ground level. A listing of the
largest known tree of each species and its location is maintained at the
principal offices of the Commission. 



[Added 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



   RECREATIONAL FACILITY, INTENSIVE — Any recreational facility which
does not satisfy the definition of "low-intensive recreational facility,"
including but not limited to golf courses, marinas, amusement parks, hotels
and motels. 



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



   RECREATIONAL FACILITY, LOW-INTENSIVE — A facility or area which
complies with the standards of N.J.A.C. 7:50-5, Part II, utilizes and depends
on the natural environment of the Pinelands and requires no significant
modifications of that environment other than to provide access, and which has
an insignificant impact on surrounding uses or on the environmental integrity
of the area. It permits such low-intensity uses as hiking, hunting, trapping,
fishing, canoeing, nature study, orienteering, horseback riding and
bicycling. 



[Amended 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997] 10



   RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPER — The erector of a new dwelling unit which
increases the intensity of the use of the land or the division of land into
two or more lots for residential purposes. 



[Added 8-23-2004 by Ord. No. 21-2004]



   RESOURCE CONSERVATION PLAN — A plan, prepared for review by the Soil
Conservation District, which details the proposed use of agricultural
recommended management practices.



   RESOURCE EXTRACTION — The dredging, digging, extraction, mining and
quarrying of sand, gravel, clay or ilmenite for commercial purposes, not
including, however, the private or agricultural extraction and use of
extracted material by a landowner. 



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



   RESOURCE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM PLAN — A plan, prepared in accordance with
the United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation
Service New Jersey Field Office Technical Guide, dated June 2005. Such plans
shall prescribe needed land treatment and related conservation and natural
resources management measures, including forest management practices, for the
conservation, protection and  development of natural resources, the
maintenance and enhancement of agricultural or horticultural productivity,
and the  control and prevention of non-point source pollution; and establish
criteria for resource sustainability of soil, water, air, plants and animals.



[Added 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 005-2013]



   RESTAURANT — Any establishment however designated at which food is
sold primarily for consumption on the premises.



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   RESUBDIVISION —



   A.   The further division or relocation of lot lines of any lot or
lots within a subdivision previously made and approved or recorded according
to law; or



   B.   The alteration of any streets or the establishment of any new
streets within any subdivision previously made and approved or recorded
according to law, but does not include conveyances so as to combine existing
lots by deed or other instrument.



   REVERSE FRONTAGE — Access to lots fronting on a major road from an
accessory street, rather than a collector street.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY — The total width and length of the course of a street,
watercourse, utility alignment or other way and within which all improvements
and right of access are confined.



   ROOF — The roof slab or deck with its supporting members, not
including vertical supports.



   ROOF LINE — The highest point of a building, such as the peak of a
pitched roof or a parapet. 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   ROOF STRUCTURE — An enclosed structure on or above the roof of any
part of a building.



   ROOT RAKING — A silvicultural practice involving the drawing of a set
of tines, mounted on the front or trailed behind a tractor, over an area to
thoroughly disturb tree and vegetation roots and/or to collect stumps and
slash.



[Added 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 005-2013]



   SCALE — The proportion of a structure's mass and bulk in relationship
to other structures in the structure's neighborhood; or the relative size of
a building, street fixture, sign, or other architectural element. 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   SEASONAL HIGH-WATER TABLE — The level below the natural ground
surface to which water seasonally rises in the soil in most years.



   SEDIMENTATION — The deposition of soil that has been transported from
its site of origin by water, ice, wind, gravity or other natural means as a
product of erosion.



   SEED TREE CUT — A silvicultural practice involving the removal of old
forest stand in one cutting, except for a small number of trees left singly,
in small groups or narrow strips, as a source of seed for natural
regeneration.



[Added 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 005-2013]



   SETBACK — The distance between the street line or property line and
the building line. 



[Amended 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   SETBACK LINE — The line that is established a minimum horizontal
distance from the lot line and beyond which the building or part of a
building is not permitted to extend toward the lot lines. All setbacks from
public streets shall be measured from the proposed right-of-way width as
shown on any adopted state, county or town master plan or official map, when
adopted. This line shall be located at the building line.



   SEXUAL CONDUCT — Human masturbation, sexual intercourse or any
touching of the genitals, pubic areas or buttocks of the human male or female
or the breasts of the female, whether alone or between members of the same or
opposite sex or between humans and animals in an act of apparent sexual
stimulation or gratification.



   SHELTERWOOD CUT — A silvicultural practice involving the
establishment of a new, essentially even-aged forest stand from release,
typically in a series of cuttings, of new trees started under the old forest
stand. A shelter wood cut involves the establishment of the new forest stand
before the old forest stand is removed.



[Added 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 005-2013]



   SHOPFRONT — A ground floor facade, which is characterized by display
windows and a building's main entrance. This facade is typically found on
buildings that contain commercial uses on the ground floor, but have
residential features such as a pitched rather than a flat roof. 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   SHOPPING CENTER — A unified development of not less than three
stores, shops or other commercial establishments, together with areas for
internal circulation, parking and other accessory uses consisting of one or
more lots under the same or separate ownership. 



[Added 3-22-2010 by Ord. No. 3-2010]



   SIDE SETBACK — Location along a line drawn parallel with the side lot
line and drawn through the point of a building or structure nearest to the
street line or front lot line.



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   SIDEWALK — An improved path for pedestrian use outside the cartway. 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   SIGHT TRIANGLE EASEMENT AT INTERSECTION AND/OR DRIVEWAY — A
triangular shaped area established in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter in which nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to
grow more than three feet above the center-line grade of either street and/or
driveway.



   SIGN — Any object, device, display or structure or part thereof,
situated outdoors or indoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display,
direct or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization,
business, product, service, event or location by any means, including words,
letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination or
projected images. "Signs" do not include the flag or emblem of any nation,
organization of nations, state or city or any fraternal, religious or civic
organization; merchandise, pictures or models of products or services
incorporated in a window display; works of art which in no way identify a
product; or scoreboards located on athletic fields.



   SIGN, AREA OF — The area included within the frame or edge of the
sign, including all lettering, wording, coloring and accompanying designs and
symbols, together with the background where open or closed. Where the sign
has no such frame or edge, the area shall be defined by an enclosed
four-sided (straight sides) geometric shape which most closely outlines said
sign. The supporting framework and bracketing incidental to the display shall
not be included.



   SINGLE HOUSE — A building type in Downtown and Gateway Districts that
comprises one dwelling unit, and is detached with small side yards, a front
yard, and a rear yard. For single houses outside of these districts, see:
"DWELLING UNIT, SINGLE FAMILY DETACHED." 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   SITE COVERAGE or COVERAGE — The percentage of the gross site area
covered by roads, paving, structures or other impervious coverage.



   SITE PLAN, MAJOR — Any development plan of one or more lots which
does not meet the definition of "minor site plan."



   SITE PLAN, MINOR — A development plan of one or more lots which:



   A.   Does not propose the new construction of or any addition to a
structure or building which will result in the building coverage of a
property involved to be in excess of 5,000 square feet.



   B.   Does not require disturbance of more than 10,000 square feet of
land area.



   C.   Does not involve planned development.



   D.   Does not involve any new street or extension of any off-tract
improvements which is to be prorated pursuant to § 175-73 of this chapter.



   E.   Does not include off-street parking for more than 15 vehicles.



   F.   Contains the information reasonably required in order to make
an informed determination whether the requirements established by this
chapter for the approval of a minor site plan have been met.



   G.   Does not include commercial or industrial development on more
than three acres.



   SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — A wind energy system, as defined herein,
that is used to generate electricity and has a name plate capacity of 10
kilowatts or less. 



[Added 3-28-2011 by Ord. No. 4-2011]



   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A solar energy system and all associated
equipment which converts solar energy into a usable electrical energy, heats
water or produces hot air or other similar functions through the use of solar
panels. 



[Added 3-28-2011 by Ord. No. 4-2011]



   SOLAR PANEL — A structure containing one or more receptive cells, the
purpose of which is to convert solar energy into usable electrical energy by
way of a solar energy system. 



[Added 3-28-2011 by Ord. No. 4-2011]



   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREA —



   A.   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttock or female breast below a point immediately above the top of
the areola.



   B.   Human genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if covered.



   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY —



   A.   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.



   B.   Any act of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.



   C.   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttock or female breast. 11



   STANDARDS OF PERFORMANCE — Standards adopted by ordinance (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-65d) regulating noise levels, glare, earth borne or sonic vibrations,
heat, electronic or atomic radiation, noxious odors, toxic matters, explosive
and inflammable matters, smoke and airborne particles, waste discharge,
screening of unsightly objects or conditions and such other similar matters
as may be reasonably required by the town or required by applicable federal
or state laws or other town ordinances. 12



   STORY — That portion of a building included between the upper surface
of a floor and upper surface of the floor or roof next above.



   STORY, FIRST — The lowermost story entirely above the grade plane.



   STREET  — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct,
drive or other way:



   A.   Which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway;



   B.   Which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law;



   C.   Which is approved by official action as provided by this
chapter; or



   D.   Which is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office
of the county recording officer prior to the appointment of the Planning
Board and the grant to such Board of the power to review plats; and which
includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved,
and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking
areas and other areas within the street lines.



   STREET LINE — The edge of the existing or future street right-of-way,
whichever would result in the widest right-of-way, as shown on the adopted
Master Plan or Official Map, when adopted, forming the dividing line between
the street and a lot. In the case of a street of undefined width, said street
line shall be assumed to parallel the center line of the street at a minimum
distance of 25 feet there from.



   STREET LOT LINE — The lot line dividing a lot from a street or other
public space.



   STREETSCAPE — Combined design elements within and along the public
right-of-way. including streetlights, sidewalks, landscaping, street
furniture, and signage. 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — Any change in either the supporting members
of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams and girders, or in the
dimensions or configurations of the roof or exterior walls.



   STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation having a fixed location on, above or below
the surface of land or attached to something having a fixed location on,
above or below the surface of land.



   STUDIO — The commercial use of premises for the production of dance,
live music, creative writing, painting, drawings, pottery or sculpture,
video, moving or still photography; teaching incidental to production, and
for selling of products produced, in whole or majority part, in that
facility. A studio use may have employees and signs, and may not engage in
sexual conduct. 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   SUBDIVIDER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate,
partnership, co partnership, corporation, trust or any legal entity
commencing proceedings under this chapter to effect a subdivision of land
hereunder for himself or for another with the written consent of the owner.



   SUBDIVISION —



   A.   The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more
lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development. The
following shall not be considered subdivisions within the meaning of this
chapter, if no new streets are created:



   B.   Divisions of land found by the Planning Board to be for
agricultural purposes where all resulting parcels are five acres or larger in
size.



   C.   Divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions.



   D.   Division of property upon court order, including but not
limited to judgments of foreclosure.



   E.   Consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded
instrument.



   F.   The conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels
of land owned by the same person or persons and all of which are found and
certified by the administrative officer to conform to the requirements of
this chapter and are shown and designated as separate lots, tracts or parcels
on the Tax Map or Atlas of the town.



   G.   The term "subdivision" shall also include the term
"resubdivision."



   SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — Any subdivision of land not classified as a
minor subdivision.



   SUBDIVISION, MINOR — A subdivision of land for the creation of an
aggregate of not more than four lots (three new lots plus the remaining lot),
provided that such subdivision does not involve a planned development, any
new streets or the extension of any off-tract improvements, the cost of which
is to be prorated pursuant to § 175-119 of this chapter (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-42); and not being a further division of an original tract of land for
which previous minor subdivisions have been approved by any board within the
five years past and where the combination of the proposed and approved minor
subdivisions constitute a major subdivision. Any readjustment of lot lines
resulting in no new lots shall be classified as a minor subdivision.



   SUBMERGED LANDS — Those lands which are inundated with water
throughout the year.



   SUBSTANTIVE CERTIFICATION — A determination by COAH approving a
municipality's housing element and fair share plan in accordance with the
provisions of the Fair Housing Act and the rules and criteria as set forth
herein. A grant of substantive certification shall be valid for a period of
six years in accordance with the terms and conditions therein. 



[Added 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 28-2002; amended 8-26-2002 by Ord. No. 32-2002]



   SWIMMING POOL — A structure artificially constructed in the ground,
not fully within a building, which provides recreational facilities for
swimming, bathing or wading and all buildings, equipment and appurtenances
thereto. It shall not include natural outdoor ponds, rivers or lakes.



   TAKE-OUT RESTAURANT — An establishment where food and/or beverages
are sold in a form ready for consumption, where all or a significant part of
the consumption takes place outside the confines of the restaurant, and where
ordering and pickup of food may take place from an automobile.



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER — A freestanding structure on which one or
more antennas are located, including lattice towers, guyed towers, monopoles
and similar structures which are used for the transmission or receipt of
radio frequency signals for wireless communications. 



[Added 8-23-2004 by Ord. No. 22-2004]



   THINNING — A silvicultural practice involving the removal of
competing trees to favor certain species, sizes and qualities of trees.



[Added 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 005-2013]



   TOWNHOUSE — A building type in Downtown and Gateway Districts. A
townhouse is comprised of a single residence on a lot which is attached to
similar building types along a shared property line on each side, or on one
side in the case of corner lots. Townhouse building types do not have side
yards, except on corner lots, where the front door should be located along
the longer of the front or side facades. For townhouses outside of these
districts, see: "DWELLING UNIT. SINGLE FAMILY ATTACHED". 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   TRACT — An area of land composed of one or more lots adjacent to one
another, having sufficient dimensions and area to make one parcel of land
meeting the requirements of this chapter for the use(s) intended.



   TRAFFIC IMPACT STUDY — A report prepared by a NJ Licensed
Professional Engineer (P.E.) or Board Certified Professional Traffic
Operations Engineer (PTOE) which analyzes the traffic impact of the proposed
development using generally accepted traffic engineering standards, and
identifies any impact mitigation measures necessary to accommodate the
development's traffic impact. 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   TRANSCRIPT — A typed or printed verbatim record of the proceedings or
a reproduction thereof.



   TWIN — A building type in downtown and gateway districts that is a
variant of a townhouse building type: a semidetached building that consists
of two dwelling units that abut along a shared property line. A twin building
type has one small side yard, one front yard, and one rear yard. For twins
outside of these districts, see: "DWELLING UNIT, TWIN OR TWO-FAMILY" 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   UPPER FLOOR — Any floor of a building that is above the ground floor
and can be occupied. 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   USE — The purpose for which the building, structure or site is
designed, used or intended to be used.



   UTILITY DISTRIBUTION LINES — Lines, conduits or pipes located in a
street, road, alley or easement through which natural gas, electricity,
telephone, cable television, water, sewage or stormwater discharge is
distributed to or from service lines extending from the main line to the
distribution system of the building or premises served. Utility distribution
lines do not include electric transmission lines. 



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989; 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



   VARIANCE — Permission to depart from the literal requirements of this
chapter and based upon the standards of this chapter.



   VEGETATION — Any plant material, including grasses, shrubs and trees.



   WALL — A structural member which also serves to separate space.



   WETLANDS — Those areas where the substrate is inundated or saturated
by surface or ground water at a frequency, magnitude and duration sufficient
to support, and, under normal circumstances, does support, a prevalence of
vegetation adapted for life in saturated soil conditions known as
"hydrophytes." Wetlands include lands with poorly drained or very poorly
drained soils as designated by the National Cooperative Soils Survey of the
Soil Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture. The
Town of Hammonton does not have any area of coastal wetlands classification,
but does possess inland wetlands, including submerged lands as defined in
N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.3 and 50-6.5. 



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



   WETLANDS MANAGEMENT — The establishment of a characteristic wetland
or the removal of exotic species or Phragmites from a wetland in accordance
with the standards of N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.10. For purposes of this definition,
exotic species are those that are not indigenous to North America.



[Added 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 005-2013]



   WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — A wind turbine and all associated equipment,
including any base, blade, foundation, nacelle, rotor, tower, transformer,
vein, wire, inverter, batteries or other component necessary to fully utilize
the wind generator. 



[Added 3-28-2011 by Ord. No. 4-2011]



   WIND TURBINE — Equipment that converts energy from the wind into
electricity. This term includes the rotor, blades and associated mechanical
and electrical conversion components necessary to generate, store and/or
transfer energy. 



[Added 3-28-2011 by Ord. No. 4-2011]



   WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS — Any personal wireless service as defined in
the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 (FTA), and other FCC-licensed
commercial wireless telecommunications services, which include cellular,
personal communications services (PCS), specialized mobile radio SMR,
enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), paging, and similar services which
currently exist or may in the future be developed. It does not include any
amateur radio facility that is owned and operated by a federally licensed
amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive-only
antennas, nor does it include noncellular telephone service. 



[Added 8-23-2004 by Ord. No. 22-2004]



   YARD — An unoccupied, unobstructed open space other than a court and
adjacent to a building. Porches and bay windows shall be considered a part of
the building. Overhanging eaves, gutters and cornices of two feet or less
shall not be considered an infringement of the requirements.



   YARD, FRONT — An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the
principal building, extending the full width of the lot situated between the
street line and the building line projected on the side lines of that lot,
exclusive of overhanging eaves, gutters, cornices and steps.



   YARD, REAR — An open, unoccupied space extending across the full
width of the lot and lying between the rear line of the lot and the nearest
line of any building, exclusive of overhanging eaves, gutters, cornices and
steps; the yard directly opposite the chosen front yard. The depth of the
rear yard shall be measured at right angles to the rear line of the lot.



   YARDS, GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR — As to a front, rear or side yard,
easements on adjacent properties shall not be used in order to fulfill the
requirements for each such yard.



   YARD, SIDE — An open, unoccupied space between the side line of the
lot and the nearest line of a building and extending from the front yard to
the rear yard or, in the absence of either of such yards, to the street or
rear lot lines, as the case may be. The width of a side yard will be measured
at right angles to the side line of the lot. Overhanging eaves, cornices and
steps are excepted.



   ZONE — The area of the town also referred to and defined as a
"district."



   ZONING — The reservation of certain specified areas within a
community or city for building and structures or use of land for certain
purposes, with other limitations such as height, lot coverage and other
stipulated requirements.



   ZONING PERMIT — A document signed by the administrative officer:



   A.   Which may be required by this chapter as a condition precedent
to the commencement of a use or the erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, conversion or installation of a structure or building; and



   B.   Which acknowledges that such use, structure or building
complies with the provisions of this chapter or variance there from duly
authorized by a municipal agency pursuant to this chapter.



ARTICLE III
Master Plan; Capital Improvement Program



§ 175-11. Master Plan.



   A.   Adoption or amendment; component parts.



      (1)   The Planning Board may prepare and, after public
hearing, amend the Master Plan, or adopt component parts thereof, to guide
the use of lands within the town in a manner which protects public health and
safety and promotes the general welfare.



      (2)   The Master Plan shall generally comprise a report or
statement and land use and development proposals, with maps, diagrams and
text, presenting where appropriate the following elements:



         (a)   A statement of objectives, principles,
assumptions, policies and standards upon which the constituent proposals for
the physical, economic and social development of the town are based.



         (b)   A land use plan element taking into account the
other Master Plan elements and natural conditions, including, but not
necessarily limited to, topography, soil conditions, water supply, drainage,
floodplain areas, marshes and woodlands; showing the existing and proposed
location, extent and intensity of development of land to be used in the
future for varying types of residential, commercial, industrial,
agricultural, recreational, educational and other public and private purposes
or combination of purposes; and including a statement of the standards of
population density and development intensity recommended for the town.



         (c)   A housing plan element, including but not limited
to residential standards and proposals for the construction and improvement
of housing.



         (d)   A circulation plan element showing the location
and types of facilities for all modes of transportation required for the
efficient movement of people and goods into, about and through the town.



         (e)   A utility service plan element analyzing the need
for and showing the future general location of water supply and distribution
facilities, drainage and flood control facilities, sewage and waste
treatment, solid waste disposal and provisions for other related utilities.



         (f)   A community facilities plan element showing the
location and type of educational or cultural facilities, historic sites,
libraries, hospitals, firehouses, police stations and other related
facilities, including their relation to the surrounding areas.



         (g)   A recreation plan element showing a comprehensive
system of areas and public sites for recreation.



         (h)   A conservation plan element providing for the
preservation, conservation and utilization of natural resources, including,
to the extent appropriate, open space, water, forests, soil, marshes,
wetlands, harbors, rivers and other waters, fisheries, wildlife and other
natural resources.



         (i)   An energy conservation plan element which
systematically analyzes the impact of each other component and element of the
Master Plan on the present and future use of energy in the town, details
specific measures contained in the other plan elements designed to reduce
energy consumption and proposes other measures that the town may take to
reduce energy consumption and to provide for the maximum utilization of
renewable energy sources.



         (j)   Appendices or separate reports containing the
technical foundation for the Master Plan and its constituent elements.



      (3)   The Master Plan and its plan elements may be divided
into sub plans and sub plan elements projected according to periods of time
or staging sequences.



      (4)   The Master Plan shall include a specific policy
statement indicating the relationship of the proposed development of the town
as developed in the Master Plan to: the master plans of contiguous
municipalities; the Master Plan of Atlantic County; and any comprehensive
guide plan pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.52. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A.
13:1B-15.52 was repealed by L. 1985, c. 398, § 18, effective January 2,
1986. See now N.J.S.A. 52:18A-196 et seq.



   B.   Notice. The Planning Board shall give:



      (1)   Public notice of a hearing on adoption, revision or
amendment of the Master Plan or component parts thereof. Such notice shall be
given by publication in the official newspaper of the town, if there is one,
or in a newspaper of general circulation in the town at least 10 days prior
to the date of the hearing.



      (2)   Notice by personal service or certified mail to the
clerk of an adjoining municipality of all hearings on adoption, revision or
amendment of the Master Plan involving property situated within 200 feet of
such adjoining municipality at least 10 days prior to the date of any such
hearing.



      (3)   Notice by personal service or certified mail to the
Atlantic County Planning Board and Pinelands Commission of all hearings on
the adoption, revision or amendment of the town Master Plan at least 10 days
prior to the date of the hearing, such notice to include a copy of any such
proposed Master Plan or any revision or amendment thereto; and the adoption,
revision or amendment of the Master Plan not more than 30 days after the date
of such adoption, revision or amendment. Such notice shall include a copy of
the Master Plan or revision or amendment thereto.



   C.   Contents of notice. All notices required to be given shall
state the date, time and place of the hearing, describe and specify design
and/or performance standards exceptions requested, if applicable, the nature
of the matters to be considered and identification of the property proposed
for development by street address, if any, or by reference to lot and block
numbers as shown on the current tax duplicate in the Municipal Tax Assessor's
office and the location and times at which any maps and documents for which
approval is sought are available as required by § 175-36C.



   D.   Periodic Master Plan reexamination.



      (1)   The Planning Board shall, at least every six years or
more frequently upon the request of the Town Council, generally reexamine the
town Master Plan and development regulations. The Planning Board shall
prepare a report on the findings of such reexamination, a copy of which shall
be sent to the County Planning Board and the municipal clerks of each
adjoining municipality. The six-year period shall commence with the adoption
or termination of the last general reexamination of such plan and regulations.



      (2)   Such report shall state:



         (a)   The major problems and objectives relating to land
development in the town at the time of such adoption, last revision or
reexamination, if any.



         (b)   The extent to which such problems and objectives
have been reduced or have increased subsequent to such date.



         (c)   The extent to which there have been significant
changes in the assumptions, policies and objectives forming the basis for
such plan or regulations as last revised, with particular regard to the
density and distribution of population and land uses, housing conditions,
circulation, conservation of natural resources, energy conservation and
changes in state, county and municipal policies and objectives.



         (d)   The specific changes recommended for such plan or
regulations, if any, including underlying objectives, policies and standards,
or whether a new plan or regulations should be prepared.



§ 175-12. Capital improvement program.



   A.   The Planning Board, at least every four years, shall prepare a
program of municipal capital improvement projects projected over a term of at
least six years and amendments thereto. Such program may encompass major
projects being currently undertaken or future projects to be undertaken with
federal, state, county and other public funds or under federal, state or
county supervision. The first year of such program shall, upon adoption by
the Town Council, constitute the capital budget of the town as required by
N.J.S.A. 40A:4-43 et seq.



   B.   The program shall classify projects in regard to the urgency
and need for realization and shall recommend a time sequence for their
implementation. It may also contain the estimated cost of each project and
indicate probable operating and maintenance costs and probable revenues, if
any, as well as existing sources of funds or the need for additional sources
of funds for the implementation and operation of each project. It shall, as
far as possible, be based on existing information in the possession of the
departments and agencies of the town and shall take into account public
facility needs indicated by the prospective development shown in the Master
Plan of the town or as permitted by other municipal land use controls.



   C.   In preparing the program, the Planning Board shall confer, in a
manner deemed appropriate by the Board, with the Mayor, the chief fiscal
officer, other town officials and agencies and the School Board or Boards.
Any such program shall include an estimate of the displacement of persons and
establishments caused by each recommended project.



   D.   In addition to any of the requirements in Subsection A of this
section, every town department, authority or agency shall, upon request of
the Planning Board, transmit to said Board a statement of all capital
projects proposed to be undertaken by such town department, authority or
agency, during the term of the program, for study, advice and recommendation
by the Planning Board.



   E.   Whenever the Planning Board has prepared a capital improvement
program pursuant to this section, it shall recommend such program to the Town
Council, which may adopt such program with any modification approved by
affirmative vote of a majority of the full authorized membership of the Town
Council and with the reasons for said modification recorded in the minutes.



   F.   Notice.



      (1)   Notice by personal service or certified mail shall be
made to the Atlantic County Planning Board of the adoption, revision or
amendment of the town capital improvement program not more than 30 days after
the date of such adoption, revision or amendment. Any notice provided
hereunder shall include a copy of the proposed capital program or any
proposed revision or amendment thereto, as the case may be.



      (2)   Notice of hearings to be held pursuant to this section
shall state the date, time and place of the hearing and the nature of the
matters to be considered. Any notice by certified mail pursuant to this
section shall be deemed complete upon mailing.



   G.   Whenever the Planning Board shall have adopted any portion of
the Master Plan, the Town Council or other public agency having jurisdiction
over the subject matter, before taking action necessitating the expenditure
of any public funds incidental to the location, character or extent of such
project, shall refer the action involving such specific project to the
Planning Board for review and recommendation in conjunction with such Master
Plan and shall not act thereon without such recommendation or until 45 days
have elapsed after such reference without receiving such recommendation. This
requirement shall apply to action by a housing, parking, highway, special
district or other authority, redevelopment agency, school board or other
similar public agency, state, county or municipal.



ARTICLE IV. Planning Board; Preservation Board



§ 175-13. Establishment; membership.



   There is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23 et seq., in
the Town of Hammonton, a Planning Board of nine members consisting of the
following four classes:



   A.   Class I: The Mayor.



   B.   Class II: One of the officials of the municipality other than a
member of the governing body, to be appointed by the Mayor, provided that if
there is an Environmental Commission, the member of the Environmental
Commission who is also a member of the Planning Board, as required by Section
1 of P.L. 1968, c. 245 (N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1), shall be deemed to be the Class
II Planning Board member for purposes of this chapter in the event that there
is among the Class IV or alternate members of the Planning Board both a
member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment and a member of the Board of
Education.



   C.   Class III: A member of the governing body, to be appointed by
the governing body.



   D.   Class IV: Six other citizens of the municipality to be
appointed by the Mayor. The members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal
office except as stated. One member of the Board of Education and/or one
member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment may be a Class IV member of the
Planning Board. The member of the Environmental Commission who is also a
member of the Planning Board shall be a Class IV Planning Board member,
unless there is among the Class IV or alternate members of the Planning Board
both a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment and a member of the Board of
Education, in which case, the member common to the Planning Board and
Municipal Environmental Commission shall be deemed a Class II member of the
Planning Board.



§ 175-14. Terms of members; vacancies; removal.



   The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond to his
official tenure. The terms of the members composing Class II and Class III
shall be for one year or terminate at the completion of their respective
terms of office, whichever occurs first, except for a Class II member who is
also a member of the Environmental Commission. The term of a Class II or
Class IV member who is also a member of the Environmental Commission shall be
for three years or terminate at the completion of his term of office as a
member of the Environmental Commission, whichever occurs first. The term of a
Class IV member who is also a member of the Board of Adjustment or Board of
Education shall terminate whenever he is no longer a member of such other
body or at the completion of his Class IV term, whichever occurs first. The
terms of all Class IV members first appointed under this chapter shall be so
determined that, to the greatest practicable extent, the expiration of such
terms shall be distributed evenly over the first four years after their
appointment, provided that the initial Class IV term of no member shall
exceed four years. Thereafter, the Class IV term of each such member shall be
four years. If a vacancy in any class shall occur otherwise than by
expiration of the Planning Board term, it shall be filled by appointment, as
above provided, for the unexpired term. No member of the Planning Board shall
be permitted to act on any matter in which he has, either directly or
indirectly, any personal or financial interest. Any member other than a Class
I member, after a public hearing if he requests one, may be removed by the
governing body for cause. Nothing in this chapter shall, however, be
construed to affect the term of any present member of the Planning Board, all
of whom shall continue in office until the completion of the term for which
they were appointed.



§ 175-15. Voting by absent members.



   A member of the Board who was absent from one or more of the meetings
at which a hearing was held shall be eligible to vote on the matter upon
which the hearing was conducted, notwithstanding his absence from one or more
of the meetings; provided, however, that such Board member has available to
him the transcript or recording of the hearing from which he was absent and
certifies, in writing, to the Board that he has read such transcript or
listened to such recording.



§ 175-16. Alternate members.



[Amended 1-22-2018 by Ord. No. 001-2018]



   A.   Alternate members shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall
meet the qualifications of Class IV members. Alternate members shall be
designated at the time of appointment by the Mayor as "Alternate No. 1",
"Alternate No. 2", "Alternate No. 3", and "Alternate No. 4." The terms of the
alternate members shall be for two years, except that the terms of the
alternate members shall be such that the term of not more than two alternate
members shall expire in any one year; provided, however, that in no instance
shall the terms of the alternate members first appointed exceed two years. A
vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled by the
Mayor for the unexpired term only.



   B.   No alternate member shall be permitted to act on any matter in
which he has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial
interest. An alternate member may, after public hearing if he requests one,
be removed by the governing body for cause.



   C.   Alternate members may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote, except in the absence or disqualification of a
regular member of any class. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a
regular member may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a
choice must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, the alternate
members shall be chosen sequentially by their designated number.



§ 175-17. Officers; other staff and services.



   The Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from the
members of Class IV and select a Secretary, who may or may not be a member of
the Planning Board or a municipal employee, and create and fill such other
offices as established by ordinance. It may employ or contract for and fix
the compensation of legal counsel other than the Town Attorney, a planning
consultant, a professional engineer and other staff and services as it may
deem necessary, not exceeding, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount
appropriated by the Town Council for its use.



§ 175-18. Rules and regulations.



   The Planning Board shall adopt and may amend reasonable rules and
regulations, not inconsistent with this chapter or with any applicable
ordinance, for the administration of its functions, powers and duties and
shall furnish a copy thereof to any person upon request and may charge a
reasonable fee for such copy. Copies of all such rules and regulations and
amendments thereto shall be maintained in the office of the administrative
officer.



§ 175-19. Powers and duties.



   The Planning Board shall have the following powers and duties:



   A.   To make and adopt and from time to time amend a Master Plan for
the physical development of the Town of Hammonton in accordance with the
provisions of § 175-11 of this chapter. (See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.)



   B.   To administer the provisions of the Land Development Ordinance
of the Town of Hammonton in accordance with the provisions of said ordinances
and the Municipal Land Use Law of 1975 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.), including
but not limited to subdivision control, site plan review and zoning district
regulations including conditional uses.



   C.   To participate in the preparation and review of programs or
plans required by state or federal law or regulations.



   D.   To assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous
planning process.



   E.   To prepare, at least every four years, a program of municipal
capital improvement projects projected over a term of six years, and
amendments thereto, and recommend same to the governing body; said program to
be in accordance with the provisions of § 175-12 of this chapter (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-29 and 55D-30).



   F.   To perform advisory duties on the following referrals:



      (1)   Prior to the adoption of a development regulation,
revision or amendment thereto, the Planning Board shall make and transmit to
the Town Council, within 35 days after referral, a report including
recommendations concerning the proposed development regulation, revision or
amendment. The Town Council, when considering the adoption of a development
regulation, revision or amendment thereto, shall review the report of the
Planning Board and may disapprove or change any recommendation by a vote of a
majority of its full authorized membership and shall record in its minutes
the reasons for not following such recommendations, Failure of the Planning
Board to transmit its report within the thirty-five-day period provided
herein shall relieve the Town Council from the requirements of this
subsection in regard to the proposed development regulation, revision or
amendment thereto referred to the Planning Board.



      (2)   To review and advise as to any matter or class of
matters to the Planning Board before final action thereon by a town body or
town officer having final authority thereon. Such reference shall not extend
the time for action by the referring body, whether or not the Planning Board
has submitted its report. Whenever the Planning Board shall have made a
recommendation regarding a matter authorized by this chapter to another town
body, such recommendation may be rejected only by a majority of the full
authorized membership of such other body.



      (3)   Prior to the hearing on adoption of a zoning ordinance
or any amendments thereto, the Town Council shall refer any such proposed
ordinance or amendment thereto to the Planning Board (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26a and
55D-64.)



      (4)   Whenever the Planning Board shall have adopted any
portion of the Master Plan, the Town Council or other public agency having
jurisdiction over the subject matter, before taking action necessitating the
expenditure of any public funds incidental to the location, character or
extent of such project, shall refer the action involving such specific
project to the Planning Board for review and recommendation in conjunction
with such Master Plan and shall not act thereon without such recommendation
or until 45 days have elapsed after such reference without receiving such
recommendation. This requirement shall apply to action by a housing, parking,
highway, special district or other authority, redevelopment agency, school
board or other similar public agency, state, county or municipal.



      (5)   Prior to the hearing on the adoption of any official map
or any amendment thereto, the Town Council shall refer the proposed official
map or amendment to the Planning Board pursuant to Subsection F(1) of this
section. (See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26a.) This review shall take into account the
provisions of § 175-11 of this chapter. (See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32.)



   G.   Variances.



      (1)   When reviewing applications for approval of subdivision
plats, site plans or conditional uses, to grant to the same extent and
subject to the same restrictions as the Zoning Board of Adjustment:



         (a)   Variances pursuant to § 175-28C of this chapter.
(See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c.)



         (b)   To direct the issuance of a permit for a building
and/or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public drainage way, flood
control basin or public area reserved in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32
and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34.



         (c)   To direct the issuance of a permit for a building
or structure not related to a street. (See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36.)



      (2)   Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this
subsection, notice of a hearing on the application for development shall
include reference to the request for a variance or direction for issuance of
a permit, as the case may be.



   H.   Subdivision, conditional use and site plan approval.



      (1)   When acting upon applications for preliminary or minor
subdivision approval or preliminary site plan approval, to grant such
exceptions from the design and performance standards in Article XII as may be
reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of the provisions for
review and approval of subdivisions and/or site plans if the literal
enforcement of one or more provisions is impracticable or will exact undue
hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question.



      (2)   To review and approve or deny conditional uses or site
plans simultaneously with review for subdivision approval without the
developer being required to make further application to the Planning Board or
the Planning Board being required to hold further hearings. The longest time
period for action by the Planning Board, whether it be for subdivision,
conditional use or site plan approval, shall apply. Whenever approval of a
conditional use is requested by the developer pursuant to this subsection,
notice of the hearing on the plat shall include reference to the request for
such conditional use.



   I.   To act as Preservation Board in reference to § 175-21.



   J.   Zoning Board of Adjustment Powers. 



[Added 1-22-2018 by Ord. No. 001-2018]



      (1)   Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D - 25(c), the Planning Board
shall exercise, to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions, all
powers of a Zoning Board of Adjustment; but Class I and Class III members,
shall not participate in the consideration of applications for development
which involve relief pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D - 70(d).



      (2)   The Planning Board shall have all of the powers and
duties of the Zoning Board of Adjustment set forth in Ordinance § 175-28, §
175-29 and § 175-30. 



      (3)   All references in the Code of the Town of Hammonton to
the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall mean and refer to the Town of Hammonton
Planning Board.



§ 175-20. Time limit for decisions.



   A.   Minor subdivisions and minor site plans. Minor subdivision
approvals and minor site plan approvals shall be granted or denied within 45
days of the date of submission of a complete application to the Planning
Board or within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
Failure of the Board to act within the period prescribed shall constitute
approval and a certificate of the Planning Board Secretary as to the failure
of the Board to act shall be issued on request of the applicant, and it shall
be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of
approval herein required and shall be accepted by the county recording office
for purposes of filing subdivision plats. Approval of a minor subdivision
shall expire 190 days from the date of Planning Board approval, unless within
such period a plat in conformity with such subdivision approval and the
provisions of the Map Filing Law Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et
seq. , or a deed clearly describing the approved minor subdivision is filed
by the developer with the county recording officer, the Municipal Engineer
and the Municipal Tax Assessor.



   B.   Major subdivisions preliminary approval.



      (1)   Upon submission of a complete application for a
subdivision of 10 or fewer lots, the Planning Board shall grant or deny
preliminary approval within 45 days of the date of such submission or with
such further time as may be consented to by the developer. Upon submission of
a complete application for a subdivision of more than 10 lots, the Planning
Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 95 days of the date of
such submission or within such further time as may be consented to by the
developer. Otherwise, the Planning Board shall be deemed to have granted
preliminary approval for either size subdivision.



      (2)   Failure of the Board to act within the period prescribed
shall constitute approval, and a certificate of the Planning Board Secretary
as to the failure of the Board to act shall be issued on request of the
applicant; and it shall be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or
other evidence of approval herein required and shall be accepted by the
county recording officer for purposes of filing subdivision plats.



   C.   Major subdivision final approval.



      (1)   Final subdivision approval shall be granted or denied
within 45 days of submission of a complete application or within such further
time as may be consented to by the applicant. Final approval of a major
subdivision shall expire 95 days from the date of signing of the plat, unless
within such period the plat shall have been duly filed by the developer with
the county recording officer. The Planning Board may, for good cause shown,
extend the period for recording for an additional period not to exceed 190
days from the date of the signing of the plat. Failure of the Planning Board
to act within the period prescribed shall constitute final approval, and a
certificate of the Planning Board Secretary as to the failure of the Planning
Board to act shall be issued on request of the applicant; and it shall be
sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of approval
herein required and shall be so accepted by the County Clerk for purposes of
filing subdivision plats.



      (2)   Whenever review or approval of the application by the
County Planning Board is required by N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3, in the case of a
subdivision, the Town Planning Board shall condition any approval that it
grants upon timely receipt of a favorable report on the application by the
County Planning Board or approval by the County Planning Board by its failure
to report thereon within the required time period.



   D.   Preliminary site plan approval. Upon the submission of a
complete application for a site plan for 10 acres of land or less and 10
dwelling units or less, the Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary
approval within 45 days of the date of such submission or within such further
time as may be consented to by the developer. Upon the submission of a
complete application for a site plan of more than 10 acres or more than 10
dwelling units, the Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval
within 95 days of the date of such submission or within such further time as
may be consented to by the developer. Otherwise, the Planning Board shall be
deemed to have granted preliminary approval of the site plan.



   E.   Final site plan approval.



      (1)   Final approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days
after submission of a complete application or within such further time as may
be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to act within
the period prescribed shall constitute final approval, and a certificate of
the Planning Board Secretary as to the failure of the Planning Board to act
shall be issued on request of the applicant; and it shall be sufficient in
lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of approval herein required
and shall be so accepted by the County Clerk for purposes of filing
subdivision plats.



      (2)   Whenever review or approval of the application by the
County Planning Board is required by N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.6, the Planning Board
shall condition any approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a
favorable report on the application by the County Planning Board or approval
by the County Planning Board by its failure to report thereon within the
required time period.



   F.   Conditional use approval.



      (1)   Approval shall be granted or denied within 95 days of
submission of a complete application by a developer to the Planning Board or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.



      (2)   The review by the Planning Board of a conditional use
application shall include any required site plan review pursuant to this
chapter. (See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67.) The time period for action by the Planning
Board on conditional uses pursuant to this section shall apply to such site
plan review. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period
prescribed shall constitute approval of the application, and a certificate of
the Planning Board Secretary as to the failure of the Planning Board to act
shall be issued on request of the applicant; and it shall be sufficient in
lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of approval, herein
required, and shall be so accepted by the county recording officer for
purposes of filing subdivision plats.



      (3)   Whenever review or approval of the application by the
County Planning Board is required by N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3, in the case of a
subdivision, or N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.6, in the case of a site plan, the Town
Planning Board shall condition any approval that it grants upon timely
receipt of a favorable report on the application by the County Planning Board
or approval by the County Planning Board by its failure to report thereon
within the required time period.



   G.   Ancillary powers. Whenever the Planning Board is called upon to
exercise its powers as set forth in § 175-19G of this chapter, the Planning
Board shall grant or deny approval of the application within 95 days after
submission by the developer of a complete application or within such further
time as may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Planning Board
to act within the period prescribed shall constitute approval of the
application, and a certificate of the Planning Board Secretary as to the
failure of the Planning Board to act shall be issued on request of the
applicant.



   H.   Pinelands Commission review. Notwithstanding the provisions of
this section, where any approval results from the failure of the Planning
Board to act within the prescribed period, the applicant shall provide notice
to the Pinelands Commission, and the permit shall not become effective until
the requisite time period for Commission review and action has lapsed in
accordance with § 175-40D and E.



§ 175-21. Certificate of appropriateness.



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



   A.   The Planning Board shall exercise all the powers and perform
all the duties set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.153(a).



   B.   Authority to issue certificates of appropriateness.



      (1)   The Planning Board shall issue all certificates of
appropriateness except as specified in Subsection B(2) below.



      (2)   The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall issue certificates
of appropriateness for those applications for development which it is
otherwise empowered to review.



   C.   Certificates of appropriateness shall be required for the
following:



      (1)   Construction, encroachment upon, alteration, remodeling,
removal, disturbance, demolition or isolation of any resource designated by
the Pinelands Commission pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.154; and



      (2)   Development not otherwise exempted from review pursuant
to § 175-60A(2) of this chapter where a significant resource has been
identified pursuant to § 175-60A of this chapter.



   D.   Certificates of appropriateness shall be issued in accordance
with § 175-107 of this chapter.



ARTICLE V. Zoning Board of Adjustment



§ 175-22. Establishment.



[Amended 1-22-2018 by Ord. No. 001-2018]



   The Zoning Board of Adjustment previously established pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D - 69, et seq., consisting of seven residents of the Town of
Hammonton appointed by the Town Council is hereby abolished.  All references
in the Hammonton Code to the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall mean and refer
to the Town of Hammonton Planning Board.



§ 175-23. (Reserved) 13.1



13.1.   Editor's Note: Former § 175-23, Membership; terms, was repealed
1-22-2018 by Ord. No. 001-2018.



§ 175-24. Voting by absent members.



   A member of the Board who was absent from one or more of the meetings
at which a hearing was held shall be eligible to vote on the matter upon
which the hearing was conducted, notwithstanding his absence from one or more
of the meetings; provided, however, that such Board member has available to
him the transcript or recording of the meeting from which he was absent and
certifies, in writing, to the Board that he has read such transcript or
listened to such recording.



§ 175-25. (Reserved) 13.2



13.2.   Editor's Note: Former § 175-25, Alternate members, as amended,
was repealed 1-22-2018 by Ord. No. 001-2018.



§ 175-26. Officers; other staff and services.



   A.   The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall elect a Chairman and Vice
Chairman from its members and shall select a Secretary, who may be a Board
member or a municipal employee.



   B.   The Zoning Board of Adjustment may employ or contract for and
fix the compensation of legal counsel, other than the Municipal Attorney, a
licensed planning consultant and/or a licensed professional engineer and
other staff and services as it shall deem necessary, not exceeding, exclusive
of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the Town Council for its use.



§ 175-27. Rules and regulations.



   The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall adopt and may amend reasonable
rules and regulations, not inconsistent with any applicable provisions of
this chapter, for the administration of its functions, powers and duties and
shall furnish a copy thereof to any person upon request and may charge a
reasonable fee for such copy. Copies of all such rules and regulations and
amendments thereto shall be maintained in the office of the administrative
officer. (See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8a.)



§ 175-28. General powers and duties.



   A.   The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the power to:



      (1)   Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the
appellant that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or
refusal made by the Zoning Officer based on or made in the enforcement of
Article XIII of this chapter.



      (2)   Hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of
the zoning articles of this chapter, requests for interpretation of the
Zoning Map or zoning article of this chapter or for decisions upon other
special questions upon which such Board is authorized to pass by the zoning
provisions of this chapter.



      (3)   Where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness
or shape of a specific piece of property, by reason of exceptional
topographic conditions or by reason of other extraordinary and exceptional
situation or condition of such piece of property, the strict application of
any regulation pursuant to Article XIII of this chapter would result in
peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to or exceptional and undue
hardship upon the developer of such property, grant, upon an application or
an appeal relating to such property, a variance from such strict application
of such regulation so as to relieve such difficulties or hardship, including
a variance for a conditional use; provided, however, that no variance shall
be granted under this subsection to allow a structure or use in a district
restricted against such structure or use; and provided further that the
proposed development does not require approval by the Planning Board of a
subdivision, site plan or conditional use in conjunction with which the
Planning Board shall review a request for a variance pursuant to this chapter.



      (4)   In particular cases and for special reasons, grant a
variance to allow departure from regulations pursuant to Article XIII of this
chapter, including, but not limited to, allowing a structure or use in a
district restricted against such structure or use, but only by affirmative
vote of at least five members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.



      (5)   Any municipal variance approval which grants relief from
the density or lot area requirements for a residential or principal
nonresidential use in the RR, R-1, R-2, R-3, B-2 or MD Districts shall
require that Pinelands development credits be used for all dwelling units or
lots in excess of that permitted without the variance.



[Added 6-28-1993 by Ord. No. 13-1993; amended 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



   B.   No variance or other relief may be granted under the terms of
this section unless such variance or other relief can be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and will not substantially impair
the intent and purpose of the Master Plan and Zoning Ordinance. An
application under this section may be referred to any appropriate person or
agency, including the Planning Board pursuant to § 175-19F of this chapter,
for its report, provided that such reference shall not extend the period of
time within which the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act.



   C.   In exercising the above-mentioned power, the Zoning Board of
Adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq. or amendments thereto or subsequent statutes applying or the Pinelands
Comprehensive Management Plan, reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may
modify the action, order, requirement, decision, interpretation or
determination appealed from and make such other requirement, decision or
determination as ought to be made and, to that end, have all powers of the
official from whom the appeal was taken.



§ 175-29. Additional powers.



   The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall, in addition to the powers
specified in § 175-28 of this article, have power given by law to:



   A.   Upon application of the requirements of §§ 175-26, 175-28B,
175-30 and 175-31A(1), F and G of this chapter (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-71 through
75):



      (1)   Direct issuance of a permit for a building or structure
in the bed of a mapped street or public drainage way, flood control basin or
public area reserved on the Official Map. (See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 and 55D-34.)



      (2)   Direct issuance of a permit for a building or structure
not related to a street (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36).



   B.   Review of applications for development.



      (1)   Grant, to the same extent and subject to the same
restrictions as the Planning Board, subdivision, site plan or conditional use
approval pursuant to Article IV of this chapter, but only when the proposed
development requires approval by the Board of Adjustment of a variance
pursuant to § 175-28A(4) of this chapter (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d). The
developer may elect to submit a separate application requesting approval of
the variance and a subsequent application for any required approval of a
subdivision, site plan or conditional use. The separate approval of the
variance shall be conditioned upon the granting of all required subsequent
approvals by the Zoning Board of Adjustment. No such subsequent approval
shall be granted unless such approval can be granted without substantial
detriment to the public good and without substantial impairment of the intent
and purpose of the Master Plan and Zoning Ordinance. The number of votes of
Board members required to grant any such subsequent approval shall be as
otherwise provided in this act for the approval in question, and the special
vote pursuant to the aforesaid § 175-28A(4) shall not be required.



      (2)   Whenever the Zoning Board of Adjustment considers an
application for development in accordance with the provisions of Subsection
B(1) of the above, refer said application, whether for subdivision, site plan
or conditional use approval, to the Planning Board in accordance with the
provisions of §§ 175-19F(2) and 175-31E of this chapter.



§ 175-30. Appeals and applications.



   A.   Appeals to the Zoning Board of Adjustment may be taken by any
interested party affected by a decision of the Zoning Officer of the town
based on or made in the enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance or Official Map.
Such appeal shall be taken within 20 days by filing a notice of appeal with
the Zoning Officer specifying the grounds of such appeal. The officer from
whom the appeal is taken shall immediately transmit to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment all the papers constituting the record upon which the action
appealed from was taken.



   B.   A developer may file an application for development with the
Zoning Board of Adjustment for action under any of its powers without prior
application to the Zoning Officer or any other administrative officer.



§ 175-31. Time limit for decisions.



   A.   General time limit.



      (1)   The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall render its decision
not later than 120 days after the date an appeal is taken from the decision
of the Zoning Officer or other administrative officer or the submission of a
complete application for development to the Zoning Board of Adjustment
pursuant to the provisions of § 175-40B of this chapter. [See N.J.S.A.
40:55D-72b.]



      (2)   Failure of the Zoning Board of Adjustment to render a
decision within such one-hundred-twenty-day period or within such further
time as may be consented to by the applicant shall constitute a decision
favorable to the applicant.



   B.   Applications for development.



      (1)   Whenever an application for development requests relief
pursuant to § 175-29B, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall grant or deny
approval of the application within 120 days after submission by a developer
of a complete application to the administrative officer or within such
further time as may he consented to by the applicant. In the event that the
developer elects to submit separate consecutive applications, the aforesaid
time period shall apply to the application for approval of the variance. The
period for granting or denying any subsequent approval shall be as otherwise
provided in this chapter. (See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.)



      (2)   Failure of the Zoning Board of Adjustment to act within
the period prescribed shall constitute approval of the application, and a
certificate of the Board Secretary as to the failure of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment to act shall be issued on request of the applicant. Said
certificate shall be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other
evidence of approval herein required and shall be so accepted by the county
recording officer for purposes of filing subdivision plats.



   C.   Whenever review or approval by the County Planning Board of the
application is required in the case of a subdivision (N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3) or
in the case of a site plan (N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.6), the Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall condition any approval that it grants upon timely receipt of
a favorable report on the application by the County Planning Board or by its
failure to report thereon within the required time.



   D.   Local approvals granted as a result of the approving
authority's failure to act within the prescribed time period shall not become
effective until the requirements of § 175-40D and E are met.



   E.   An application to the Zoning Board of Adjustment made in
accordance with the powers delegated to said Board in accordance with this
chapter may be referred to any appropriate person or agency for its report in
addition to the referral of all such applications to the Planning Board. Such
reference shall not extend the period of time within which the Zoning Board
of Adjustment shall act. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall set a deadline
of not less than 100 days for receipt of a report from the person or agency
referred to and from the Planning Board. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall
take no action on the application until either receipt of requested report or
the expiration of the aforementioned time period.



      (1)   Should the Zoning Board of Adjustment decide not to
follow the recommendation of the Planning Board, it may do so only by a
majority vote of its full authorized membership, and it shall set forth the
reason for its decision in writing as part of its deciding resolution.



      (2)   Copies of said deciding resolution shall be sent to all
referral agencies, boards or persons.



   F.   An appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall stay all
proceedings in furtherance of the action in respect to which the decision
appealed from was made, unless the Zoning Officer, from whose action the
appeal is taken, certifies to the Zoning Board of Adjustment, after the
notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts
stated in his certification a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent
peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed
other than by an order of the Superior Court upon notice to the officer from
whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.



   G.   Inquiries as to whether a proposed land use is permissible
under the Zoning Ordinance or Official Zoning Map shall be submitted in
writing to the Board of Adjustment, which shall issue a written response
within 45 days after the next meeting following receipt of the request or
within such additional time as may be consented to by the inquirer.



ARTICLE VI. Provisions Applicable to Both Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment



§ 175-32. Conflicts of interest.



   No member of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act
on any matter in which he or she has, either directly or indirectly, any
personal or financial interest. Whenever any such member shall disqualify
himself or herself from acting on a particular matter, he or she shall not
continue to sit with the board on the hearing of such matter nor participate
in any discussion or decision relating thereto as a member of the board.



§ 175-33. Meetings.



   A.   Meetings of both the Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall be scheduled no less often than once a month, and any
meeting so scheduled shall be held as scheduled, unless canceled for lack of
applications for development to process. Both boards shall by resolution
adopt rules to fix the time and place for holding its regular meetings to
conduct business for which each board is authorized.



   B.   Special meetings may be called by the Chairman or on the
request of any two board members and shall be held on notice to its members
and the public in accordance with all applicable legal requirements.



   C.   No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present.



   D.   All action shall be taken by majority vote of the members of
the board present, except as otherwise required by any provision of this
chapter and of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.



   E.   All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to
the public. Notice of all such meetings shall be given in accordance with the
requirements of the Open Public Meetings Act, Chapter 231 of the Laws of New
Jersey 1975 Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq. and as may be further
required by any town regulations. An executive session for the purpose of
discussing and studying any matters to come before either board shall not be
deemed a regular or special meeting within the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-9b.



§ 175-34. Minutes.



   Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall
include the names of the persons appearing and addressing the board and of
the persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the board, the
findings, if any, made by it and reasons therefor. The minutes shall
thereafter be made available for public inspection during normal business
hours at the office of the Board Secretary. Any interested party shall have
the right to compel production of the minutes for use as evidence in any
legal proceeding concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such
interested party may be charged a fee for reproduction of the minutes for his
use as provided for in the rules of the board and in the appropriate town
ordinance.



§ 175-35. Twenty-one-day requirement.



[Amended 3-26-2001 by Ord. No. 13-2001]



   A.   No application shall be placed upon the agenda of any Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment of the Town of Hammonton unless a
complete application is submitted at least 21 days prior to the regularly
scheduled meeting of the respective Boards.



   B.   For the purpose of this section, a complete application shall
be defined as a fully executed and completed application forms, maps,
surveys, site plans, subdivision plans, environmental impact statements,
traffic surveys, drainage maps and calculations and any other materials upon
which the application will be considered.



§ 175-36. Hearings.



   A.   Requirement. Each Board shall hold a hearing on each of its
respective applications for development and, in the case of the Planning
Board, for the adoption, revision or any amendment to the Master Plan.



   B.   Rules. The Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment may
make rules governing the conduct of hearings before such bodies, which rules
shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of the Municipal Land Use Law
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.) or of this chapter.



   C.   Twenty-one-day requirement.



[Amended 3-26-2001 by Ord. No. 13-2001]



      (1)   No application shall be placed upon the agenda of any
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment of the Town of Hammonton unless
a complete application is submitted at least 21 days prior to the regularly
scheduled meeting of the respective Boards.



      (2)   For the purpose of this subsection, a complete
application shall be defined as a fully executed and completed application
forms, maps, surveys, site plans, subdivision plans, environmental impact
statements, traffic surveys, drainage maps and calculations and any other
materials upon which the application will be considered.



   D.   Oaths. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as
he may designate shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant evidence,
including witnesses and documents presented by the parties, and the
provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1
et seq.) shall apply.



   E.   Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an
application for development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the
presiding officer, and the right of cross-examination shall be permitted to
all interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly,
if not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.



   F.   Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable
to the hearing, but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.



   G.   Records. Each Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of
the proceedings by either stenographer, mechanical or electronic means at the
expense of the respective Board. The Board shall furnish a transcript or
duplicate recording in lieu thereof on request to any interested party at his
expense. The municipal agency, in furnishing a transcript of the proceedings
to an interested party at his expense, shall not charge such interested party
more than the maximum permitted in N.J.S.A. 2A:11-15. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A.
2A:11-15 was repealed by L. 1991, c. 119, § 4, effective April 25, 1991. See
now N.J.S.A. 2B:7-4. Said transcript shall be certified, in writing, by the
transcriber to be accurate.



§ 175-37. Notification of Pinelands Commission.



   A.   Notice of any hearing, public meeting or other proceeding at
which an application for development is to be considered shall be given not
less than five days prior to such hearing, meeting or proceeding by the
applicant to the Pinelands Commission by mail or by delivery of same to the
principal office of the Commission. The notice shall be in such form as the
Executive Director of the Pinelands Commission shall, from time to time,
specify; as a minimum, the notice shall contain:



      (1)   The name and address of the applicant.



      (2)   The docket number of the certificate of filing issued by
the Pinelands Commission and the date on which it was issued.



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



      (3)   The date, time and location of the meeting, hearing or
other formal proceeding.



      (4)   The name of the local permitting agency or
representative thereof which will be conducting the meeting, hearing or other
formal proceeding.



      (5)   Any written reports or comments received by the local
permitting agency on the application for development which have not been
previously submitted to the Commission.



      (6)   The purpose for which the meeting, hearing or other
formal proceeding is to be held.



   B.   The applicant shall give notice to the Pinelands Commission of
any design, engineering or other changes made to an application previously
filed with a local approving authority. Any such notice shall be made within
five days of submission of such changes to the Board Secretary. Such notice
shall be in such form as the Executive Director of the Pinelands Commission
shall specify; but as a minimum, shall contain at least the information
required pursuant to § 175-60D(1) as applicable.



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



§ 175-38. Public notice requirements for hearings.



   A.   Public notice of a hearing on an application for development
shall be required, except as set forth herein.



   B.   No public notice of a hearing shall be required for the
following applications for development:



      (1)   Minor site plan review. The Board shall waive notice and
public hearing for an application for development upon the Board determining
that the application for development conforms to the definition of "minor
site plan," provided that no variances or other waiver from design standards
requiring notice and public hearing are requested.



      (2)   Minor subdivisions. The Board shall waive notice and
public hearing for an application for development upon the Board determining
that the application for development conforms to the definition of "minor
subdivisions," provided that no variances or other waiver from design
standards requiring notice and public hearing are requested.



      (3)   Final approval of site plans and major subdivisions.



   C.   Variance applications pursuant to §§ 175-19G and 175-28A(2)
and (3) shall require public notice when the variance request is made as part
of an application for development otherwise excepted from public notice.



   D.   Public notice shall be required for preliminary major site plan
approval.



   E.   Whenever public notice of a hearing is required, notice shall
be given to the Pinelands Commission and as follows:



      (1)   Notice shall be given by the applicant to the owners of
all real property, as shown on the current tax duplicate, located within 200
feet in all directions of the subject property, whether located within or
without the town in which the applicant's land is located. This requirement
shall be deemed satisfied by notice to the condominium association, in the
case of any unit owner whose unit has a unit above or below it, or horizontal
property regime, in the case of any co-owner whose apartment has an apartment
above or below it. Such notice shall be given by serving a copy thereof on
the property owner as shown on the said current tax duplicate or his agent in
charge of the property or mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the
property owner at his address as shown on the said current tax duplicate.



      (2)   Notice to a partnership owner may be made by the
applicant by service upon any partner. Notice to a corporate owner may be
made by the applicant by service upon its president, a vice president,
secretary or other person authorized by appointment or by law to accept
service on behalf of the corporation. Notice to a condominium association,
horizontal property regime, community trust or homeowners' association,
because of its ownership of common elements or areas within 200 feet of the
subject property, may be made in the same manner as to a corporation without
further notice to unit owners, co-owners or homeowners on account of such
common elements or areas.



      (3)   Notice of all hearings on application for development
involving property located within 200 feet of an adjoining municipality shall
be given by the applicant by personal service or certified mail to the clerk
of such municipality.



      (4)   Notice shall be given by personal service or certified
mail by the applicant to the County Planning Board of a hearing on an
application for development of property adjacent to an existing county road
or proposed road shown on the Official County Map or on the County Master
Plan, adjoining other county land or situated within 200 feet of a municipal
boundary.



      (5)   Notice shall be given by the applicant by personal
service or certified mail to the Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing
on an application for development of property adjacent to a state highway.



      (6)   Notice shall be given by the applicant by personal
service or certified mail to the Director of the Division of State and
Regional Planning in the Department of Community Affairs of a hearing on an
application for development of property which exceeds 150 acres or 500
dwelling units. Such notice shall include a copy of any maps or documents
required to be on file with the Town Clerk pursuant to § 175-36C.



      (7)   Public notice shall be given by the Board Secretary, and
may be given by the applicant, by publication in the official newspaper of
the town at least 10 days prior to the date of the scheduled meeting.



      (8)   All notices specified in this section shall be given at
least 10 days prior to the date fixed for hearing. The applicant shall file
an affidavit of proof of service with the board holding the hearing on the
application for development.



      (9)   Any notice made by certified mail as hereinabove
required shall be deemed complete upon mailing.



      (10)   The notice stated in Subsection E(3), (4), (5) and (6)
is not required unless public notice is required pursuant to Subsections A,
B, C and D and notice is required pursuant to Subsection E(2) and (3).



      (11)   Contents of notice. All notices required to be given
pursuant to this chapter shall state the date, time and place of the hearing,
describe and specify design and/or performance standards exceptions
requested, if applicable, the nature of the matters to be considered and
identification of the property proposed for development by street address, if
any, or by reference to lot and block numbers as shown on the current tax
duplicate in the Municipal Tax Assessor's office and the location and times
at which any maps and documents for which approval is sought are available as
required by § 175-36C.



§ 175-39. List of property owners.



   A.   Pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the Tax Assessor
shall, within seven days after receipt of a request therefor and upon receipt
of payment of a fee of $0.25 per name or $10, whichever is greater, make and
certify a list from the current tax duplicate of names and addresses of
owners to whom the applicant is required to give notice pursuant to §
175-38E of this chapter. (See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12b and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12c.)



   B.   The applicant may rely upon the information contained in such
list, and failure to give notice to any owner not on the list shall not
invalidate any hearing or proceeding.



   C.   The Tax Assessor shall forward to the appropriate board a copy
of the certified list of property owners prior to the public hearing.



§ 175-40. Decisions.



   A.   Each decision on any application for development shall be set
forth in writing as a resolution of the board, which shall include findings
of fact and legal conclusion based thereon. The board shall vote to either
approve or deny the application. Failure of a motion approving an application
for development to receive the number of votes for approval shall be deemed
an action denying the application.



   B.   Resolution of memorialization.



      (1)   The Board may provide such written decision and findings
and conclusions either on the date of the meeting at which the Board takes to
grant or deny approval or, if the meeting at which such action is taken
occurs within the final 45 days of the applicable time period for rendering a
decision on the application for development, within 45 days of such meeting
by the adoption of a resolution of memorialization setting forth the decision
and the findings and conclusions of the Board thereon. An action resulting
from the failure of a motion to approve an application shall be memorialized
by resolution as provided above, notwithstanding the time at which such
action occurs within the applicable time period for rendering a decision on
the application.



      (2)   The adoption of a resolution of memorialization pursuant
to this subsection shall not be construed to alter the applicable time period
for rendering a decision on the application for development. Such resolution
shall be adopted by a vote of a majority of the members of the Board who
voted for the action previously taken, and no other member shall vote
thereon. The vote on such resolution shall be deemed to be a memorialization
of an action of the Board and not to be an action of the municipal agency;
except that failure to adopt such a resolution within the forty-five-day
period shall result in the approval of the application for development,
notwithstanding any prior action taken thereon.



      (3)   Whenever a resolution of memorialization is adopted in
accordance with this subsection, the date of such adoption shall constitute
the date of the decision for purposes of the mailing, filing and publications
as required by this chapter.



   C.   A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Board within 10
days of the date of decision to the applicant or, if represented, to his
attorney without separate charge. A copy of the decision shall also be mailed
to any interested party and to all persons who have requested it and who have
paid the fee set forth in Article VII for such service. A copy of the
decision shall also be filed in the office of the Board Secretary, who shall
make a copy available for public inspection at such office during reasonable
hours.



   D.   Notice of any determination with respect to an application
shall be given by the applicant to the Pinelands Commission within five days
following receipt by the applicant of such determination. Such notice shall
be in a form as the Executive Director of the Pinelands Commission shall
specify; but such notice shall, as a minimum, contain at least the
information required pursuant to § 175-60. These requirements shall not
apply to those types of development set forth in § 175-60A(2) of this
chapter.



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



   E.   No development authorized pursuant to an approval of an
application for development shall commence until the review and notice and
procedures of § 175-60 have been met.



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



   F.   No final subdivision or site plan approval shall be issued
until the requirements of § 175-60 are met.



§ 175-41. Publication of decisions.



   A.   A brief notice of each decision on any application for
development shall be published in the official newspaper of the municipality.
The ten-day period of time in which an appeal of the decision may be made
shall run from the first day of publication of the decision.



   B.   Publication of the above decision shall be done by the Board
Secretary. The applicant may also arrange for such publication if he desires.



§ 175-42. Proof of payment of taxes; corporate disclosure.



   A.   Every application for development submitted to the Planning
Board or to the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be accompanied by proof that
no taxes or assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on the
property which is the subject of such application. (See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39
and 55D-65.)



   B.   A corporation or partnership applying to the Planning Board or
the Board of Adjustment for permission to subdivide a parcel of land into six
or more lots or applying for a variance to construct a multiple dwelling of
25 or more family units or for approval of a site to be used for commercial
purposes shall list the names and addresses of all stockholders or individual
partners owning at least 10% of its stock of any class or at least 10% of the
interest in the partnership, as the case may be. (See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-48.1 et
seq.)



   C.   If a corporation or partnership owns 10% or more of the stock
of a corporation or 10% or greater interest in a partnership, subject to
disclosure pursuant to Subsection B above, that corporation or partnership
shall list the names and addresses of its stockholders holding 10% or more of
its stock or of 10% or greater interest in the partnership, as the case may
be, and this requirement shall be followed by every corporate stockholder or
partner in a partnership, until the names and addresses of the noncorporate
stockholders and individual partners exceeding the ten-percent ownership
criterion established above have been listed.



   D.   No board shall approve the application of any corporation or
partnership which does not comply with this chapter.



§ 175-43. Appeal to Town Council.



   A.   Any interested party may appeal to the Town Council a final
decision of the Zoning Board approving an application pursuant to § 175-28D
to permit a use otherwise prohibited by this chapter. Such appeal shall be
made within 10 days of the date of publication of such final decision
pursuant to § 175-41 of this chapter. The appeal to the Town Council shall
be made by serving the Town Clerk in person or by certified mail with a
notice of appeal specifying the grounds therefor and the name and address of
the appellant and name and address of his attorney, if represented. Such
appeal shall be decided by the Town Council only upon the record established
before the approving board.



   B.   Notice of the meeting to review the record below shall be given
by the Town Council by personal service or certified mail to the appellant,
to the Pinelands Commission, to those entitled to notice of a decision
pursuant to § 175-38 and to the board from which the appeal is taken at
least 10 days prior to the date of the meeting. The parties may submit oral
and written argument on the record at such meeting, and the Town Council
shall provide for verbatim recording and transcripts of such meetings
pursuant to § 175-36.



   C.   The appellant shall, within five days of service of the above
notice of appeal, arrange for a transcript pursuant to § 175-36G for use by
the Town Council and shall pay a deposit of $50 or the estimated cost of such
transcription, whichever is less, or shall, within 35 days of service of the
notice of appeal, submit a transcript as otherwise arranged to the Town Clerk.



   D.   The Town Council shall conclude a review of the record below
not later than 95 days from the date of publication of notice of the decision
below pursuant to § 175-41, unless the applicant consents in writing to an
extension of such period. Failure of the Town Council to hold a hearing and
conclude a review of the record below and to render a decision within such
specified period shall constitute a decision affirming the action of the
board.



   E.   The Town Council may reverse, remand or affirm, wholly or in
part, or may modify the final decision of the Board.



   F.   The affirmative vote of a majority of the full authorized
membership of the Town Council shall be necessary to reverse, remand or
modify any final action of the Board.



   G.   An appeal to the Town Council shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action in respect to which the decision appealed from was
made unless the Board from whose action the appeal is taken certifies to the
Town Council, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with such
Board, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in
its opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case,
proceedings shall not be stayed other than by an order of the Superior Court
on application upon notice to the Board from whom the appeal is taken and on
good cause shown.



   H.   The Town Council shall mail a copy of the decision to the
appellant or, if represented, to his attorney and to the applicant without
separate charge and for the fee established in Article VII to any interested
party who has requested it not later than 10 days after the date of the
decision. A brief notice of the decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the town. Such publication shall be arranged by the Town Clerk;
the applicant may, if so desired, also arrange for such publication. The
appellant shall also pay a fee as set forth in Article VII for publication by
the Town Clerk.



   I.   Nothing herein shall be construed to restrict the right of any
party to obtain a review by any court of competent jurisdiction according to
law. The period of time in which an appeal to a court may be made shall run
from the first publication, whether arranged by the town or applicant.



   J.   The applicant shall give notice by mail to the Pinelands
Commission and to the Pinelands Executive Director of any design, engineering
or other changes made to an application as a result of an appeal to the Town
Council. Such notice shall be made by mail within five days of the receipt by
the applicant of the decision of the Town Council. Such notice shall contain
the information required in § 175-60D(1).



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



   K.   Notice of decisions shall be as specified in § 175-40A, D, E
and F of this chapter.



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



§ 175-44. Information to be available to Environmental Commission.



   The Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall make
available to the Environmental Commission an informational copy of every
application for development submitted to either Board. Failure of the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment to make such informational copy
available to the Environmental Commission shall not invalidate any hearing or
proceeding.



§ 175-45. Certificate of subdivision approval.



   A.   Issuance. (See 40:55D-56.)



      (1)   A prospective purchaser, prospective mortgagee or any
other person interested in any land which either forms part of a subdivision
or formed part of such a subdivision as of August 1, 1973, may apply in
writing to the Secretary of the approving Board for the issuance of a
certificate certifying whether such subdivision has been approved by the
Board. Such application shall contain a diagram showing the location and
dimensions of the land to be covered by the certificate and the name of the
owner thereof.



      (2)   The Board Secretary shall make and issue such
certificate within 15 days after the receipt of such written application and
the fees therefor. Said Secretary shall keep a duplicate copy of each
certificate, consecutively numbered, including a statement of the fee
charged, in a binder as a permanent record of his office.



      (3)   Each such certificate shall be designated a "certificate
as to approval of subdivision of land" and shall certify:



         (a)   Whether there exists in the town a duly
established Planning Board.



         (b)   Whether there is an ordinance controlling
subdivision of land adopted under the authority of the Municipal Land Use Act
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.).



         (c)   Whether the subdivision, as it relates to the land
shown in the application, has been approved by the Board and, if so, the date
of such approval.



         (d)   Any extension and the terms of any extensions
showing that the subdivision of which these lands are a part is a validly
existing subdivision.



         (e)   Whether such subdivision, if the same has not been
approved, is statutorily exempt from the requirement of approval as provided
in this chapter.



   B.   Rights conferred by certificate.



      (1)   Any person who shall acquire for a valuable
consideration an interest in lands covered by a certificate as to approval of
subdivision of land and who shall rely upon the information therein contained
shall hold such interest free of any right, remedy or action which could be
prosecuted or maintained by the town pursuant to the provisions of Article
XIV. (See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-55.)



      (2)   If the Board Secretary designated to issue any such
certificate fails to issue the same within 15 days after receipt of an
application and fees therefor, any person acquiring an interest in the lands
described in such application shall hold such interest free of any right,
remedy or action which could be prosecuted or maintained by the town pursuant
to Article XIV. (See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-55.)



      (3)   Any application for a certificate of subdivision
approval addressed to the Clerk of the town shall be deemed to be addressed
to the proper designated officer, and the town shall be bound thereby to the
same extent as though the same was addressed to the designated official.



ARTICLE VII. Fees



§ 175-46. Payment of fees; escrow; agreement.



   A.   The applicant shall at the time of filing a submission pay the
following nonrefundable fees to the Town of Hammonton. Proposals involving
more than one use or application type shall pay a fee equal to the sum of the
fee for each element. Fees shall be paid by cash or certified check.



   B.   The application fees stated below are nonrefundable. Escrow
funds not used may be returned to the applicant upon his request.



   C.   The escrow fees shall be paid to the board and shall be held in
escrow to cover the costs of professional services and board review,
including engineering and legal or other incidental costs.



   D.   The applicant, as a condition of submission, shall agree in
writing to pay all reasonable and necessary costs for professional review of
the application and plans for inspection of required improvements and for
other professional and secretarial services required by this application.



   E.   The applicant shall also agree that upon notification of the
need for additional escrow funds, said moneys will be immediately paid.



   F.   Form of agreement to be executed by applicant/developer. All
applications submitted to the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment of
the Town of Hammonton shall include a fully executed agreement to pay fees,
the form of which is as follows:



[Added 2-26-2001 by Ord. No. 1-2001]



   AGREEMENT TO PAY FEES



   THIS AGREEMENT, made and entered on this _________day of _____________,
20____ by and between the Town of Hammonton, a Municipal Corporation of the
State of New Jersey (hereinafter "TOWN") and (hereinafter
"APPLICANT/DEVELOPER") is made upon the following terms and conditions:



   1.   AGREEMENT TO PAY FEES: APPLICANT/DEVELOPER hereby covenants and
agrees to pay all charges and fees imposed by TOWN in connection with the
Application for Development filed contemporaneously herewith. Such fees
include but are not limited to application fees, attorney's review fees,
environmental study review fees, engineer's review fee, planner's review
fees, court stenographer fees, copy costs and postage.



   2.   ESCROW DEPOSIT: The TOWN hereby acknowledges receipt of $   
      , said sum being a cash deposit to be placed in a Town escrow
account to cover the cost of the aforementioned review fees. Such sum shall
be charged periodically as fees and charges accrue, and the balance of the
escrow sum, if any after all charges and fees have been paid, shall be
returned to APPLICANT/DEVELOPER.



   3.   ADDITIONAL PAYMENTS: The APPLICANT/DEVELOPER agrees to pay any
additional sum required to pay charges and fees not covered by the escrow
deposit within 15 days after receipt of billing by the TOWN. The
APPLICANT/DEVELOPER understands and agrees to pay such sum notwithstanding
any dispute as to the reasonableness of fees and charges. Payment shall not
constitute a waiver of the right to challenge the reasonableness of charges
and fees as set forth hereinbelow.



   4.   CONTEST OF REASONABLENESS: APPLICANT/DEVELOPER agrees that the
reasonableness of any fee or charge may be challenged by an appropriate legal
action brought within 45 days from the date that the APPLICANT/DEVELOPER
escrow deposit balance is returned or 45 days from the date the
APPLICANT/DEVELOPER receives notice that additional payments are requested to
pay charges and fees not covered by the escrow deposit. APPLICANT/DEVELOPER
understands and agrees that the aforesaid procedure shall be the sole and
exclusive method of challenging the reasonableness of charges and fees and
hereby waives any longer statute of limitations.



   5.   NOTICE: APPLICANT/DEVELOPER agrees that all notices or refunds
to the APPLICANT/DEVELOPER shall be mailed to the following address:



   



   



   



   6.   COLLECTION: Should the APPLICANT/DEVELOPER fail to pay any sum
required to be paid hereunder when due, TOWN shall be entitled to pursue all
remedies at law or equity. Interest shall accrue at the rate of 18% per annum
simple interest on all sums unpaid after the due date. The TOWN may collect a
reasonable attorney's fee, which shall not be less than $300, should
litigation for the purpose of collecting any sum be commenced.



           IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have hereunto
subscribed their hands the date first above written.



   TOWN OF HAMMONTON   APPLICANT/DEVELOPER



      



   Signature   Signature



   Project Name:



   Project Location:



   Applicant/Developer Name:



   Applicant/Developer Address:



   



   



   Applicant/Developer Federal I.D. Number:



   Applicant/Developer Social Security Number:



   Bill to (name and address if different from above):



   Name:



   Address:



            



   Phone: ____________________ (Business) ______________________ (Other)



§ 175-47. Subdivision review fees.



[Amended 7-28-1986 by Ord. No. 17-1986; 4-24-1989 by Ord. No. 14-1989;
4-22-1996 by Ord. No. 3-1996; 8-24-2009 by Ord. No. 17-2009]



   Subdivision review fees shall be as follows:



   A.   Minor subdivision:



      (1)   Application fee: $250.



      (2)   Escrow fee: $1,500.



   B.   Preliminary approval, major subdivision:



      (1)   Application fee: $500.



      (2)   Escrow fee: $4,000, plus $100 per lot.



      (3)   Extension of preliminary approval:



         (a)   Application fee: $150.



         (b)   Escrow fee: 20% of original escrow deposit.



      (4)   Substantial revision or additional review of preliminary
approval:



         (a)   Application fee: $250.



         (b)   Escrow fee: 100% of original escrow deposit for
preliminary approval, major subdivision.



   C.   Final approval, major subdivision:



      (1)   Application fee: $350.



      (2)   Escrow fee: 100% of original escrow deposit for
preliminary approval, major subdivision.



      (3)   Extension of final approval:



         (a)   Application fee: $150.



         (b)   Escrow fee: 20% of original escrow deposit.



   D.   Extension of minor subdivision approval:



      (1)   Application fee: $150.



      (2)   Escrow fee: $300.



§ 175-48. Categories of site plan fees.



   For the purposes of establishing application fees for the review of
site plans, the following site plan categories are hereby created:



   A.   New commercial construction. This shall consist of all new
construction of any type of retail sales establishment, professional or
business offices, service establishments or any other use not categorized
otherwise herein.



   B.   New construction (industrial). This shall consist of all new
construction of any industrial establishment. For purposes of this chapter,
an industrial establishment shall be considered to be that type of business
where parts may be assembled or where raw materials are converted to form a
finished consumer product and where same is distributed to wholesale or
retail sales outlets and which do not have direct retail sales greater than
10% of total sales volume. In addition, the following uses shall also fall
within this category:



      (1)   Warehouses solely for the storage of materials or
products.



      (2)   Heavy construction contractor yard.



      (3)   Any other use which, in the opinion of the approving
authority, is within the intent of this section.



   C.   Residential housing. This shall consist of multifamily
development apartments, condominium developments and similar residential
developments.



   D.   Building alteration. This shall consist of any building or
group of buildings for which site plan approval has been previously granted
which is being increased in gross floor area greater than 10% of the original
floor area or in case of industrial sites greater than 20% of gross floor
area. Any building for which site plan approval has been previously granted
and which is being increased by less than the values stated shall be
considered exempt from the provisions of this chapter, except that this shall
be restricted to only the first such enlargement after site plan approval.
Also included in this category are any buildings or groups of buildings,
regardless of amount of increase in size, which have never previously
obtained site plan approval.



   E.   Use change. This shall consist of all land areas and all
buildings or groups of buildings not being increased in size but wherein a
change of use is proposed and no previous site plan approval for the proposed
use has ever been obtained, or where previous site plan approval has been
obtained and the new use has a greater parking requirement per this chapter.



§ 175-49. Site plan review fees.



[Amended 7-28-1986 by Ord. No. 17-1986; 4-24-1989 by Ord. No. 14-1989;
4-22-1996 by Ord. No. 3-1996; 8-24-2009 by Ord. No. 17-2009]



   Site plan review fees shall be as follows:



   A.   Minor site plan:



      (1)   Application fee for preliminary and final minor site
plan: $500.



      (2)   Escrow fee: $3,500. If escrow drops below 30% of the
initial amount, the applicant must deposit funds to replenish escrow to 100%
of initial amount deposited.



   B.   Major site plan:



      (1)   Application fee for preliminary and final major site
plan: $1,500.



      (2)   Escrow fee for preliminary site plan:



         (a)   New commercial and/or new industrial construction:
$4,000 for the first acre of the gross area or fraction thereof, plus $800
for each additional acre or fraction thereof. If escrow drops below 30% of
the initial amount, the applicant must deposit funds to replenish escrow to
100% of initial amount deposited.



         (b)   Residential multifamily housing construction:
$8,000 for two to 25 dwelling units, plus $50 per dwelling unit for every
unit above 25. If escrow drops below 30% of the initial amount, the applicant
must deposit funds to replenish escrow to 100% of initial amount deposited.



         (c)   Building alteration: $2,500 for the first 3,000
square feet of gross floor area, plus $500 per 1,000 square feet of
additional gross floor area or fraction thereof. If escrow drops below 30% of
the initial amount, the applicant must deposit funds to replenish escrow to
100% of initial amount deposited.



      (3)   Final escrow fees for major site plan:



         (a)   New commercial and/or new industrial construction:
$2,500 for the first acre of the gross area or fraction thereof, plus $800
for each additional acre or fraction thereof. If escrow drops below 30% of
the initial amount, the applicant must deposit funds to replenish escrow to
100% of initial amount deposited.



         (b)   Residential multifamily housing construction:
$8,000 for two to 25 units, plus $50 per dwelling unit for every unit above
25. If escrow drops below 30% of the initial amount, the applicant must
deposit funds to replenish escrow to 100% of initial amount deposited.



         (c)   Building alteration: $2,500 for the first 3,000
square feet of gross floor area, plus $500 per 1,000 square feet of
additional floor area or fraction thereof. If escrow drops below 30% of the
initial amount, the applicant must deposit funds to replenish escrow to 100%
of initial amount deposited.



   C.   Change of use.



      (1)   Application fee: $500.



      (2)   Escrow fee: $1,250. If escrow drops below 30% of the
initial amount, the applicant must deposit funds to replenish escrow to 100%
of initial amount deposited.



§ 175-50. Other fees and escrows.



[Amended 7-28-1986 by Ord. No. 17-1986; 4-24-1989 by Ord. No. 14-1989;
4-22-1996 by Ord. No. 3-1996; 8-24-2009 by Ord. No. 17-2009]



   A.   Fees.



      (1)   Hear and decide appeals: $300.



      (2)   Interpretation of the Zoning Map: $300.



      (3)   Hardship variance: $200.



         (a)   Escrow fee: $750.



      (4)   Use variance: $250.



         (a)   Escrow fee: $1,000.



      (5)   Conditional uses: The fee shall be that which applies to
minor or major site plans, whichever category is applicable to the
application in question.



      (6)   Hearing for permit for building or structure:



         (a)   In bed of mapped street, et al: $200.



         (b)   Not related to a street: $200.



      (7)   Site plan waiver request: $250.



         (a)   Escrow fee: $750.



      (8)   Request for waiver from the requirement that curbs and
sidewalks be installed: $150.



      (9)   Certificate of appropriateness (historical,
archaeological and cultural designations):



         (a)   If a certificate of appropriateness is required,
the application fee shall be $100.



         (b)   Escrow fees may be required, if necessary, as
generally set forth in § 175-46.



      (10)   Certificate of subdivision approval:



         (a)   The fee for a certificate confirming subdivision
approval shall be $15.



         (b)   The fee to update this certificate shall be $5,
and the updated certificate may be reissued within two years of the original
certificate.



      (11)   Signs.



         (a)   The following fees shall apply for a permit to
construct a permanent new sign which is not a substantially similar
replacement of a sign in that location: $1 per square foot of surface area of
a sign (calculated and applied to one side of a double-faced sign only), but
in no event less than $50.



         (b)   An addition to an existing permitted sign shall
have a fee only as to the additional sign square footage.



         (c)   The fee shall be $25 for a sign substantially
similar to the sign being replaced.



         (d)   The fee for a permit to use a temporary, portable
sign shall be $25, which permit shall expire in 90 days.



      (12)   Zoning permit/certificate of conformity/letter of
interpretation application fee: $25.



[Added 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 6-2011]



   B.   Escrows. All escrows shall be $500 unless otherwise specified
or waived by the respective board. When any escrow drops below 30% of the
initial amount deposited, the applicant must deposit funds to replenish
escrow to 100% of initial amount deposited.



§ 175-50.1. Development fees.



[Added 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 28-2002; amended 8-26-2002 by Ord. No. 32-2002]



   A.   In Holmdel Builder's Ass'n v. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550
(1990), the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory development
fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985, N.J.S.A. 52:27d-30l et
seq., and the State Constitution subject to the Council on Affordable
Housing's (COAH) adoption of rules. The purpose of this section is to
establish standards for the collection, maintenance and expenditure of
development fees pursuant to COAH's rules. Fees collected pursuant to this
section shall be used for the sole purpose of providing low- and
moderate-income housing. This section shall be interpreted within the
framework of COAH's rules on development fees.



   B.   Residential development fees. Developers shall pay a
development fee of ½ of 1% of the equalized assessed value for residential
development within all zoning districts in the Town of Hammonton, provided no
increased density is permitted.



[Amended 8-23-2004 by Ord. No. 21-2004]



   C.   (Reserved) Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, Nonresidential
development fees, was repealed 8-23-2004 by Ord. No. 21-2004.



   D.   Eligible exaction, ineligible exaction and exemptions.



      (1)   Developers of low- and moderate-income units shall be
exempt from paying development fees.



      (2)   Developers that have received preliminary or final
approval prior to the effective date of this section shall be exempt from
paying a development fee unless the developer seeks a substantial change in
the approval, or a developer who has agreed to pay development fee and has
included the resolution of approval.



      (3)   Developers of churches, schools, religious organizations
and qualified nonprofit organizations facilities, together with additions to
existing residential and commercial structures, shall be exempt from paying a
development fee.



      (4)   A developer shall be exempt from the payment of the
development fee in the event that the residential development occurs after an
existing structure has been raised and only if the new residential
development is of the same intensity as the previous use.



[Added 8-23-2004 by Ord. No. 21-2004]



   E.   Payment.



[Amended 8-23-2004 by Ord. No. 21-2004]



      (1)   Developers shall pay no less than 50% of the calculated
development fee to the Town of Hammonton at the issuance of building permits.



      (2)   At the time of the issuance of certificates of
occupancy, the developer shall pay the balance of the calculated development
fee to the Town.



      (3)   The developer shall be responsible for paying the
difference between the fees paid at the time of the issuance of the building
permit and that calculated at the time of the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy.



   F.   Housing trust fund.



      (1)   There is hereby created an interest-bearing housing
trust fund in Fleet Bank for the purpose of receiving development fees from
residential and nonresidential developers. All development fees paid by
developers pursuant to this section shall be deposited in this fund. No money
shall be expended from the housing trust fund unless the expenditure conforms
to a spending plan approved by COAH.



      (2)   If COAH determines that the Town of Hammonton is not in
compliance with COAH rules on development fees, COAH is authorized to direct
the manner in which all development fees collected pursuant to this section
shall be expended. Such authorization is pursuant to this section, COAH's
rules on development fees and the written authorization from the governing
body to the Fleet Bank.



   G.   Use of funds.



      (1)   Money deposited in a housing trust fund may be used for
any activity approved by COAH for addressing the Town of Hammonton's low- and
moderate-income housing obligation. Such activities may include, but are not
necessarily limited to, housing rehabilitation, new construction, regional
contribution agreements, the purchase of land for low- and moderate-income
housing, extensions and/or improvements of roads and infrastructure to low-
and moderate-income housing sites, assistance designed to render units more
affordable to low- and moderate-income households and administrative costs
necessary to implement the Town of Hammonton's housing element. The
expenditure of all money shall conform to a spending plan approved by COAH.



      (2)   At least 30% of the revenues collected shall be devoted
to render units more affordable unless exempt as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-8-16(c).
Examples of such activities include, but are not limited to, down payment and
closing cost assistance, low-interest loans and rental assistance.



      (3)   No more than 20% of the revenues shall be expended on
administrative costs necessary to develop, revise or implement the housing
element. Examples of eligible administrative activities include personnel,
consultant services, space costs, consumable supplies and rental or purchase
of equipment directly associated with plan development or plan implementation.



      (4)   Development fee revenues shall not be expended to
reimburse the Town of Hammonton for housing activities that preceded a first
or second round substantive certification.



   H.   Expiration. This section shall expire if:



      (1)   COAH revokes substantive certification of this section;



      (2)   The substantive certification/judgment of repose expires
prior to the Town of Hammonton's filing an adopted housing element with COAH,
petitioning for substantive certification or receiving COAH's approval of
this section.



ARTICLE VIII. Development Review and Approval



§ 175-51. Definitions.



   As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:



   CONDITIONAL USE



   A use permitted in a particular zoning district only upon a showing
that such use in a specified location will comply with the conditions and
standards for the location or operation of such use as contained in this
chapter and upon the issuance of an authorization therefor by the Planning
Board.



   MAJOR SUBDIVISION



   Any subdivision of land not classified as a minor subdivision.



   MINOR SITE PLAN



   A.   A development plan of one or more lots which:



   B.   Does not propose the new construction of or any addition to a
structure or building which will result in the building coverage of a
property involved to be in excess of 5,000 square feet.



   C.   Does not require a land area in excess of 10,000 square feet to
be disturbed by construction.



   D.   Does not involve planned development.



   E.   Contains the information reasonably required in order to make
an informed determination whether the requirements established by this
chapter for the approval of a minor site plan have been met.



   F.   Any new street or extension of any off-tract improvements which
is to be prorated pursuant to § 175-119 of this chapter (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42).



   MINOR SUBDIVISION



   A subdivision of land for the creation of an aggregate of not more than
four lots (three new lots plus the remaining lot), provided that such
subdivision does not involve a planned development, any new streets or the
extension of any off-tract improvements, the cost of which is to be prorated
pursuant to § 175-119 of this chapter (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42); and is not a
further division of an original tract of land for which previous minor
subdivision(s) have been approved by any board within the five years past and
where the combination of the proposed and approved minor subdivisions
constitutes a major subdivision; and is not deficient in those details and
specifications required herein of a minor subdivision. Any readjustment of
lot lines resulting in no new lots shall be classified as a minor subdivision.



   SITE PLAN



   A development plan of one or more lots on which is shown the existing
and proposed conditions of the lot, including but not necessarily limited to
topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains, marshes and waterways; the
location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives, parking spaces,
walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities, utility services,
landscaping, structures and signs, lighting, screening devices; and any other
information that may be reasonably required in order to make an informed
determination pursuant to this chapter.



   SUBDIVISION



   The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots,
tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development. The
following shall not be considered subdivisions within the meaning of this
chapter, if no new streets are created: divisions of land found by the
Planning Board to be for agricultural purposes where all resulting parcels
are five acres or larger in size; divisions of property by testamentary or
intestate provisions; divisions of property upon court order, including but
not limited to judgments of foreclosure; consolidation of existing lots by
deed or other recorded instrument; and the conveyance of one or more
adjoining lots, tracts or parcels of land owned by the same person or persons
and all of which are found and certified by the administrative officer to
conform to the requirements of this chapter and are shown and designated as
separate lots, tracts or parcels on the Tax Map or Atlas of the town. The
term "subdivision" shall also include the term "resubdivision."



§ 175-52. Review requirements; exemptions; waivers; deviations.



   A.   Site plan review and approval shall be required before any
development, change of use or before any excavation, removal of soil,
clearing of a site or placing of any fill on lands contemplated for
development, and, except as hereinafter provided, no building permit shall be
issued for any building for use or reduction or enlargement in size or other
alteration of any building or change in building type or use of any building,
including accessory structures, unless a site plan is first submitted and
approved by the reviewing board, and no certificate of occupancy shall be
given unless all construction and development conform to the plans as
approved by the reviewing board.



[Amended 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   B.   Exemptions.



      (1)   Site plan review and approval shall not be required for:



      (a)   Building permits for individual lot applications
involving only a detached one- or two-dwelling-unit building.



      (b)   Accessory uses such as a private garage, unless it is
part of an apartment or townhouse project.



      (c)   A sign for an existing use or structure which meets all
applicable zoning requirements as determined by the Zoning Officer.



      (d)   Other buildings incidental to residential or
agricultural land use, provided that the proposed use is not a roadside stand.



      (e)   In connection with the alteration or repair of an
existing building or use which is not either a detached one- or two-dwelling
building or agricultural use when the Zoning Officer determines that said
alterations or repair:



         [1]   Will not result in additional lot coverage.



         [2]   Will conform to the maximum and minimum building
standards set forth in the Zoning Ordinance.



         [3]   Will not increase the number of required
off-street parking or loading spaces.



         [4]   Is not proposed in connection with a use requiring
conditional use approval by the Planning Board.



      (2)   The provisions of Subsection B(1) shall not limit the
requirements for submission and approval of subdivision plats as otherwise
required by this chapter.



   C.   The reviewing board may waive site plan approval requirements
whenever it determines that the proposed construction or alteration or change
of occupancy or use or building type classification does not affect existing
circulation, drainage, relationship of buildings to each other, landscaping,
buffering, lighting and other considerations of site plan review. Any
applicant desiring a waiver under this provision shall present sufficient
evidence to allow the board to reach such conclusions as would permit a
waiver. This evidence shall consist of sketches, descriptions of property and
appurtenances, methods of operations, photographs or other information or
documentation as the board may require. The board shall base its decision on
such evidence and may attach conditions to any waiver.



[Amended 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   D.   Approval of subdivision plats by resolution of the Planning
Board shall be required as a condition for the filing of such plats with the
county recording officer.



   E.   The zoning provisions of this chapter provide for conditional
uses which shall be granted by the Planning Board according to definite
specifications and standards as set forth clearly by ordinance. The Planning
Board shall have the power to review and approve or deny conditional uses or
site plans simultaneously with a review for subdivision approval without the
applicant being required to hold further hearings. The longest time period
for action by the Board, whether it is for subdivision, conditional use or
site plan approval, shall apply. Whenever approval of a conditional use is
requested by the applicant in conjunction with a site plan or subdivision,
notice of the hearing on the plat shall include reference to the request for
such conditional use.



   F.   The Planning Board, when acting upon applications for
preliminary or minor subdivisions or preliminary site plan approval, shall
have the power to grant such exceptions from the requirements of Article XII,
Design, Performance and Evaluation Standards, for subdivision approval or
site plan approval as may be reasonable and within the general purpose and
intent of the provisions for subdivision or site plan review and approval of
this chapter, if the literal enforcement of one or more provisions of this
chapter is impracticable or will exact undue hardship because of peculiar
conditions pertaining to the land in question. Whenever, however, an
exception is being sought from the requirements of § 175-99A for an
environmental impact statement, a written determination from the
Environmental Commission, setting forth its factual findings, conclusions and
recommendations as to the granting of such an exception, shall accompany the
original application to the Board. 



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



   G.   The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the power to grant,
to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions as the Planning
Board, subdivision, site plan or conditional use approval pursuant to this
chapter whenever the proposed development requires approval by the Zoning
Board of Adjustment of a variance pursuant to § 175-28 of this chapter. The
developer may elect to submit a separate application requesting approval of
the variance and a subsequent application for any required approval of a
subdivision, site plan or conditional use. The separate approval of the
variance shall be conditioned upon granting of all required subsequent
approvals by the Zoning Board of Adjustment. No such subsequent approval
shall be granted unless such approval can be granted without substantial
detriment to the public good and without substantial impairment of the intent
and purpose of the Zone Plan and Zoning Ordinance. The number of votes of
Board members required to grant any such subsequent approval shall be as
otherwise provided in this chapter for the approval in question, and the
special vote pursuant to the provisions of § 175-28A(4) shall not be
required.



   H.   The Planning Board may authorize a deviation from the final
plan if caused by a change of conditions beyond the control of the developer
since the date of final approval and if the deviation would not substantially
alter the character of the development or substantially impair the intent and
purpose of the Master Plan and Zoning Ordinance.



§ 175-53. Concept design review.



   A.   An applicant may request, and the Planning Board shall grant,
an informal review of a concept design plan for which an applicant intends to
prepare and submit an application for development. It is strongly advised
that applicants with planned developments submit under the provisions of this
section. 



[Amended 3-25-2002 by Ord. No. 12-2002]



   B.   A concept design plan and the supporting documents for a
proposed development shall constitute the material to be officially submitted
to the Planning Board. Said plans and supporting documents shall show a
general informal design of the development, including proposed building types
if located in a Downtown District or Gateway District,  and its public
improvements so that the Board can indicate its approval or disapproval of
the concept. Approval of the concept design plan does not constitute an
approval of the concept or plan, nor shall it be considered a valid basis for
the construction of improvements or for other commitments which depend upon
its design characteristics. Neither the applicant nor the Board shall be
bound by the plan or the review. 



[Amended 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   C.   Should such request be made by the applicant, submission shall
be made to the Planning Board Secretary, and the applicant shall submit six
copies of the concept design plan of the proposed development and six copies
of the preliminary plat application as hereinafter set forth.



   D.   No fee for concept review shall be required from the applicant.
However, the applicant and the Board may agree to an escrow fee to be paid by
the applicant to cover the cost of professional services incurred by the
Board for the review of the concept plan. Said moneys shall be placed in
escrow by the Board and may be used for said services, including legal and
engineering or other incidental expenses of the Board.



   E.   The Board shall review with the applicant the concept design
plan within 45 days of the date of submission. Upon written consent of the
applicant, the time period for review shall be extended for additional
periods of time to allow for additional review. Failure to review or to
extend the review within the applicable periods shall not constitute an
approval by the Board.



   F.   Upon the Board completing its review of the concept design
plan, it shall return all but one copy of the proposed concept design plan
and application to the applicant with any written suggestions. A formal
motion at a meeting of the Board to return said documents to the applicant
shall stop any time periods from continuing to run. In no event shall the
concept design plan be considered to be a preliminary plat for the purposes
of deeming an application complete or approving a preliminary plat.



§ 175-54. Filing of applications with Pinelands Commission.  [Amended
4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



   A.   For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:



   DEVELOPMENT  — The change of or enlargement of any use or
disturbance of any land, the performance of any building or mining operation,
the division of land into two or more parcels and the creation or termination
of rights of access or riparian rights, including but not limited to:



      (1)   A change in type of use of a structure or land, or a
change in building type if within areas zoned as Downtown Districts or
Gateway Districts.



[Amended 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



      (2)   A reconstruction, alteration of the size or material
change in the external appearance of a structure or land.



      (3)   A material increase in the intensity of use of land,
such as an increase in the number of businesses, manufacturing
establishments, offices or dwelling units in a structure or on land.



      (4)   Commencement of resource extraction or drilling or
excavation on a parcel of land.



      (5)   Demolition of a structure or removal of trees.



      (6)   Deposit of refuse, solid or liquid waste or fill on a
parcel of land.



      (7)   In connection with the use of land, the making of any
material change in noise levels, thermal conditions or emissions of waste
material.



      (8)   Alteration, either physically or chemically, of a shore,
bank or floodplain, seacoast, river, stream, lake, pond, wetlands or
artificial body of water.



      (9)   Commencement of forestry activities.



   MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any division of land into five or more lots; any
construction or expansion of any housing development of five or more dwelling
units; any construction or expansion of any commercial or industrial use or
structure on a site of more than three acres; or any grading, clearing or
disturbance of an area in excess of 5,000 square feet



   MINOR DEVELOPMENT — All development, as defined in this section,
other than major development.



   B.   An applicant, prior to filing an application for development
with any approval authority, shall file the required application with the
Pinelands Commission in accordance with the provisions of § 175-60 of this
article.



§ 175-55. Minor subdivision review.



   A.   Minor subdivision plats, plans, applications and required
attachments shall be submitted where the applicant proposes a subdivision
that meets the definitional requirements of a minor subdivision.



   B.   The applicant shall submit to the Board Secretary the following
items:



      (1)   Twelve copies of the proposed minor subdivision prepared
in accordance with § 175-66 of Article IX, Plat Detail and Data, of this
chapter.



      (2)   Three completed copies of both the town and county
applications.



      (3)   Four copies of any protective covenants or deed
restrictions applying or to be applied to the subject land.



      (4)   The application and/or escrow fee and fee agreement in
accordance with §§ 175-46 and 175-47 of this chapter.



      (5)   A certificate of filing issued by the Pinelands
Commission pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.33 through 4.35 and § 175-60 of this
chapter. 



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



      (6)   A certification by the Tax Collector's office that no
taxes or assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on the
subject property.



      (7)   If applicable, certification of corporation or
partnership involvement as per § 175-42B of this chapter.



      (8)   Any additional documents as may be requested on the
applicable application form as are reasonably necessary to make an informed
decision whether the requirements for approval of an application for
development have been met.



   C.   The Board Secretary shall, immediately upon receipt, note the
date of receipt, mark the documents "filed" and assign a file number. Once a
file number has been assigned, such number must be placed by the applicant on
all papers, maps, plats and other documents submitted.



   D.   The Board Secretary shall immediately forward one copy of all
items submitted by the applicant to the Board Engineer and one copy of both
the plans and application form to the County Planning Board.



   E.   The Board Engineer shall review all aspects of the application
for development, including a review as to completeness of the application.



   F.   The Board Engineer shall expeditiously report his findings, in
writing, to the Board.



   G.   Upon receipt of the Board Engineer's report and within the
applicable time period, the Board shall first determine whether a complete
application has been submitted. If the application is found to be incomplete,
the Board may deem it incomplete and return it to the applicant to correct
the deficiencies. After the deeming of an application incomplete, the
applicant may correct the deficiencies and resubmit all required items.



   H.   If the application is found to conform to the definition of a
minor subdivision and is complete, the Board shall formally determine that a
complete application has been submitted and shall also waive the requirements
for public notice and hearing. Upon a determination of completeness of an
application for development, notice shall be given by the Board to the
Pinelands Commission in accordance with § 175-60D(1). 



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



   I.   The Board shall determine the completeness of an application
and, if said application is determined to be complete, grant or deny the
application within 45 days of the date of submission of the application to
the Board Secretary. However, upon finding the application to be incomplete,
all time periods will be tolled and no further action may be taken until a
resubmission.



   J.   Notice of any hearing, public meeting or other formal
proceeding at which the Board will consider an application for minor
subdivision shall be given by the Board to the Pinelands Commission, in
writing, not less than five days prior to such meeting, hearing or
proceeding; said notice shall be in accordance with § 175-60D(2). 



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



   K.   Where the remaining portion of the original tract is of
sufficient size to be subdivided further, the applicant may be required to
submit a concept plat of the entire remaining portion of the tract to
indicate a feasible plan whereby the applied for subdivision, together with
subsequent subdivision(s), may be submitted that will not create, impose or
aggravate or lead to any such adverse effect.



   L.   Action on applications; conditions.



      (1)   The Board shall act upon the application upon being
satisfied that it has sufficiently reviewed the application, that its
professionals have adequately reviewed the application, that the applicant
has had sufficient opportunity to present its request to the Board and that
the interests of other interested persons have been considered. In all cases,
however, an application for minor subdivision approval shall be granted or
denied, by resolution of the Board, within 45 days of the date of
determination that a complete application was submitted to the Board or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant. The
decision and resolution of the Board shall be in writing. Said decision and
resolution shall be in accordance with §§ 175-40 and 175-41 of this
chapter. (See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10g through 55D-10i.)



      (2)   Minor subdivision approval shall be deemed to be a final
approval by the Board, except that such final approval shall not take effect
until the requirements of § 175-43 have been satisfied.



      (3)   The Board may condition final approval on terms ensuring
the provision of improvements and performance in accordance with Articles X,
XII and XIII of this chapter. (See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38 to 40:55D-40 and
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.)



      (4)   Whenever review or approval of the application by the
Atlantic County Planning Board is required by N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3, the Board
shall condition any approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a
favorable report on the application by the Atlantic County Planning Board or
approval by the Atlantic County Planning Board by its failure to report
thereon within the required time period.



      (5)   Failure of the Board to act within the period prescribed
shall constitute approval, and a certificate of the Board Secretary as to the
failure of the Board to act shall be issued on request of the applicant. Such
certificate shall be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other
evidence of approval as herein required and shall be accepted by the Atlantic
County Clerk for purposes of filing subdivision plats.



   M.   Where any approval results from the failure of the Board to act
within the prescribed period, the applicant shall provide notice to the
Pinelands Commission, and the approval and/or certificate shall not become
effective until the requirements of § 175-60 of this article have been
satisfied.



   N.   The approval of a minor subdivision shall expire 190 days from
the date of Board approval, unless within such period a plat in conformity
with such approval and the provisions of the Map Filing Law (N.J.S.A.
46:23-9.9 et seq.) or a deed clearly describing the approved minor
subdivision is filed by the developer with the Atlantic County Clerk, the
Board Engineer and the Town Tax Assessor. Any such plat or deed accepted for
such filing shall have been signed by the Chairman and Secretary of the
approving board. In reviewing the application for development for a proposed
minor subdivision, the Board may be permitted by ordinance to accept a plat
not in conformity with the Map Filing Law, provided that if the developer
chooses to file the minor subdivision as provided herein by plat rather than
deed, such plat shall conform to the provisions of said act.



   O.   Upon the granting of subdivision approval by the Board, copies
of the approved documents shall be sent to the:



      (1)   Applicant.



      (2)   Planning Board file.



      (3)   Board Engineer.



      (4)   Construction Code Official.



      (5)   Town Clerk.



      (6)   Tax Assessor.



      (7)   County Board of Health.



      (8)   Pinelands Commission.



   P.   The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions,
whether conditional or otherwise, upon which minor subdivision approval was
granted shall not be changed for a period of two years after the date of
minor subdivision approval, provided that the approved minor subdivision
shall have been duly recorded as provided in this section.



§ 175-56. Review of major subdivisions and planned development. 



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989; 3-25-2002 by Ord. No. 12-2002]



   A.   Preliminary review.



      (1)   Preliminary development plats, plans, applications and
required attachments shall be submitted where the applicant proposes a
development that meets the definitional requirements of a major subdivision
and planned development.



      (2)   The applicant shall submit to the Board Secretary the
following items:



         (a)   Twelve copies of the preliminary plat proposed
development prepared in accordance with § 175-67 of this chapter.



         (b)   Three copies of both the completed town and county
application forms.



         (c)   Three copies of any protective covenants or deed
restrictions applying or to be applied to the subject land.



         (d)   The application and/or escrow fee and fee
agreement in accordance with §§ 175-46 and 175-47 of this chapter.



         (e)   A certificate of filing issued by the Pinelands
Commission as per N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.33 through 4.35; a certificate of
appropriateness; and a cultural resource survey.



         (f)   A certification by the Tax Collector's office that
no taxes or assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on the
subject property.



         (g)   If applicable, certification of corporation or
partnership involvement as per § 175-42B of this chapter.



         (h)   An environmental impact statement as required by
§ 175-52F of this chapter, or, if a request for an exception is being made,
a report from the Environmental Commission as provided in § 175-52F.



         (i)   Any additional documents as may be requested on
the applicable application form.



      (3)   The Board Secretary shall, immediately upon receipt,
note the date of receipt, mark the documents "filed" and assign a file
number. Once a file number has been assigned, such number must be placed by
the applicant on all papers, maps, plats and other documents submitted.



      (4)   The Board Secretary shall immediately forward one copy
of all items submitted by the applicant to the Board Engineer and attorney
and the County Planning Board.



      (5)   The Board Engineer shall first review the items received
to report to the Board as to the completeness of the application. Said
Engineer may also review said items as to all phases of the application for
development.



      (6)   The Board Engineer shall, as quickly as possible, report
his findings, in writing, to the Board. Said report shall be available to the
Board for its use in determining the completeness of the application.



      (7)   The Board shall formally determine the completeness of
the submitted application and notify the applicant within 45 days of the date
of its submission, or it shall be deemed to be properly submitted. If the
application for development is found to be incomplete, the applicant shall be
notified in writing of the deficiencies within the above period. After the
correction of the deficiencies, the applicant may resubmit all required and
correct items.



      (8)   Upon a determination of completeness of an application,
notice shall be given by the Board to the Pinelands Commission in accordance
with § 175-60D(1).



      (9)   During the period required by the Board to review the
proposal of the applicant, the Board shall hold a hearing upon public notice.
Said hearing may, in the discretion of the Board, be held prior to or after
the Board determines the application to be complete.



         (a)   The Board shall set the date, time and place of
the hearing and shall advise the applicant.



         (b)   Notice of the hearing shall be published, given to
the public and given to others by the applicant, as required by §§ 175-36
through 175-40 of this chapter and by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.



         (c)   The applicant shall, prior to the hearing, comply
with all other requirements for a hearing requiring public notice, including
but not limited to:



            [1]   Public inspection of documents as per §
175-36C of this chapter.



            [2]   Filing of affidavit of proof of service and
proof of publication as per § 175-38E(7) of this chapter.



         (d)   All persons having an interest in the proposed
development shall be given an opportunity to be heard at the hearing.



      (10)   Notice of any hearing, public meeting or other formal
proceeding at which the Board will consider an application for development
shall be given by the Board to the Pinelands Commission, in writing, not less
than five days prior to such meeting, hearing or proceeding; said notice
shall be in accordance with § 175-60D(2).



      (11)   If the Board requires any substantial amendment in the
layout of improvements proposed by the applicant that have been the subject
of a hearing, an amended application shall be submitted and acted upon as
would be done in the case of the original application.



      (12)   The Board shall act upon the application upon being
satisfied that it has sufficiently reviewed the application, that its
professionals have adequately reviewed the application, that the applicant
has had sufficient opportunity to present its request to the Board and that
the interests of other interested persons have been considered.



         (a)   The Board shall also be certain that the proposed
development complies with this chapter, the Municipal Land Use Act (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.), the Pinelands Comprehensive Management Plan and all other
applicable statutes, regulations or ordinances.



         (b)   In the case of a major subdivision where the
remaining portion of the original tract is of sufficient size to be
subdivided further, the subdivider may be required to submit a concept plat
of the entire remaining portion of the tract to indicate a feasible plan
whereby the applied for subdivision, together with subsequent subdivisions,
may be submitted that will not create, impose or aggravate or lead to any
such adverse effect.



         (c)   The Board shall not act upon the application until
it has determined the application complete.



      (13)   In the case of a planned development, the Planning
Board shall find the following facts and conclusions prior to approval:



         (a)   That departures by the proposed development from
zoning regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property conform to
the zoning ordinance standards.



         (b)   That the proposals for maintenance and
conservation of the common open space are reliable, and the amount, location
and purpose of the common open space are adequate.



         (c)   That provision for public services, control over
vehicular and pedestrian traffic and the amenities of light and air,
recreation and visual enjoyment are adequate.



         (d)   That the proposed planned development will not
have a significant adverse impact upon the area in which it is proposed to be
established.



         (e)   In the case of a proposed development which
contemplates construction over a period of years, that the terms and
conditions intended to protect the interests of the public and of the
residents, occupants and owners of the proposed development in the total
completion of the development are adequate.



      (14)   Action by Board.



         (a)   The Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval
of:



            [1]   A subdivision of 10 or fewer lots within 45
days of the date a complete application was determined to have been submitted
or within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant; or



            [2]   A subdivision of more than 10 lots within 95
days of the date a complete application was determined to have been submitted
or within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.



         (b)   Upon failure of the Board to act within the
aforementioned time periods, the Board shall be deemed to have granted
preliminary approval to the subdivision.



      (15)   Such preliminary approval shall not take effect until
the requirements of § 175-60 of this article have been satisfied.



      (16)   Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, where
any approval results from the failure of the Board to act within the
prescribed period, the applicant shall provide notice to the Pinelands
Commission, and the permit shall not become effective until the requirements
of § 175-60 of this article have been satisfied.



      (17)   Whenever review or approval of the application by the
Atlantic County Planning Board is required by Section 5 of P.L. 1968, c. 285
(N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3), the Board shall condition any approval that it grants
upon timely receipt of a favorable report on the application by the Atlantic
County Planning Board or approval by the Atlantic County Planning Board by
its failure to report thereon within the required time period.



      (18)   The effect of preliminary approval shall be as set
forth in Article XI of this chapter.



      (19)   The final decision and resolution of the Board shall be
in writing. Said decision and resolution shall be in accordance with §§
175-40 and 175-41 of this chapter and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10g through 55D-10i.



      (20)   Upon the granting of approval by the Board, copies of
the approved documents shall be sent to the:



         (a)   Applicant.



         (b)   Planning Board file.



         (c)   Board Engineer.



         (d)   Construction Code Official.



         (e)   Town Clerk.



         (f)   Tax Assessor.



         (g)   County Board of Health.



         (h)   Pinelands Commission.



         (i)   Environmental Commission.



      (21)   The applicant shall submit a Traffic Impact Study for
any major subdivision or planned development over 25 dwelling units.  The
Board may require, at its sole discretion, a Traffic Impact Study for any
major subdivision or planned development consisting of 25 or fewer dwelling
units.



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   B.   Final review.



      (1)   Final plats, plans, applications and required
attachments shall be submitted for major subdivisions and planned
developments where the application proposes a subdivision that meets the
definitional requirements of a major subdivision and prior to the expiration
of preliminary approval of the subject land. The applicant may submit for
final approval, on or before the expiration date of preliminary approval, the
whole or a section or sections of the preliminary development plat.



      (2)   The applicant shall submit to the Board Secretary the
following items:



         (a)   Thirteen copies of the final plat of the proposed
major subdivision and planned development, prepared in accordance with §
175-68 of Article IX, Plat Detail and Data, of this chapter.



         (b)   Three copies of the completed town and county
application forms.



         (c)   Three copies of the protective covenants or deed
restrictions applying to the subject land as included in preliminary approval.



         (d)   The application and/or escrow fee and fee
agreement in accordance with §§ 175-46 and 175-47 of this chapter.



         (e)   Two translucent tracing cloth copies and one
original reproducible copy of the proposed major subdivision.



         (f)   A copy of either:



         [1]   Notification from the Pinelands Commission that
review of the local agency's preliminary approval is not required; or



         [2]   Notification from the Pinelands Commission that it
has completed its review of the Board's preliminary approval pursuant to §
175-60; and the final order regarding the preliminary approval and review by
the Pinelands Commission.



         (g)   A certification by the Tax Collector's office that
no taxes or assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on the
subject property.



         (h)   If applicable, certification of corporation or
partnership involvement as per § 175-42B of this chapter.



         (i)   All changes or modifications required by the
Planning Board in the approval of the preliminary plat.



         (j)   Letters directed to the Chairman of the Board and
signed by a responsible official of the Sewer Department, 18 Board of Water
Commissioners and any other utility company or governmental authority or
district which provides accessory utility service and has jurisdiction in the
area approving each proposed utility installation design. The letter will
state who will construct the facility and that the service will be available
prior to occupancy.



         (k)   A map showing all improvements required by the
preliminary approval and showing what improvements, if any, have been
installed. The plan shall show all improvements in their exact location and
elevation.



         (l)   Certifications.



            [1]   Certification must be provided by a licensed
engineer that all improvements required by this chapter have been installed;
and/or



            [2]   Certification by the applicant that he has
posted guaranties for the purposes of assuring the installation and
maintenance of on-tract improvements as required by Article X of this chapter
and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53; this certification shall be accompanied by copies of
the required guaranty papers.



         (m)   Where improvements have been installed prior to
the application, there shall be a statement from the Board Engineer that all
improvements installed prior to application have been inspected as provided
in Article X of this chapter and that such improvements meet the requirements
of the town. Any improvements installed prior to application for final plat
approval that do not meet or exceed town standards shall be factored into the
required performance guaranty.



         (n)   Any additional documents as may be requested on
the applicable application form.



      (3)   The Board Secretary shall, immediately upon receipt,
note the date of receipt, mark the documents "filed" and assign a file
number. Once a file number has been assigned, such number must be placed by
the applicant on all papers, maps, plats and other documents submitted.



      (4)   The Board Secretary shall immediately forward one copy
of all items submitted by the applicant to the Board Engineer and to the
County Planning Board.



      (5)   The Board Engineer shall first review the items received
in order to report to the Board as to the completeness of the application.
Said Engineer may also review said items as to other phases of the
application for development.



      (6)   The Board Engineer shall expeditiously report his
findings, in writing, to the Board.



      (7)   Upon receipt of the Board Engineer's report, the Board
shall first determine whether a complete application has been submitted. If
the application is found to be incomplete, the Board may deem it incomplete
and return it to the applicant to correct the deficiencies. After the deeming
of an application incomplete, the applicant may correct the deficiencies and
resubmit all required items.



      (8)   If the application is found to be complete, the Board
shall formally determine that a complete application has been submitted; upon
a determination of completeness of an application for development in the
Pinelands Area of the Town of Hammonton, notice shall be given by the Board
to the Pinelands Commission in accordance with § 175-60D(1).



      (9)   From the date of determination of submission of a
complete application, the Board shall grant or deny final approval of the
application within 45 days or within such further time as may be consented to
by the applicant.



      (10)   Action by Board.



         (a)   Final approval shall be granted if the detailed
drawings, specifications and estimates of the application for final approval
conform to the standards established by ordinance for final approval, the
conditions of preliminary approval and the standards prescribed by the Map
Filing Law (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.), provided that in the case of a
planned unit development or planned unit residential development, the Board
may permit minimal deviations from the conditions of preliminary approval
necessitated by change of conditions beyond the control of the developer
since the date of preliminary approval without the developer being required
to submit another application for development for preliminary approval.



         (b)   The decision and resolution of the Board shall be
in writing. Said decision and resolution shall be in accordance with §§
175-40 and 175-41 of this chapter. (See N.J.S.A. 40:55-10g through 55-10i.)



      (11)   Notice of any hearing, public meeting or other formal
proceeding at which the Board will consider an application for development
shall be given by the Board to the Pinelands Commission, in writing, not less
than five days prior to such meeting, hearing or proceeding; said notice
shall be in accordance with § 175-60D(2).



      (12)   The Board may condition final approval on terms
ensuring the provisions of improvements and performance in accordance with
Articles VIII, IX and X of this chapter. (See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38 to
40:55D-40; N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42; and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.)



      (13)   Whenever review or approval of the application by the
Atlantic County Planning Board is required by N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3, the Board
shall condition any approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a
favorable report on the application by the Atlantic County Planning Board or
approval by the Atlantic County Planning Board by its failure to report
thereon within the required time period.



      (14)   Failure of the Board to act within the period
prescribed shall constitute approval, and a certificate of the Board
Secretary as to the failure of the Board to act shall be issued on the
request of the applicant. Such certificate shall be sufficient in lieu of the
written endorsement or other evidence or approval as herein required and
shall be accepted by the Atlantic County Clerk for purposes of filing
subdivision plats.



      (15)   Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, where
any approval results from the failure of the Board to act within the
prescribed period, the application shall provide notice to the Pinelands
Commission, and the permits shall not become effective until the requirements
of § 175-60 of this article have been satisfied.



      (16)   Upon the granting of subdivision approval by the Board,
copies of the approved documents shall be sent to the:



         (a)   Applicant.



         (b)   Planning Board file.



         (c)   Board Engineer.



         (d)   Construction Code Official.



         (e)   Town Clerk.



         (f)   Tax Assessor.



         (g)   County Board of Health.



         (h)   Pinelands Commission.



         (i)   Director of Public Works.



      (17)   Filing with county recording officer.



         (a)   Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire
95 days from the date of signing of the plat unless within such period the
plat shall have been duly filed by the applicant with the county recording
officer. The Board may for good cause shown extend the period for recording
for an additional period not to exceed 190 days from the date of signing of
the plat.



         (b)   No subdivision plat shall be accepted for filing
by the county recording officer until it has been approved by the Board as
indicated on the instrument by the signature of the Chairman and Secretary of
the Board or a certificate has been issued pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-47,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-50, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-61, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-67 or N.J.S.A. 40:55D-76. The signatures of the Chairman and Secretary
of the Board shall not be affixed until the developer has posted the
guaranties required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53. If the county recording
officer records any plat without such approval, such recording shall be
deemed null and void, and upon request of the town, the plat shall be
expunged from the official records.



         (c)   It shall be the duty of the county recording
officer to notify the Board, in writing, within seven days of the filing of
any plat, identifying such instrument by its title, date of filing and
official number.



      (18)   Upon the filing of a plat showing the subdivision or
resubdivision of land, the county recording officer shall, at the same time
that notification is given to the Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-54, send
a copy of such notification to the Tax Assessor of the town.



      (19)   The effect of final approval shall be as set forth in
Article XI of this chapter.



§ 175-57. Minor site plan review.



   A.   Minor site plans, applications and required attachments shall
be submitted where the applicant proposes a site plan that meets the
definitional requirements of a minor site plan.



   B.   The applicant shall submit to the Board Secretary the following
items:



      (1)   Twelve copies of the proposed minor site plan prepared
in accordance with § 175-69, Minor site plan, of this chapter.



      (2)   Three copies of the completed town and county
application forms.



      (3)   Four copies of any protective covenants or deed
restrictions applying or to be applied to the subject land.



      (4)   The application and/or escrow fee and fee agreement in
accordance with §§ 175-48 and 175-49 of this chapter.



      (5)   A certificate of filing issued by the Pinelands
Commission pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.33 through 4.35 and § 175-60 of this
chapter.



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



      (6)   A certification by the Tax Collector's office that no
taxes or assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on the
subject property.



      (7)   If applicable, certification of corporation or
partnership involvement as per § 175-42B of this chapter.



      (8)   Any additional documents as may be reasonably necessary
to make an informed decision whether the requirements necessary for
preliminary site plan approval have been met.



   C.   The Board Secretary shall, immediately upon receipt, note the
date of receipt, mark the documents "filed" and assign a file number. Once a
file number has been assigned, such number must be placed by the applicant on
all papers, maps, plats and other documents submitted.



   D.   The Board Secretary shall immediately forward one copy of all
items submitted by the applicant to the Board Engineer and one copy of each
to the Site Plan Review Advisory Board and the County Planning Board.



   E.   The Board Engineer shall review all aspects of the application
for development, including a review as to completeness of the application.



   F.   The Board Engineer shall expeditiously report his findings, in
writing, to the Board, with a copy to the Site Plan Review Advisory Board.



   G.   Upon receipt of the Board Engineer's report and within the
applicable time period, the Board shall first determine that a complete
application has been submitted. If the application is found to be incomplete,
the Board shall deem it incomplete and, through the Board Secretary, return
the application to the applicant to correct the deficiencies.



   H.   Upon a determination of completeness of an application for
development, notice shall be given by the Board to the Pinelands Commission
in accordance with § 175-60D(1).



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



   I.   If the application is found to conform to the definition of
"minor site plan" and is complete, the Board shall proceed to waive notice
and public hearing.



   J.   From the date of determination by the Board of submission of a
complete application, the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall
have 45 days to grant or deny minor site plan approval or within such further
time as may be consented to by the applicant.



   K.   Notice of any hearing, public meeting or other formal
proceeding at which the Board will consider an application for development
shall be given by the Board to the Pinelands Commission, in writing, not less
than five days prior to such meeting, hearing or proceeding; said notice
shall be in accordance with § 175-60D(2).



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



   L.   Where the remaining portion of the original tract is of
sufficient size to be developed further, the applicant may be required to
submit a concept plat of the entire remaining portion of the tract to ensure
that the applied for development, together with any subsequent development
that may be submitted, will not create, impose or aggravate or lead to any
such adverse effect.



   M.   The Board shall act upon the application upon being satisfied
that it has sufficiently reviewed the application, that its professionals
have adequately reviewed the application, that the applicant has had
sufficient opportunity to present its request to the Board and that the
interests of other interested persons have been considered. In all cases,
however, an application for minor subdivision approval shall be granted or
denied, by resolution of the Board, within 45 days of the date of
determination that a complete application was submitted to the Board or
within such further time as may be consented to the applicant. The decision
and resolution of the Board shall be in writing. Said decision and resolution
shall be in accordance with §§ 175-40 and 175-41 of this chapter. (See
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10g through 55D-10i.)



   N.   Minor site plan approval shall be deemed to be a final approval
by the Board, except that such final approval shall not take effect until the
requirements of § 175-60 of this article have been satisfied.



   O.   The Board may condition final approval on terms ensuring the
provision of improvements and performance in accordance with Articles X, XII
and XIII of this chapter. (See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38, 55D-39, 55D-41 and 55D-53.)



   P.   Whenever review or approval of the application by the Atlantic
County Planning Board is required by N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3, the Board shall
condition any approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a favorable
report on the application by the Atlantic County Planning Board or approval
by the Atlantic County Planning Board by its failure to report thereon within
the required time period.



   Q.   Failure of the Board to act within the period prescribed shall
constitute approval, and a certificate of the Board Secretary as to the
failure of the Board to act shall be issued on request of the applicant.



   R.   Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, where any
approval results from the failure of the Board to act within the prescribed
period, the applicant shall provide notice to the Pinelands Commission, and
the approval and/or certificate shall not become effective until the
requirements of § 175-60 of this article have been satisfied.



   S.   Upon the granting of site plan approval by the Board, copies of
the approved documents shall be sent to the:



      (1)   Applicant.



      (2)   Planning Board file.



      (3)   Board Engineer.



      (4)   Construction Code Official.



      (5)   Town Clerk.



      (6)   Tax Assessor.



      (7)   County Board of Health.



      (8)   Pinelands Commission.



   T.   The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions,
whether conditional or otherwise, upon which minor site plan approval was
granted, shall not be changed for a period of two years after the date of
minor site plan approval.



§ 175-58. Major site plan review.



   A.   Preliminary review.



      (1)   Preliminary major site plans, applications and required
attachments shall be submitted where the applicant proposes a site plan that
meets the definitional requirements of a major site plan.



      (2)   The applicant shall submit to the Board Secretary the
following items: [Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



         (a)   Twelve copies of the plat of the proposed major
site plan prepared in accordance with § 175-70 of this chapter.



         (b)   Three copies of the completed town and county
application forms.



         (c)   Three copies of any protective covenants or deed
restrictions applying or to be applied to the subject land.



         (d)   The application and/or escrow fee and fee
agreement in accordance with §§ 175-48 and 175-49 of this chapter.



         (e)   A certificate of filing issued by the Pinelands
Commission as per N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.33 through 4.35; a certificate of
appropriateness; and a cultural resource survey.



         (f)   A certification by the Tax Collector's office that
no taxes or assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on the
subject property.



         (g)   If applicable, certification of corporation or
partnership involvement as per § 175-42B of this chapter.



         (h)   Three copies of preliminary architectural plans
and views.



         (i)   An environmental impact statement as required by
§ 175-52F of this chapter, or, if a request for an exception is being made,
a report from the Environmental Commission as provided for in § 175-52F.



         (j)   Any additional documents as may be requested on
the applicable application form as are reasonably necessary for the Board to
make an informed decision whether the requirements necessary for approval
have been met.



      (3)   The Board Secretary shall, immediately upon receipt,
note the date of receipt, mark the documents "filed" and assign a file
number. Once a file number has been assigned, such number must be placed by
the applicant on all papers, maps, plats and other documents submitted.



      (4)   The Board Secretary shall immediately forward one copy
of all items submitted by the applicant to the Board Engineer and Attorney,
one copy of each to the County Planning Board and one copy of each to the
Environmental Commission.



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



      (5)   The Board Engineer shall first review the items received
to report to the Board as to the completeness of the application. Said
Engineer shall also review said items as to all phases of the application for
development.



      (6)   The Board Engineer shall expeditiously report his
findings, in writing, to the Board. Said report shall be available to the
Board for its use in determining the completeness of the application.



      (7)   Upon receipt of the Board Engineer's report, the Board
shall first determine whether to recommend that a complete application has
been submitted. If the application is found to be incomplete, the Board may
recommend that it be deemed incomplete and that it be returned to the
applicant to correct the deficiencies.



      (8)   The Board shall formally determine the completeness of
the submitted application and notify the applicant within 45 days of the date
of its submission, or it shall be deemed to be properly submitted. If the
application for development is found to be incomplete, the applicant shall be
notified, in writing, of the deficiencies within the above period. After the
correction of the deficiencies, the applicant may resubmit all required and
corrected items.



      (9)   During the period required by the Board to review the
proposal of the applicant, the Board shall hold a hearing upon public notice.
Said hearing may, in the discretion of the Board, be held prior to or after
the Board determines the application to be complete.



         (a)   The Board shall set the date, time and place of
the hearing and shall advise the applicant.



         (b)   Notice of the hearing shall be published, given to
the public and given to others by the applicant, as required by §§ 175-36
through 175-39 of this chapter. (See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.)



         (c)   The applicant shall, prior to the hearing, comply
with all other requirements for a hearing requiring public notice, including
but not limited to:



         [1]   Public inspection of documents as per § 175-36C
of this chapter; and



         [2]   Filing of affidavit of proof of service and proof
of publication as per § 175-38E(7) of this chapter.



         (d)   All persons having an interest in the proposed
development shall be given an opportunity to be heard at the meeting.



      (10)   Notice of any hearing, public meeting or other formal
proceeding at which the Board will consider an application shall be given by
the Board to the Pinelands Commission, in writing, not less than five days
prior to such meeting, hearing or proceeding; said notice shall be in
accordance with § 175-60D(2). 



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



      (11)   If the Board requires any substantial amendment in the
layout of improvements proposed by the applicant that have been the subject
of a hearing, an amended application shall be submitted and acted upon as
would be done in the case of the original application.



      (12)   The Board shall act upon the application upon being
satisfied that it has sufficiently reviewed the application, that its
professionals have adequately reviewed the application, that the applicant
has had sufficient opportunity to present its request to the Board and that
the interests of other interested persons have been considered.



         (a)   The Board shall also be certain that the proposed
site plan complies with this chapter, the Municipal Land Use Act (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.), the Pinelands Comprehensive Management Plan and all other
applicable statutes, regulations or ordinances.



         (b)   Where the remaining portion of the original tract
is of sufficient size to be developed further, the applicant may be required
to submit a concept plat of the entire remaining portion of the tract to
indicate a feasible plan whereby the applied for site plan, together with
subsequent site plans, may be submitted that will not create, impose or
aggravate or lead to any such adverse effect.



         (c)   The Board should not act upon the application
until it has determined the application complete.



      (13)   Action by Board.



         (a)   The Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval
of:



            [1]   A site plan of 10 acres or less or 10
dwelling units or fewer within 45 days of the date a complete application was
determined to have been submitted or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant; or



            [2]   A site plan which involves more than 10
acres or more than 10 dwelling units within 95 days of the date a complete
application was determined to have been submitted or within such further time
as may be consented to by the applicant.



         (b)   Upon failure of the Board to act within the
aforementioned time periods, the Board shall be deemed to have granted
preliminary approval to the subdivision.



      (14)   Such preliminary approval shall not take effect until
the requirements of § 175-60 of this article have been satisfied.



      (15)   Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, where
any approval results from the failure of the Board to act within the
prescribed period, the applicant shall provide notice to the Pinelands
Commission, and the permit shall not become effective until the requirements
of § 175-60 of this article have been satisfied.



      (16)   Whenever review or approval of the application by the
Atlantic County Planning Board is required by N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3, the Board
shall condition any approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a
favorable report on the application by the Atlantic County Planning Board or
approval by the Atlantic County Planning Board by its failure to report
thereon within the required time period.



      (17)   The effect of preliminary approval shall be as set
forth in Article XI of this chapter.



      (18)   The final decision and resolution of the Board shall be
in writing. Said decision and resolution shall be in accordance with §§
175-40 and 175-41 of this chapter. (See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10g through 55D-10i.)



      (19)   Upon the granting of approval by the Board, copies of
the approved documents shall be sent to the: 



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



         (a)   Applicant.



         (b)   Planning Board file.



         (c)   Board Engineer.



         (d)   Construction Code Official.



         (e)   Town Clerk.



         (f)   Tax Assessor.



         (g)   County Board of Health.



         (h)   Pinelands Commission.



         (i)   The Environmental Commission.



      (20)   The applicant shall submit a Traffic Impact Study for
any major site plan.



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   B.   Final review.



      (1)   Final major site plans, applications and required
attachments shall be submitted where the applicants proposed development
meets the definitional requirements for major site plan review and prior to
the expiration of preliminary major site approval of the subject land. The
applicant may submit for final approval, on or before the expiration date of
preliminary approval, the whole or a section or sections of the preliminary
site plan.



      (2)   The applicant shall submit to the Board Secretary the
following items:



         (a)   Twelve copies of the final plat for the proposed
major site plan prepared in accordance with § 175-71 of Article IX, Plat
Detail and Data, of this chapter.



         (b)   Three copies of the completed town and county
application forms.



         (c)   Three copies of the protective covenants or deed
restrictions applying to the subject land as included in preliminary approval.



         (d)   The application and/or escrow fee and fee
agreement in accordance with §§ 175-48 and 175-49 of this chapter.



         (e)   Two translucent tracing-cloth copies and one
original reproducible copy of the proposed major subdivision.



         (f)   A copy of either:



            [1]   Notification from the Pinelands Commission
that review of the Board's preliminary approval is not required; or



            [2]   Notification from the Pinelands Commission
that it has completed its review of the Board's preliminary approval pursuant
to § 175-60; and the final order regarding the preliminary approval and
review by the Pinelands Commission. 



[Amended 6-12-1989 by Ord. No. 19-1989]



         (g)   A certification by the Tax Collector's office that
no taxes or assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on any
portion of the property involved in the development.



         (h)   If applicable, certification of corporation or
partnership involvement as per § 175-42B of this chapter.



         (i)   All changes or modifications required by the local
agency in the approval of the preliminary plat.



         (j)   Letters directed to the Chairman of the Board and
signed by a responsible official of the Sewer Department, 19 Board of Water
Commissioners and any other utility company or governmental authority or
district which provides accessory utility service and has jurisdiction in the
area approving each proposed utility installation design. The letter will
state who will construct the facility and that the service will be available
prior to occupancy.



         (k)   A map showing all improvements required by the
preliminary approval and showing what improvements, if any, have been
installed. The plan shall show all improvements in their exact location and
elevation.



         (l)   Certifications.



            [1]   Certification must be provided by a licensed
engineer that all improvements required by this chapter have been installed;
and/or



            [2]   Certification by the applicant that he has
posted guaranties for the purposes of assuring the installation and
maintenance of on-tract improvements as required by Article X of this
chapter; this certification shall be accompanied by copies of the required
guaranty papers. (See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.)



         (m)   Where improvements have been installed prior to
the application, there shall be a statement from the Board Engineer that all
improvements installed prior to application have been inspected as provided
in Article X of this chapter and that such improvements meet the requirements
of the town. Any improvements installed prior to application for final plat
approval that do not meet or exceed town standards shall be factored into the
required performance guaranty.



         (n)   Any additional documents as may be requested on
the applicable application form.



      (3)   The Board Secretary shall, immediately upon receipt,
note the date of receipt, mark the documents "filed" and assign a file
number. Once a file number has been assigned, such number must be placed by
the applicant on all papers, maps, plats and other documents submitted.



      (4)   The Board Secretary shall immediately forward one copy
of all items submitted by the applicant to the Board Engineer and Attorney,
the County Planning Board and the Environmental Commission. 



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



      (5)   The Board Engineer shall first review the items received
in order to report to the Board as to the completeness of the application.
Said Engineer may also review said items as to other phases of the
application for development.



      (6)   The Board Engineer shall, as quickly as possible, report
his findings, in writing, to the Board.



      (7)   Upon receipt of the Board Engineer's report, the Board
shall first determine whether a complete application has been submitted. If
the application is found to be incomplete, the Board may deem it incomplete
and return it to the applicant to correct the deficiencies. After the deeming
of an application incomplete, the applicant may correct the deficiencies and
resubmit all required items.



      (8)   If the application is found to be complete, the Board
shall formally determine that a complete application has been submitted. Upon
a determination of completeness of an application for development, notice
shall be given by the Board to the Pinelands Commission in accordance with §
175-60D(1). 



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



      (9)   From the date of determination of submission of a
complete application, the Board shall grant or deny final approval of the
application within 45 days or within such further time as may be consented to
by the applicant.



      (10)   Decision of the Board.



         (a)   Final approval shall be granted if the drawings,
specifications and estimates of the application for final approval conform to
the standards established by ordinance for final approval, the conditions of
preliminary approval and the standards prescribed by the Map Filing Law,
N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq., provided that in the case of a planned unit
development or planned unit residential development, the Board may permit
minimal deviations from the conditions of preliminary approval necessitated
by change of conditions beyond the control of the developer since the date of
preliminary approval without the developer being required to submit another
application for development for preliminary approval.



[Amended 3-25-2002 by Ord. No. 12-2002]



         (b)   The decision and resolution of the Board shall be
in writing. Said decision and resolution shall be in accordance with §§
175-40 and 175-41 of this chapter. (See N.J.S.A. 40:55-10g through 55-10i.)



      (11)   Notice of any hearing, public meeting or other formal
proceeding at which the Board will consider an application for development
shall be given by the Board to the Pinelands Commission, in writing, not less
than five days prior to such meeting, hearing or proceeding; said notice
shall be in accordance with § 175-60D(2). 



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989; 6-12-1989 by Ord. No. 19-1989]



      (12)   The Board may condition final approval on terms
ensuring the provisions of improvements and performance in accordance with
Articles X, XII and XIII of this chapter. (See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38 to
40:55D-40; N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.)



      (13)   Whenever review or approval of the application by the
Atlantic County Planning Board is required by Section 5 of P.L. 1968, c. 285
(N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.6), the Board shall condition any approval that it grants
upon timely receipt of a favorable report on the application by the Atlantic
County Planning Board or approval by the Atlantic County Planning Board by
its failure to report thereon within the required time period.



      (14)   Failure of the Board to act within the period
prescribed shall constitute approval, and a certificate of the Board
Secretary as to the failure of the Board to act shall be issued on request of
the applicant. Such certificate shall be sufficient in lieu of the written
endorsement or other evidence or approval as herein required and shall be
accepted by the Atlantic County Clerk for purposes of filing subdivision
plats.



      (15)   Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, where
any approval results from the failure of the Board to act within the
prescribed period, the application shall provide notice to the Pinelands
Commission, and the permits shall not become effective until the requirements
of § 175-60 of this chapter have been satisfied.



      (16)   Upon the granting of site plan approval by the Board,
copies of the approved documents shall be sent to the: 



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



         (a)   Applicant.



         (b)   Planning Board file.



         (c)   Board Engineer.



         (d)   Construction Code Official.



         (e)   Town Clerk.



         (f)   Tax Assessor.



         (g)   County Board of Health.



         (h)   Pinelands Commission, if property is in the
Pinelands Area of the Town of Hammonton.



         (i)   The Environmental Commission.



      (17)   The effect of final approval shall be as set forth in
Article XI of this chapter.



§ 175-59. Conditional use review.



   It is well recognized that certain uses, if located without proper
consideration to existing conditions or building types and surrounding
development, may have an adverse effect on the public health, safety and
general welfare of the community. These uses are designated as conditional
uses and are subject to the conditions hereby established. 



[Amended 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   A.   Before any permit shall be issued for a conditional use,
applications shall be made to the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall
grant or deny the application after public hearing, but within 95 days of
submission of a complete application to the administrative officer or within
such further time as may be consented to by the applicant. Where a
conditional use application involves a site plan or subdivision, notice of
the hearing shall include reference to all matters being heard, and the
Planning Board shall review and approve or deny the subdivision or site plan
simultaneously with the conditional use application. Failure of the Planning
Board to act within the required time period shall constitute approval of the
application. In reviewing the conditional use application, the Planning Board
shall consider and be guided by the following. All technical representations
shall be made by the appropriate licensed professional.



      (1)   That use for which an application is being made is
specifically listed as a conditional use within the zone where the property
is located.



      (2)   The design, arrangement and nature of the particular use
is such that the public health, safety and welfare will be protected and
reasonable consideration is afforded to: the compatibility of the proposed
use(s) and/or structure(s) within the existing neighborhood; the number of
employees or users of the property; the potential effect that the proposed
use(s) and/or structures will have upon property values; the adequacy of the
proposed parking and traffic circulation for the uses) and/or structure(s)
and the potential for traffic congestion and/or the creation of undue traffic
hazards; the structural location(s) and orientations; the need for such
facility or use(s) to serve the area in which it is to be located; the
adequacy of proposed drainage facilities which will serve the uses(s) and/or
structures; the adequacy of plans for screening any adverse aspects of the
use(s) and/or structure(s) from adjoining properties; and the adequacy of
proposed outdoor lighting.



      (3)   Compliance with the design and performance standards
pursuant to Article XII of this chapter.



      (4)   Compliance with the standards, principles and objectives
of the Master Plan of the Town of Hammonton.



   B.   All conditional uses shall also be required to obtain site plan
approval, unless otherwise specified in this chapter.



   C.   Conditional uses shall adhere to the additional standards
specified for the particular use or building type under Article XII, except
where no additional standards are specified herein.



[Amended 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   D.   In all requests for approval of conditional uses, the burden of
proof shall be on the applicant. All conditional uses shall additionally
require, at a minimum, site plan review and approval by the Planning Board.
The applicant shall submit and the Board shall review an application for
conditional use approval in accordance with the procedures of § 175-62 of
this chapter. In the granting of conditional uses, a time limit of one year
from the date of the approval shall be set within which time the owner shall
secure a building permit, otherwise the conditional use permit shall be null
and void.



§ 175-60. Pinelands Commission review.  [Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No.
7-1989]



   A.   Applicability of procedures.



      (1)   No person shall carry out any development without
obtaining approval from an approving authority and without obtaining
development approval in accordance with the procedures set forth in this
section.



      (2)   Except as provided in Subsection A(3) below, the
following shall not be subject to the procedures set forth in this section
for review by the Pinelands Commission:



         (a)   The improvement, expansion or reconstruction
within five years of destruction or demolition, of any single-family dwelling
unit or appurtenance thereto.



         (b)   The improvement, expansion, construction or
reconstruction of any structure accessory to a single-family dwelling.



         (c)   The improvement, expansion, construction or
reconstruction of any structure used exclusively for agricultural or
horticultural purposes.



         (d)   The construction, repair or removal of any sign,
except for the construction or replacement of any off-site commercial
advertising sign.



         (e)   The repair of existing utility distribution lines.



[Amended 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



         (f)   The clearing of less than 1,500 square feet of
land.



         (g)   The construction of any addition or accessory
structure for any nonresidential use or any multifamily residential
structure, provided that said addition or structure will be located on or
below an existing impermeable surface, that the existing use is served by
public sewers, and that said addition or structure will cover an area of no
more than 1,000 square feet. [Amended 6-12-1989 by Ord. No. 19-1989]



         (h)   The demolition of any structure that is less than
50 years old.



         (i)   The installation of utility distribution lines,
except for sewage lines, to serve areas which are effectively developed or
development which has received all necessary approvals and permits. 



[Added 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



         (j)   The repair or replacement of any existing on-site
wastewater disposal system.



[Added 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



         (k)   The repaving of existing paved roads, provided
that no increase in the paved width of said roads will occur. [Added
7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



         (l)   The clearing of land solely for agricultural
purposes.



[Added 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



         (m)   Fences, provided that no more than 1,500 square
feet of land is to be cleared. 



[Added 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



         (n)   Aboveground telephone equipment cabinets.



[Added 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



         (o)   Tree pruning.



[Added 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



         (p)   The following forestry activities:



[Added 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



            [1]   Normal and customary forestry practices on
residentially improved parcels of land that are five acres or less in size;



            [2]   Tree harvesting, provided that no more than
one cord of wood per five acres of land is harvested in any one year and that
no more than five cords of wood are harvested from the entire parcel in any
one year;



            [3]   Tree planting, provided that the area to be
planted does not exceed five acres in any one year, no soil disturbance
occurs other than that caused by the planting activity and no trees other
than those authorized by N.J.A.C. 7:50 - 6.25 are to be planted; and



            [4]   Forest stand improvement designed to
selectively thin trees and brush, provided that no clearing or soil
disturbance occurs and that the total land area on the parcel in which the
activity occurs does not exceed five acres in any one year.



         (q)   Prescribed burning and the clearing and
maintaining of fire breaks.



[Added 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



         (r)   Normal and customary landscape plantings, unless a
landscaping plan is required pursuant to § 175-136E.



[Added 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



      (3)   The exceptions contained in Subsection A(2) above shall
not apply to any historic resources designated by the Pinelands Commission
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.154.



      (4)   Nothing herein shall preclude any local or state agency
from reviewing, in accordance with the provisions of any applicable ordinance
or regulation, any proposed development which does not require an application
to the Pinelands Commission pursuant to this section.



   B.   Minor development application requirements. Any application for
approval of minor development shall include at least the following
information:



      (1)   The applicant's name and address and his interest in the
subject property.



      (2)   The owner's name and address, if different from the
applicant's, and the owner's signed consent to the filing of the application.



      (3)   The legal description, including block and lot
designation and street address, if any, of the subject property.



      (4)   A description of all existing uses and building types of
the subject property. 



[Amended 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



      (5)   A brief written statement generally describing the
proposed development.



      (6)   A United States Geological Survey Quadrangle Map or copy
thereof and a copy of the Municipal Tax Map sheet on which the boundaries of
the subject property and the Pinelands management area designation are shown.



      (7)   A plat or plan showing the location of all boundaries of
the subject property, the location of all proposed development and existing
or proposed facilities to provide water for the use and consumption of
occupants of all buildings and sanitary facilities which will serve the
proposed development. The following information shall be included with
respect to existing or proposed sanitary facilities:



         (a)   On-site treatment facilities: The location, size,
type and capacity of any proposed on-site wastewater treatment facilities.



         (b)   Soil borings and percolation tests: If on-site
sewage disposal is proposed, results of soil borings and percolation tests in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 58:11-23 et seq. and the regulations adopted
pursuant thereto shall be submitted at suitable location with a tract map
showing location, logs, elevations of all test holes, indicating where
groundwater was encountered, estimating the seasonal high-water table and
demonstrating that such facility is adequate to meet the water quality
standards contained in Article XII of this chapter.



      (8)   A location map, including the area extending at least
300 feet beyond each boundary of the subject property, showing ownership
boundary lines, the boundary of the proposed development, owners of holdings
adjoining and adjacent to the subject property, existing facilities,
buildings and structures on the site, all proposed development, wetlands,
streams, including intermittent streams, rivers, lakes and other water bodies
and existing roads.



      (9)   A soils map, including a county soils survey which
conforms to the guidelines of the United States Department of Agriculture
Soil Conservation Service, showing the location of all proposed development.



      (10)   A map showing existing vegetation, identifying
predominant vegetation types in the area and showing proposed landscaping of
the subject property, including the location of the tree line before and
after development and all areas to be disturbed as a result of the proposed
development.



      (11)   A certificate of filing from the Pinelands Commission
issued pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.34 or, until January 14, 1991, evidence of
prior approval from the Pinelands Development Review Board or the Pinelands
Commission pursuant to the Interim Rules and Regulations.



      (12)   When prior approval for the development has been
granted by the approving authority, evidence of Pinelands Commission review
pursuant to this section.



   C.   Certificate of filing other application requirements.



      (1)   No application for approval of any development located
within the Pinelands Area shall be deemed complete without receipt of a
certificate of filing from the Pinelands Commission pursuant to N.J.A.C.
7:50-4.34.



      (2)   Any application for approval of major development,
except for forestry operations, shall include at least the following
information:



         (a)   The applicant's name and address and his interest
in the subject property.



         (b)   The owner's name and address, if different from
the applicant's, and the owner's signed consent to the filing of the
application.



         (c)   The legal description, including block and lot
designation and street address, if any, of the subject property.



         (d)   A description of all existing uses of the subject
property.



         (e)   A brief written statement generally describing the
proposed development; the number of total units; and the floor area of all
units to be included in the proposed development.



[Amended 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



         (f)   A written statement addressing each of the
standards or guidelines set forth in this chapter; and stating specifically
how the proposed development meets each such standard or guideline.



         (g)   A plat or plan showing the location of all
boundaries of the subject property, the location of all proposed development
and existing or proposed facilities to provide water for the use and
consumption of occupants of all buildings and sanitary facilities which will
serve the proposed development. The following information shall be included
with respect to existing or proposed wastewater treatment facilities:



            [1]   Sanitary sewer distribution: The location,
size and direction of flow of all existing and proposed sanitary sewer lines
and pumping stations serving the proposed development and all existing and
proposed connections to existing facilities.



            [2]   On-site treatment facilities: The location,
size, type and capacity of any proposed on-site wastewater treatment
facilities, including, except with respect to discharges into an individual
residential septic system, quantities, composition, proposed pretreatment and
ultimate means of disposal.



            [3]   Soil borings and percolation tests: If
on-site sewage disposal is proposed, results of soil borings and percolation
tests in accordance with the requirements of N.J.S.A. 58:11-23 et seq. and
the regulations adopted pursuant thereto shall be submitted with a tract map
showing the location, logs and elevations of all test holes, indicating where
groundwater was encountered and estimating the seasonal high-water table.



            [4]   The proposed hours and days of operation and
number of employees of any nonresidential facility.



         (h)   A project site base map, at a scale of no less
than one inch to 200 feet and including the areas extending at least 300 feet
beyond each boundary of the subject property, showing ownership boundary
lines, the boundary of the proposed development, owners of holdings, if any,
adjoining and adjacent to the subject property, existing facilities,
buildings and structures on the site, all proposed development, wetlands,
streams, including intermittent streams, rivers, lakes and other water bodies
and existing roads.



         (i)   A soils map, including a county soils survey in
conformance with the guidelines of the United States Department of
Agriculture Soil Conservation Service, at the same size and scale as the
project site base map, delineating all soil series at an appropriate level of
detail and, in sewered projects, sufficient soil borings to confirm the
accuracy of the soils map.



         (j)   A slope map, at the same size and scale as the
project site base map, indicating contour elevations at two-foot intervals.



         (k)   A resource capability map, at the same size and
scale as the project site base map, indicating the cumulative limitations to
development due to the standards and the guidelines contained in this
chapter. This map should be prepared prior to any engineering, site layout or
design work.



         (l)   A proposed development map, at the same size and
scale as the project site base map, showing areas of proposed development;
the location of surveyor's tape or other markers placed on the site
delineating the boundaries of the property; the number of residential lots
and other type of development in each general area; all proposed lot lines;
areas proposed to be retained as open space; the applicable land use areas
boundaries; the location of proposed facilities such as dams and
impoundments, public or private water systems, storm drainage systems, public
or private sewerage systems, public utilities, soil erosion and sedimentation
control devices, industrial wastewater discharges and solid waste disposal
areas; sources of air pollution; the proposed primary road network; all areas
to be disturbed by construction activities; existing vegetation, identifying
the predominant vegetation types in the area; and all vegetation which is to
be removed or disturbed as a result of the proposed development; and the tree
line before and after development.



         (m)   A map, at the same size and scale as the project
site base map, showing stormwater drainage patterns and calculations and the
applicant's proposed stormwater run-off management plan, which shall contain
results of all percolation tests and soil borings performed in each recharge
area, including the estimated seasonal high-water table.



         (n)   Legal instruments evidencing the applicant's
right, title or interest in any Pinelands development credits and any
existing or proposed deed restrictions or easements relating to the subject
parcel.



         (o)   A landscaping schedule and plan on a map, of the
same size and scale as the project site base map, identifying the species of
plants to be installed and the quantity and location of all plants proposed
to be planted, demonstrating that the landscaping will be carried out within
six months of the completion of construction and demonstrating that the
landscaping will stabilize soils.



         (p)   All public service infrastructure agreements or
other documentation evidencing the availability of electric, gas, water,
sewer and other necessary public service infrastructure.



         (q)   The cultural resources survey described in §
175-21.



         (r)   A list of all permits required for the proposed
development from county, municipal, state and federal agencies.



         (s)   A certificate of filing from the Pinelands
Commission issued pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.34 or, until January 14, 1991,
evidence of prior approval from the Pinelands Development Review Board or the
Pinelands Commission pursuant to the Interim Rules and Regulations.



         (t)   When prior approval for the development has been
granted by the approving authority, evidence of Pinelands Commission review
pursuant to this section.



      (3)   Any application for approval of forestry operations
shall be subject to the requirements of § 175-104A.



   D.   Notices to the Pinelands Commission.



      (1)   Notice of application submission and modification.
Written notification shall be given by the approving authority to the
Pinelands Commission within seven days after a determination is made by the
approving authority that an application for development is complete or if a
determination is made by the approving authority that the application has
been modified. Such notice shall contain:



         (a)   The name and address of the applicant.



         (b)   The legal description and street address, if any,
of the property which the applicant proposed to develop.



         (c)   A brief description of the proposed development
including uses and intensity of uses proposed. A brief description of the
building types proposed shall be included if development is located within
Downtown Districts or Gateway Districts. 



[Amended 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



         (d)   The docket number of the certificate of filing
issued by the Pinelands Commission and the date on which it was issued.



         (e)   The date on which the application or change
thereto was filed and any docket or other identifying number assigned to such
application by the approving authority.



         (f)   The name of the approving authority with which the
application or change thereto was filed.



         (g)   The content of any change made to any such
application since it was filed with the Commission, including a copy of any
revised plan or reports which have not been previously submitted to the
Commission.



         (h)   The nature of the local approval or approvals
being sought.



      (2)   Notice of hearings and meetings. Where a hearing,
meeting or other proceeding on an application for development approval in the
Pinelands Area is required, the applicant shall provide notice to the
Pinelands Commission not less than five days prior to such meeting, hearing
or proceeding. Such notice shall contain at least the following information:



         (a)   The name and address of the applicant.



         (b)   The docket number of the certificate of filing
issued by the Pinelands Commission and the date on which it was issued.



         (c)   The date, time and location of the meeting,
hearing or proceeding.



         (d)   The name of the approving authority or
representative thereof which will be conducting the meeting, hearing or
proceeding.



         (e)   Any written reports or comments received by the
approving authority on the application for development which have not been
previously submitted to the Commission.



         (f)   The purpose for which the meeting, hearing or
proceeding is to be held.



      (3)   Notice of approvals and denials. The Pinelands
Commission shall be notified of all approvals or denials of development in
the Pinelands Area, whether the approval occurs by action or inaction of any
approving authority or an appeal of any approving authority decision. The
applicant shall, within five days of the approval, give notice by certified
mail to the Pinelands Commission. Such notice shall contain the following
information:



         (a)   The name and address of the applicant.



         (b)   The legal description and street address, if any,
of the property which the applicant proposed to develop.



         (c)   The docket number of the certificate of filing
issued by the Pinelands Commission and the date on which it was issued, if
any.



         (d)   The date on which the approving authority's
approval or denial was issued.



         (e)   Any written reports or comments received
concerning the application for development approval not previously submitted
to the Commission.



         (f)   Any revisions to the application not previously
submitted to the Commission.



         (g)   A copy of the resolution, permit or other
documentation of the approval or denial which was granted.



         (h)   The names and addresses of all persons who
actively participated in the proceedings.



      (4)   Except as provided in § 175-61, the requirements of
this Subsection D shall not apply to the issuance of a preliminary zoning
permit or a refusal to issue a preliminary zoning permit for the development
of a single-family dwelling on an existing lot of record.



[Added 5-22-1995 by Ord. No. 12-1995]



   E.   Review by the Pinelands Commission.



      (1)   Upon receipt by the Pinelands Commission of a notice of
approval pursuant to Subsection D(3) above, the application for development
approval shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions in N.J.A.C.
7:50-4.37 through 7:50-4.42. The approval of the town shall not be effective
and no development shall be carried out prior to a determination of whether
the development approval will be reviewed by the Commission. If the applicant
is notified that the Commission will review the application for development,
no development shall be carried out until such review has been completed.



      (2)   Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.1(b) and until January 14,
1991, approvals issued by the Pinelands Development Review Board or the
Pinelands Commission under the Interim Rules and Regulations shall serve as
the basis for Pinelands Commission review of the local approval under this
section.



      (3)   Although the Pinelands Commission shall be notified of
all denials, no such denial actions are subject to further review and action
by the Pinelands Commission.



      (4)   Except as provided in § 175-61, the requirements of
this Subsection E shall not apply to the issuance of a preliminary zoning
permit or a refusal to issue a preliminary zoning permit for the development
of a single-family dwelling on an existing lot of record.



[Added 5-22-1995 by Ord. No. 12-1995]



   F.   Condition on prior approvals of the town. Where a prior
approval has been granted by the town, no subsequent approval of an
application for development approval shall be obtained until one of the
following is satisfied:



      (1)   Notification is received from the Pinelands Commission
that review of the town's approval is not required; or



      (2)   Review of the town's approval has been completed
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.37 through 7:50-4.42 and a final order regarding
the approval is received by the town from the Pinelands Commission.



   G.   Effect of Pinelands Commission decision on town's approval.



      (1)   If the Pinelands Commission disapproves an application
for development previously approved by an approving authority, such approval
shall be revoked by the approving authority within 30 days, and the approving
authority shall thereafter deny approval of the application. If the
Commission approves the decision of an approving authority subject to
conditions, the approving authority which had previously approved the
application shall, within 30 days, modify its approval to include all
conditions imposed by the Commission and, if final approval of the
application is required, shall grant final approval only if the application
for approval demonstrates that the conditions specified by the Commission
have been met by the applicant.



      (2)   Except as provided in § 175-61, the requirements of
this Subsection G shall not apply to the issuance of a preliminary zoning
permit or a refusal to issue a preliminary zoning permit for the development
of a single-family dwelling on an existing lot of record.



[Added 5-22-1995 by Ord. No. 12-1995]



   H.   Participation of Pinelands Commission in public hearings. The
Pinelands Commission may participate in a hearing held in the town involving
the development of land in the Pinelands Area pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.36.



   I.   Environmental Commission review. All applications for major
development and forestry shall be referred to the Environmental Commission
for review and comment.



   J.   Public development. All development proposed by the town or any
agency thereof will comply with all the requirements for public development
set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.51 et seq. and all the standards set forth in
Articles XII and XIII of this chapter.



   K.   Amendments. In amending the town's Master Plan or this chapter,
the town shall comply with all of the requirements of N.J.A.C. 7:50-3.45.



§ 175-61. Procedure for application for development of single-family
dwellings.



[Added 5-22-1995 by Ord. No. 12-1995]



   A.   The Zoning Officer is hereby authorized and directed to issue
preliminary zoning permits as a prerequisite to the issuance of a
construction permit or other permits or approvals which are needed to develop
a single-family dwelling on an existing lot of record within the Town of
Hammonton.



   B.   Applications for a preliminary zoning permit.



      (1)   An application for a preliminary zoning permit shall be
submitted to the Zoning Officer and shall include the following:



         (a)   The applicant's name and address and his interest
in the subject property.



         (b)   The applicant's signed certification that he is
duly authorized to submit the application, that the materials and information
are accurate and that duly authorized representatives of the Town of
Hammonton and Pinelands Commission are authorized to inspect the property.



         (c)   The owner's name and address, if different from
the applicant's, and the owner's signed consent to the filing of the
application.



         (d)   The street address, if any, the Tax Map sheet and
block and lot number of the property.



         (e)   Proof that taxes for the property have been paid.



         (f)   Acreage of the property in square feet.



         (g)   A dated plot plan, with the scale noted, showing
the following:



            [1]   The zoning district in which the property is
located.



            [2]   The location and dimensions of all property
lines, easements affecting the property and streets abutting the property.



            [3]   The location of all yards and setbacks
required pursuant to Article XIII.



            [4]   The location and use of all existing
structures and improvements on the property and their intended disposition.



            [5]   A building envelope within which the
single-family dwelling is to be located.



            [6]   The location and dimensions of the proposed
driveway.



            [7]   The location and dimensions of any proposed
accessory structures or improvements.



            [8]   The location and dimensions of the area in
which any sewage disposal system, including the disposal field, is proposed
to be located.



            [9]   The location of any proposed water supply
well.



         (h)   If proposed, certification that central sewer
and/or water service are available.



         (i)   If development of the property is proposed in
accordance with the density transfer program of § 175-145J, the street
address, if any, the Tax Map sheet, block and lot number and acreage in
square feet of the noncontiguous property.



      (2)   The Zoning Officer is authorized to require such
additional information as may be necessary to determine compliance with this
chapter. Such information may include, but is not limited to, a soil boring
in the area of any proposed septage system disposal field, a wetland buffer
map and information to determine compliance with any permitted use
requirement of this chapter.



      (3)   The Zoning Officer is authorized to waive any of the
aforementioned application requirements if the information is not necessary
to determine compliance with this chapter.



      (4)   Within 14 days of receipt of an application, the Zoning
Officer shall determine whether the application is complete and, if
necessary, notify the applicant of any additional information which is
necessary to complete the application.



   C.   Permit decisions. Within 14 days of determining an application
to be complete, the Zoning Officer shall issue either a preliminary zoning
permit or a refusal to issue a preliminary zoning permit.



   D.   Preliminary zoning permit.



      (1)   A preliminary zoning permit shall be issued if.



         (a)   The Zoning Officer determines that the application
is consistent with the requirements of this chapter.



         (b)   A duly authorized representative of the Pinelands
Commission approves the Zoning Officer's determination and so signifies by
signing the preliminary zoning permit.



      (2)   A preliminary zoning permit shall expressly incorporate
the plot plan being approved, shall specify any conditions which the Zoning
Officer determines are necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter and
shall specify the expiration date of the permit.



      (3)   The Zoning Officer shall provide copies of the
application and the preliminary zoning permit to the Pinelands Commission
within five days of the issuance of the permit.



   E.   Effect of preliminary zoning permit.



      (1)   A preliminary zoning permit represents a determination
that the application meets the requirements of this chapter and the Pinelands
Comprehensive Management Plan, N.J.A.C. 7:50-1.1 et seq.



      (2)   A preliminary zoning permit shall be valid for two years
and shall, during that period, confer the following rights and privileges:



         (a)   The approved application shall not be subject to
any substantive revisions of the Code of the Town of Hammonton or the
Pinelands Comprehensive Management Plan, N.J.A.C. 7:50-1.1 et seq.



         (b)   Any subsequent approvals necessary for the
development of the single-family dwelling on the property may be sought
without the need for a certificate of filing from the Pinelands Commission.



      (3)   Any subsequent approvals to be sought, including but not
limited to construction permits, shall be subject to the notice, review and
decision requirements of § 175-60D through 175-60G.



   F.   Refusal to issue preliminary zoning permit.



      (1)   The Zoning Officer shall issue a refusal to issue a
preliminary zoning permit if any of the following are found to apply:



         (a)   A variance from the Code of the Town of Hammonton
is required.



         (b)   A waiver of strict compliance from the Pinelands
Comprehensive Management Plan is required.



         (c)   The Zoning Officer determines that the application
does not meet the requirements of this chapter.



         (d)   The duly authorized representative of the
Pinelands Commission has not attested to the consistency of the application
with the Pinelands Comprehensive Management Plan, N.J.A.C. 7:50-1.1 et seq.



      (2)   A refusal to issue a preliminary zoning permit shall
expressly reference the reasons why the refusal was issued.



      (3)   When a refusal to issue a preliminary zoning permit is
predicated solely upon the need to obtain a variance, the Zoning Officer
shall provide copies of the application and the refusal to the Pinelands
Commission within five days of the issuance.



      (4)   When a refusal to issue a preliminary zoning permit is
predicated wholly or in part upon Subsection F(1)(b), (c) or (d) above, the
Zoning Officer shall provide the original application and a copy of the
refusal to the Pinelands Commission within five days of the issuance. The
Pinelands Commission shall thereafter process the application pursuant to the
Pinelands Comprehensive Management Plan, N.J.A.C. 7:50-1.1 et seq., and §
175-60D through 175-60G of the Code of the Town of Hammonton. In lieu of a
preliminary zoning permit, a certificate of filing from the Pinelands
Commission shall thereafter be required as a prerequisite to the issuance of
a construction or other permit.



   G.   Zoning Officer vacancy. Should the position of Zoning Officer
become vacant for any reason, the application procedures set forth in §
175-61 shall be of no force or effect, and the procedures of § 175-60 shall
apply until the position has been filled.



§ 175-62. Conditional approvals.



   A.   In the event that an applicant submits an application for
development proposing a development that is barred or prevented, directly or
indirectly, by a legal action instituted by any state agency, political
subdivision or other party to protect the public health and welfare or by a
directive or order issued by any state agency, political subdivision or court
of competent jurisdiction to protect the public health and welfare, the
reviewing board shall continue to process such application for development in
accordance with this chapter and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. If such
application for development complies with this chapter, the board shall
approve such application conditioned on removal of such legal barrier to
development.



   B.   In the event that the development proposed requires an approval
by a governmental agency other than the reviewing board, said board shall, in
appropriate instances, condition its approval upon the subsequent approval of
such other governmental agency, provided that the reviewing board shall make
a decision on any application for development within the time period provided
in this chapter or within an extension of such period as has been agreed to
by the applicant, unless the board is prevented or relieved from so acting by
the operation of law.



§ 175-63. Standards for development review.



   In reviewing any plan, the Board shall consider:



   A.   Pedestrian and vehicular traffic movement within and adjacent
to the site with particular emphasis on the provision and layout of parking
areas, off-street loading and unloading, movement of people, goods and
vehicles from access roads within the site, between buildings and between
buildings and vehicles. The Planning Board shall ensure that all parking
spaces are usable and are safely and conveniently arranged. Access to the
site from adjacent roads shall be designed so as to interfere as little as
possible with traffic flow on these roads and to permit vehicles a rapid and
safe ingress and egress to the site. All of the above shall be consistent
with municipal, county and state requirements.



   B.   The design and layout of buildings and parking areas shall be
reviewed so as to provide an aesthetically pleasing design and efficient
arrangement. Particular attention shall be given to safety and fire
protection, impact on surrounding development and contiguous and adjacent
buildings and lands.



   C.   Adequate lighting shall be provided to ensure safe movement of
persons and vehicles and for security purposes. Lighting standards shall be a
type approved by the Planning Board. Directional lights shall be arranged so
as to minimize glare and reflection on adjacent properties.



   D.   Buffering shall be located around the perimeter of the site to
minimize headlights of vehicles, noise, light from structures, the movement
of people and vehicles and to shield activities from adjacent properties when
necessary. Buffering may consist of fencing, evergreens, shrubs, bushes,
deciduous trees or combinations thereof to achieve the stated objectives.



   E.   Landscaping shall be provided as part of the overall site plan
design and integrated into building arrangements, topography, parking and
buffering requirements. Landscaping shall include trees, bushes, shrubs,
ground cover, perennials, annuals, plants, sculpture, art and/or the use of
building and paving materials in an imaginative manner.



   F.   Signs shall be designed so as to be aesthetically pleasing,
harmonious with other signs on the site and located so as to achieve their
purpose without constituting hazards to vehicles and pedestrians.



   G.   Storm drainage, sanitary waste disposal, water supply and
garbage disposal shall be reviewed and considered. Particular emphasis shall
be given to the adequacy of existing systems and the need for improvements,
both on-site and off-site, to adequately carry runoff and sewage and to
maintain an adequate supply of water at sufficient pressure.



   H.   Environmental elements relating to soil erosion, preservation
of trees, protection of watercourses, and resources, noise, topography, soil
and animal life shall be reviewed and the design of the plan shall minimize
any adverse impact on these elements.



   I.   The extent to which the standards of the Pinelands
Comprehensive Management Plan have been observed in the design of the
development.



   J.   The balance of costs to the town of servicing the project and
the revenues to be gained shall be considered in terms of the potential
impact upon tax rates.



   K.   Design standards for Downtown Districts and Gateway Districts,
as per Article XII, § 175-160. 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



ARTICLE IX
Plat Detail and Data



§ 175-64. Plat conformity required.



   No development application shall be accepted unless submitted in plat
form, and no plat shall be accepted for consideration unless it conforms to
the following requirements as to form, content and accompanying information
and complies with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 46:23-1 et seq. 16 (Map Filing
Law), as amended. All plats shall be prepared by a land surveyor as required
by law, licensed to practice in the State of New Jersey, and shall bear the
signature, seal, license number and address of the land surveyor. All
drawings of improvements and/or technical information shall be prepared,
signed and sealed by a licensed professional engineer of the State of New
Jersey.



§ 175-65. Conceptual plan.



   A conceptual review of any type of proposed development may be
submitted to the Planning Board. This informal submission is optional. The
purpose of such a submission is for informal discussion to review overall
development concepts in order to assist in the preparation of subsequent
formal submissions. A submission shall include the following information:



   A.   A conceptual plan must show the lot lines, proposed
building(s), proposed use(s), parking, loading, on-site circulation,
driveways, wooded areas, streams, approximate flood hazard area, contours
based on United States Geological Survey or similarly available datum,
approximate on-site stormwater detention facilities and water and sewer
service.



   B.   The conceptual plan of a major subdivision for the purposes of
classification and discussion must contain as a minimum the following
information:



      (1)   It shall be titled as such and shall be based on Tax Map
information or some other similarly accurate base, at a graphic scale of not
less than one inch equals 200 feet.



      (2)   It shall further include the following information:



         (a)   Lot line dimensions measured to the nearest whole
foot and contours shall be based on United States Geological Survey or
similarly available datum.



         (b)   The location of that portion which is to be
subdivided in relation to the entire tract.



         (c)   A tentative lot and street layout, with
dimensions, and all streets, roads, streams, watercourses and drainage
rights-of-way.



   C.   A conceptual plat is not required to be in conformity with the
Map Filing Law.



§ 175-66. Minor subdivision plat.



   The submitted minor subdivision plat shall be based on Tax Map
information or some other similarly accurate base and shall be neatly and
accurately drawn at an approximate scale of not more than 200 feet to the
inch on one of four of the following standard sheet sizes: 81/2 by 13 inches;
15 by 21 inches; 24 by 36 inches; 30 by 42 inches; to enable the entire tract
to be shown on one sheet. The following information shall also be included:



   A.   The location of that portion which is to be subdivided in
relation to the entire tract.



   B.   All existing structures and wooded lands within the area to be
subdivided and within 200 feet thereof, and the shortest distance from any
existing structure to any proposed and existing lot line.



   C.   The name of the owner and all adjoining property owners as
disclosed by the most recent municipal tax records.



   D.   The Tax Map, block and lot numbers and the subdivision
application number.



   E.   All existing and proposed streets within 200 feet of the area
to be subdivided for minor subdivisions with rights-of-way and names
indicated.



   F.   All subdivisions including more than 5.0 acres or which contain
natural drainage ways or soils of poor drainage characteristics must show
contours as shown on United States Geological Survey topographic survey
sheets.



   G.   All proposed lot lines and existing lot lines proposed to be
eliminated.



   H.   The location and approximate size of all bridges and culverts
and the location, direction of flow and approximate drainage area of all
streams, brooks, ponds, wet-weather swales and ditches in the area to be
subdivided and within 200 feet of the area to be subdivided for minor
subdivisions.



   I.   A general description of the proposed drainage facilities.



   J.   The location and width of all existing and proposed utility
easements in the area to be subdivided.



   K.   The zoning district within which the proposed subdivision is
located. If more than one zoning district is involved, the plat shall
indicate the district line(s).



   L.   North arrow.



   M.   Scale of plat and date of latest revision.



   N.   Acreage of the entire tract and the area being subdivided to
the nearest tenth of an acre; square footage shall be shown when areas to be
subdivided are less than 3.2 acres.



   O.   The number of new lots created.



   P.   The names, addresses, phone numbers and signatures of the
owner, subdivider and person preparing the plat.



   Q.   The signature, seal and license number and address of the
person preparing the plat.



   R.   A key map showing the entire subdivision and its relation to
surrounding areas at a scale of not more than 2,000 feet to the inch.



   S.   A plat or plan showing the location of all boundaries of the
subject property, the location of all proposed development and existing or
proposed facilities to provide water for the use and consumption of occupants
of all buildings and sanitary facilities which will serve the proposed
development. The following information shall be included with respect to
existing or proposed sanitary facilities: 



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



      (1)   On-site treatment facilities: The location, size, type
and capacity of any proposed on-site wastewater treatment facilities.



      (2)   Soil borings and percolation tests: If on-site sewage
disposal is proposed, results of soil borings and percolation tests in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 58:11-23 et seq., and the regulations adopted
pursuant thereto, shall be submitted at suitable location with a tract map
showing location, logs, elevations of all test holes, indicating where
groundwater was encountered, estimating the seasonal high-water table and
demonstrating that such facility is adequate to meet the water quality
standards contained in Article XII of this chapter.



   T.   A soils map, including a county soils survey which conforms to
the guidelines of the United States Department of Agriculture Soil
Conservation Service, showing the location of all proposed development.



   U.   A map showing existing vegetation, identifying predominant
vegetation types in the area, and showing proposed landscaping of the subject
property, including the location of the tree line before and after
development and all areas to be disturbed as a result of the proposed
development 



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



§ 175-67. Preliminary major subdivision and planned development plans. 



[Amended 3-25-2002 by Ord. No. 12-2002]



   The preliminary plans shall be clearly and legibly drawn or reproduced
at a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet unless otherwise
specified. All plans shall be designed in compliance with the provisions of
this chapter and shall show or be accompanied by the following information on
existing and proposed features:



   A.   A location map drawn at a scale of either one inch equals 1,000
feet or one inch equals 2,000 feet and showing the location of the entire
site and its relation to the surrounding areas. Such map shall show all
existing land uses within 500 feet of the site.



   B.   Site characteristics maps showing all woodlands, significant
individual trees (over 16 inches diameter at breast height), existing
streams, ponds and any other watercourses, wetlands and floodplains, as
defined by this chapter, and historically, culturally and/or archaeologically
significant structure or resource, the topography of the site at two-foot
contours and data relating to the soil types present on the site, including
the location and results of all soil borings.



   C.   A preliminary site plan of the project site at the scale
required above showing:



      (1)   The tract name, Tax Map sheet, block and lot number in a
title block; meridians; North arrow; written and graphic scales; the names,
addresses, phone numbers and signatures of the owner and subdivider; the
names of all property owners within 200 feet of the extreme limits of the
development, as disclosed by the most recent municipal tax records; the name
and address of the preparer of the map and his professional seal and
signature; the development application number; and the date of original
preparation and of each subsequent revision thereof.



      (2)   The acreage of the original tract being subdivided
measured to the nearest one thousandth of an acre and the number of the new
lots created.



      (3)   The zoning district within which the proposed
subdivision is located. If more than one zoning district is involved, the
plan shall indicate the district line(s).



      (4)   The locations and dimensions of existing and proposed
railroad rights-of-way, bridges and natural features, such as wooded areas,
and any extensive rock formations, both within the tract and within 200 feet
of its boundaries.



      (5)   All proposed lots, including existing lot lines to
remain and those to be eliminated and all setback lines required by the
Zoning Ordinance with the dimensions thereof, and the areas of all lots shown
measured to the nearest square foot. Any lot(s) to be reserved or dedicated
to public use shall be identified in the proposed use of lots for other than
residential developments and shall be shown.



      (6)   Locations of all existing structures showing existing
and proposed front, rear and side yard setback distances and an indication of
whether the existing structures and uses will be retained or removed.



      (7)   The names, locations and dimensions (cartway and
right-of-way widths) of all streets, both existing and proposed, within a
distance of 500 feet from the boundaries of the subdivision, showing any
connections from the proposed streets to existing streets and to those
proposed arterial and collector streets as shown on the Master Plan or
Official Map, as adopted.



   D.   A preliminary stormwater management plan at the same scale as
the site plan showing:



      (1)   All existing and proposed watercourses, including lakes
and ponds, including water level elevations.



      (2)   Cross sections of watercourses and/or drainage swales at
an approximate scale showing the extent of floodplain, top of bank, normal
water levels and bottom elevations at the following locations:



         (a)   At any point where a watercourse crosses a
boundary of the development.



         (b)   At fifty-foot intervals for a distance of 500 feet
upstream and downstream of any proposed and/or existing culvert or bridge
within the subdivision and within 1,000 feet downstream of the development.



         (c)   At fifty-foot intervals up to 500 feet upstream
and downstream of any point of juncture of two or more watercourses within
1,000 feet of the development.



         (d)   At a maximum of five-hundred-foot intervals, but
not less than two locations along each watercourse which runs through or
within 500 feet of the development.



         (e)   When ditches, streams or watercourses are to be
altered, improved or relocated, the method of stabilizing slopes and measures
to control erosion and siltation, as well as typical ditch section profiles,
shall be shown on the plat or accompany it. Where the Universal Soil Equation
indicates a tract soil loss during construction in excess of 10 tons per acre
per year, an erosion-sedimentation control plan in conformity with the
recommendations of the Soil Conservation Service shall be furnished to and
approved by the Board Engineer.



         (f)   The boundaries of the floodplains of all
watercourses within or adjacent to the development.



      (3)   The total acreage in the drainage basin of any
watercourse running through or adjacent to a development in the area upstream
of the development.



      (4)   The total acreage in the drainage basin to the nearest
downstream drainage structure and the acreage in the development which drains
to the structure.



      (5)   The location and extent of drainage and conservation
easements and stream encroachment lines.



      (6)   All existing or proposed storm sewer lines within or
adjacent to the development showing size and profile of the lines, direction
of flow and the location of each catch basin, inlet, manhole, culvert and
headwall.



      (7)   The location and extent of any proposed dry wells,
groundwater detention basins, retention basins or other water or soil
conservation devices.



      (8)   Data showing that the developed tract will not discharge
stormwater to contiguous neighbors in quantity and rate (cubic feet per
second) that exceeds the tract discharge in its natural undeveloped state.
The quantity of natural and undeveloped discharge shall be determined
utilizing natural and developed parameters and an intensity of six inches of
rainfall and/or a fifty-year, twenty-four-hour storm. The excess stormwater
shall be suitably detained and discharged at a controlled rate not to exceed
the above-mentioned natural site discharge. The detention devices'
performance shall also be investigated for storms of lesser frequency. If no
watercourse is available for discharge, a retention basin with groundwater
recharge may be permitted after the applicant has demonstrated the
feasibility of successful operations.



      (9)   A plan showing all on-site watershed divides and the
appropriate drainage areas to the various collection system inlets,
superimposed on a site plan of the development.



   E.   A preliminary utilities plan at the same scale of the site plan
showing:



      (1)   The location of existing utility structures, such as
water and sewer mains, gas transmission lines and high tension power lines on
the subdivision and within 200 feet of its boundaries.



      (2)   Plans of proposed improvements and utility layouts,
including sewer, water, storm drains, gas, telephone, television and
electricity, showing feasible connections to any proposed utility systems. If
private utilities are proposed, they shall comply fully with all township,
county and state regulations. If service will be provided by an existing
utility company, a letter from that company stating that service will be
available before occupancy will be sufficient. When individual on-lot water
or sewage disposal is proposed, the plan for such system shall be approved by
the appropriate township and state agencies, and the results of percolation
tests shall be submitted with the preliminary plat under conditions
designated by the County Board of Health. Where applicable, the utility
company letter must indicate that wet hookups will be available for each
subdivided lot.



   F.   Plans, typical cross sections, center-line profiles, tentative
grades and details of all proposed streets and of the existing streets
abutting the development based on the vertical datum specified by the Board
Engineer, including curbing, sidewalks, storm drains and drainage structures.
Sight triangles, the radii of curbline and street sign locations shall be
clearly indicated at intersections.



   G.   A copy of any protective covenants or deed restrictions
applying to the land being subdivided shall be submitted with the preliminary
plat and application.



   H.   In the case of a planned and/or cluster development, the
application for preliminary approval shall contain, in addition to the items
specified above, the following:



      (1)   Common open space map at a scale the same as the site
plan showing all areas of the site to be designated as common open space and
the designation of each area according to its proposed use, and the type,
size and general location of planting or other screening techniques to be
used in designated buffer areas. The map shall also denote the size of each
designated area in acres and the total common open space area in acres and as
a percentage of the site, in conformance with Article XIII of this chapter.



      (2)   An open space report outlining the form of organization
proposed to own and maintain the common open space in conformance with this
chapter and identifying how the common open space and facilities relate to
existing and proposed town open space areas and facilities.



      (3)   A sewer and water report containing an explanation of
plans to tie into existing sewer and water facilities, including the status
of efforts to have such tie-ins approved by the appropriate authorities, and
calculations of the water demand and sewage generation anticipated from the
proposed development using the standards of this chapter. Based on these
calculations and the existing excess capacities of existing sewer and water
systems, the applicant shall, if pertinent, describe what improvements shall
be implemented to increase the capacities to meet the anticipated demands.



      (4)   A traffic report containing calculations of the number
of motor vehicles expected to enter or leave the site for an average peak
hour, and an evaluation of the ability of the internal circulation plan and
the external access roadways, including the two nearest intersections on
collector roadways, to handle this anticipated traffic, made by a qualified
traffic engineer. In addition, the report shall explain how road layout
relates to terrain and the reasons for any proposed deviations from the
town's design standards.



      (5)   Development schedule data if the proposed construction
is to extend over more than one year.



         (a)   A schedule map at the same scale as the site plan
showing the location of each successive annual phase of the development.



         (b)   A schedule report listing by each annual phase the
number of residential units by type, the anticipated sales price of each unit
type, the total value of residential development, the square footage of
commercial construction and its value, the type of open space structures and
improvements and the value of public improvements installed by the applicant
for dedication to the town, its various departments or other governmental
agencies.



      (6)   A fiscal impact report indicating the impact of the
project on town services, the cash flow of the project and an indication of
the pro rata share of necessary improvements.



      (7)   A modification report, if applicable, showing the
modifications of town standards requested, along with supporting
documentation.



§ 175-68. Final plat for major subdivision and planned development.



[Amended 3-25-2002 by Ord. No. 12-2002]



   A.   The final plat for major subdivisions shall be drawn in
accordance with the requirements for preliminary plats specified in this
chapter. The final plat shall show or be accompanied by the same information
required for preliminary plat approval in addition to the following:



      (1)   Tract boundary lines; exterior lines or streets;
easements and other rights-of-way; street names; land reserved or dedicated
to public use; all lot lines and other site lines with accurate dimensions,
bearings or deflection angles; and radii, arcs and central angles of all
curves based on an actual survey by a land surveyor licensed to practice in
the State of New Jersey. All dimensions of the exterior boundaries of the
subdivision shall be balanced and closed to a precision of 1:10,000 and the
dimensions of all lot lines to within one to 1:20,000. All dimensions, angles
and bearings must be tied to at least two permanent monuments not less than
300 feet apart, and all information shall be indicated on the plat.



      (2)   At least one corner of the subdivision shall be tied to
United States Geological Survey bench marks with data on the plat as to how
the bearings were determined.



      (3)   Block and lot numbers in accordance with established
standards and in conformity with the Town Tax Map. Services of the Board
Engineer will be available to the developer to assist him in the assignment
of lot and block numbers; the Engineer's fee for such service is to be paid
by the developer.



      (4)   Cross sections, profiles and established grades of all
streets as approved by the Town Engineer.



      (5)   Plans and profiles of all storm and sanitary sewers and
water mains as approved by the Board Engineer.



   B.   In the case of a planned development, the application for final
approval shall contain the following, unless waived by the Planning Board:



      (1)   A comparison of the final plan to the development
schedule approved as part of the tentative plan, noting any changes or
variations from the approved schedule and indicating the scope of the
change(s), particularly any change in the total number of dwelling units to
be constructed, the number by type of dwelling units to be constructed, the
number of square feet of commercial uses to be constructed, the number by
type of community facilities to be constructed, the acreage of common open
space, the nature and cost of public improvements to be produced and the
anticipated values of residential and commercial construction. If applicable,
a report documenting the nature and reasons for the changes shall also be
submitted.



      (2)   A land use plan at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet,
including:



         (a)   A closed boundary survey of the total land area to
be developed with area measurements to an accuracy of 0.10 acre.



         (b)   Locations of existing and proposed permanent
monuments.



         (c)   Location, type and description of existing
buildings, roads, easements, watercourses and drainage ways on and adjacent
to the development area.



         (d)   Location and dimensions of all parking areas,
proposed buildings and other structures.



         (e)   Horizontal alignment and geometry and clear sight
dimensions for all proposed roads and intersections.



         (f)   Location of easements and areas to remain as
commonly held or publicly held open space.



         (g)   Certification by a licensed land surveyor and/or
professional engineer.



      (3)   A clearing, grading and drainage plan at a scale of one
inch equals 50 feet showing:



         (a)   Location and defined limits of all clearing and/or
removal of vegetative cover.



         (b)   Existing and proposed grades within the
development area at a contour interval of two feet.



         (c)   Location and proposed grades and elevations for
all buildings, roads, walks, storm sewers and other drainage structures and
devices, retaining walls and other landscape constructions.



         (d)   Profiles of existing and proposed grades for
roads, storm sewers and swales, abutting and within the site.



         (e)   Cross sections and typical construction details
for all existing and proposed buildings, roads, drives, parking areas, walks,
drainage facilities and other construction elements within the site.



      (4)   A utilities system plan at a scale of one inch equals 50
feet showing:



         (a)   Type and description of all utility lines located
by dimensions.



         (b)   Location and elevation of all manholes, inlets,
catch basins, hydrants and light standards.



         (c)   Profiles of existing and proposed grades for
sanitary sewer and water lines.



         (d)   Location and typical construction details for
utilities and easements.



         (e)   Certification by a New Jersey licensed
professional engineer.



      (5)   Common open space organization documents. These
documents shall show conformance with the provisions of Article XII of this
chapter and shall include:



         (a)   Articles of incorporation for any homeowners'
association, condominium association or other organization to maintain the
common open space or community facilities.



         (b)   Bylaws and membership rules and regulations of any
such organization defining its rights, duties and responsibilities.



         (c)   A copy of the master deed detailing the rights and
privileges of individual owners in the areas of common open space.



         (d)   Covenants or easements restricting the use of the
common open space.



         (e)   Covenants or agreements requiring homeowners or
residents to pay the organization for the maintenance of the common open
space and/or community facilities. This shall include a proposed schedule of
membership fees for at least the first three years of operations.



      (6)   Other covenants and easements. These documents shall
include any easements or covenants affecting any land in the development
other than those easements and covenants already specified in Subsection B(5)
of this section.



      (7)   Other maintenance agreements. These documents shall
include any easements or proposed agreements under which private roads will
be maintained, refuse collected or other supplementary services provided.



      (8)   Offer of dedication. The offer of dedication shall
include all legal requirements for a valid dedication to the town or, where
appropriate, to another governmental or public body of roads or other
improvements intended for public ownership.



§ 175-69. Minor site plan.



   A.   Plats submitted for minor site plan approval shall be as
follows:



      (1)   Each site plan submitted for approval shall be at a
scale of one inch equals 50 feet for a tract up to 40 acres in size; one inch
equals 100 feet for a tract between 40 and 150 acres; and one inch equals 200
feet for a tract 150 acres or more.



      (2)   All plans shall be certified by a licensed architect or
engineer, including accurate lot lines certified by a land surveyor,
submitted on one of the following standard sheet sizes: 81/2 by 13 inches; 15
by 21 inches; 24 by 36 inches; or 30 by 42 inches, and including the
following data (if one sheet is not sufficient to contain the entire
territory, the map may be divided into sections to be shown on separate
sheets of equal sizes, with reference on each sheet to the adjoining sheets):
boundaries of the tract; North arrow; date; scale; zone districts in which
the lot(s) are located; existing and proposed streets and street names;
existing and proposed contour lines based on United States Geological Survey
data and topographical surveys not older than two years at five-foot
intervals inside the tract and within 200 feet of any paved portion of the
tract; title of plans, existing and proposed streams and easements; total
building coverage in area and percent of lot; total number of parking spaces;
all dimensions needed to conform to this chapter, such as but not limited to
buildings, lot lines, parking spaces, setbacks and yards; a small key map
giving the general location of the parcel to the remainder of the
municipality; and the site relation to all remaining lands in the applicant's
ownership.



   B.   The plat submitted for approval shall have the following
minimum requirements for review and approval:



      (1)   Size, height, location and arrangement of all existing
and proposed buildings, structures and signs in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter, including a licensed architect's and/or
engineer's drawing of each building or a typical building and sign showing
front, side and rear views and the proposed use of all structures.



      (2)   Proposed circulation plans, including access streets,
curbs, aisles and lanes, easements, fire lanes, driveways, parking spaces,
loading areas, loading berths or docks, pedestrian walks and all related
facilities for the movement and storage of goods, vehicles and persons on the
site and including the location of lights, lighting standards and signs and
driveways within the tract and within 100 feet of the tract. Sidewalks shall
be provided from each building entrance/exit along expected paths of
pedestrian travel, such as but not limited to access to parking lots,
driveways or other buildings where pedestrian traffic can be expected to be
concentrated. Plans shall be accompanied by cross sections of new streets,
aisles, lanes and driveways, which shall adhere to the applicable
requirements and design standards of this chapter.



      (3)   Existing and proposed wooded areas, buffer areas and
landscaping shall be shown on the plan. The landscaping plan, including
seeded and/or sodded areas, grading, retaining walls, fencing, signs,
recreation areas, shrubbery, trees and buffer areas shall be in accordance
with applicable requirements of this chapter. These plans shall show the
location, species and caliper of plant material for all planted or landscaped
areas. Landscaping plans shall incorporate the elements set forth in §
175-136E.



[Amended 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



      (4)   Utilities.



         (a)   The proposed location of all drainage (including
calculations), sewage and water facilities with proposed grades, sizes,
capacities and types of materials to be used, including any drainage
easements acquired or required across adjoining properties. The method of
sewage and waste disposal and waste incineration, if any, shall be shown;
percolation tests and test borings from sufficient locations on the site to
allow a determination of adequacy shall be included where septic tanks and
leaching fields are permitted and are proposed. Such plans shall be reviewed
by the Board of Health and Board Engineer and/or other appropriate authority,
as applicable, with recommendations to the Planning Board.



         (b)   Proposed lighting facilities shall be included,
showing the direction and reflection of the lighting. All public services
shall be connected to an approved public utilities system where one exists.



         (c)   The applicant shall arrange with the servicing
utility for the underground installation for the utility's distribution,
supply lines and service connections, in accordance with the provisions of
the applicable standard terms and conditions incorporated as part of its
tariff as the same are then on file with the State of New Jersey Board of
Public Utility Commissioners, and the developer shall provide the town with
four copies of a final plan showing the installed location of the utilities.



         (d)   The applicant shall submit to the Board, prior to
the granting of final approval, a written instrument from each serving
utility, which shall evidence full compliance or intended full compliance
with the provisions of this subsection; provided, however, that lots which
abut existing streets where overhead electric or telephone distribution
supply lines and service connections have heretofore been installed may be
supplied with electric and telephone service from these overhead lines, but
any new service connections from the utility's overhead lines shall be
installed underground. In cases where total electrical and telephone load and
service cannot be determined in advance, such as industrial parks, shopping
centers, etc., perimeter utility poles may be used, but service to buildings
from poles shall be underground.



      (5)   A written description of the proposed operations of the
building(s), including the number of employees or members of nonresidential
buildings; the proposed number of shifts to be worked and the maximum number
of employees on each shift; expected truck and tractor-trailer traffic,
emission of noise, glare and air and water pollution; safety hazards; and
anticipated expansion plans incorporated in the building design. Where the
applicant cannot furnish the information required herein because of
nondetermination of use, site plan approval may be required and, if
conditionally granted subject to further review and approval of the
applicant's final plans, the applicant may proceed with his application. No
certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all such plans are given final
approval.



   C.   The applicant may request waivers from any of the required
details based upon unique or particular conditions pertaining to the property
or intended use. Such evidence shall be presented which shall indicate to the
Board that the requested waivers will not affect the Board's ability to make
informed decisions concerning the impact of the intended use upon the
adjacent property owners, neighborhood, utility systems, traffic and other
elements of concern to the Board.



§ 175-70. Preliminary major site plan.



   A.   An applicant shall submit a preliminary site plan in tentative
form for discussion purposes in conformity with the following minimum
requirements:



      (1)   The preliminary site plan shall be drawn to a scale no
less than one inch equals 100 feet, but consideration shall be given to a
smaller scale if it permits the total project to be clearly depicted on a
standard sheet of the sizes permitted in the Map Filing Law. Editor's Note:
See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.



      (2)   All plans shall be certified by a licensed architect or
engineer, including accurate lot lines certified by a licensed land surveyor
in the State of New Jersey.



      (3)   The plan shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:



         (a)   A deed plotting of the tract may be submitted in
lieu of an actual field survey of the lot lines, but the applicant accepts
the responsibility that at final submission, if the accuracy of said deed
plotting sufficiently alters the intent of the proposal, the Board shall
reserve the right to reject the final submittal without prejudice and require
a resubmittal for preliminary approval.



         (b)   Topographic contours from the United States
Geological Survey quadrangle sheets may be submitted in lieu of an actual
field or aerial topographical survey, or the applicant may opt to furnish
same. Contours shall extend 200 feet beyond the boundary of the proposal. All
existing streams that will receive, either directly or indirectly, the tract
stormwater runoff shall be indicated. A key plan of a smaller scale may be
shown if it is not practicable to indicate it on the site plan.



         (c)   All dimensions needed to confirm conformity to
appropriate zoning ordinances, and other zoning criteria, i.e., density, land
coverage, etc., shall be indicated.



         (d)   All contiguous owners, existing dedicated streets
(ownership and route numbers if applicable), existing wooded areas in outline
only and geophysical conditions of any open or recreation space to be
dedicated for public or quasi-public use.



         (e)   An architectural plan and views of each type of
building shall be furnished and certified by an architect licensed in the
State of New Jersey.



         (f)   Proposed circulation plans, including access
streets, easements, fire lanes and a typical section of all major cart ways
proposed shall be required.



         (g)   The proposed location of all storm drainage and
wastewater collection and potable water supply shall be indicated in a
schematic phase including the use of stormwater detention facilities, if
proposed. The location and size of all existing utilities to be utilized for
the proposal shall be clearly indicated on the preliminary site plan.



         (h)   Size, height, location and arrangement of all
existing and proposed buildings, structures and signs in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.



   B.   The plan shall be signed by the applicant and owner and include
respective names and addresses.



§ 175-71. Final major site plan.



   Plats submitted for final major site plan approval shall be as follows:



   A.   Each plan shall be at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet for a
tract up to 40 acres in size; one inch equals 100 feet for a tract between 40
and 150 acres; and one inch equals 200 feet for a tract 150 acres or more.
All plans shall be certified by a licensed architect or engineer, including
accurate lot lines certified by a licensed land surveyor, submitted on one of
the following standard sheet sizes: 81/2 by 13 inches; 15 by 21 inches; 24 by
36 inches; or 30 by 42 inches;



   B.   The plat shall include the following data (if one sheet is not
sufficient to contain the entire territory, the map may be divided into
sections to be shown on separate sheets of equal sizes, with reference on
each sheet to the adjoining sheets): boundaries of the tract; North arrow;
date; scale; zone district(s) in which the lot(s) are located; existing and
proposed streets and street names; existing and proposed contour lines based
on United States Geological Survey data and topographical surveys not older
than two years, at two-foot intervals inside the tract and within 200 feet of
any paved portion of the tract; title of plans; existing and proposed streams
and easements; total building coverage in area and percent of lot; total
number of parking spaces; all dimensions needed to confirm conformity to this
chapter, such as but not limited to buildings, lot lines, parking spaces,
setbacks and yards; a small key map giving the general location of the parcel
to the remainder of the municipality; and the site relation to all remaining
lands in the applicant's ownership.



   C.   The plan shall also have the following minimum criteria for
review and approval:



      (1)   Size, height, location and arrangement of all existing
and proposed buildings, structures and signs in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter, including a licensed architect's and/or
engineer's drawing of each building or a typical building and sign showing
front, side and rear elevations and the proposed use of all structures.



      (2)   Proposed circulation plans, including access streets,
curbs, aisles and lanes, easements, fire lanes, driveways, parking spaces,
loading areas, loading berths or docks, pedestrian walks and all related
facilities for the movement and storage of goods, vehicles and persons on the
site and including the location of lights, lighting standards and signs and
driveways within the tract and within 100 feet of the tract. Sidewalks shall
be provided from each building entrance/exit along expected paths of
pedestrian travel, such as but not limited to access to parking lots,
driveways or other buildings where pedestrian traffic can be expected to be
concentrated. Plans shall be accompanied by cross sections of new streets,
aisles, lanes and driveways, which shall adhere to applicable requirements of
this chapter and applicable design standards in the subdivision ordinance.



      (3)   Existing and proposed wooded areas, buffer areas and
landscaping shall be shown. The landscaping plan, including seeded and/or
sodded areas, grading, retaining walls, fencing, signs, recreation areas,
shrubbery, trees and buffer areas shall be in accordance with applicable
requirements of this chapter. These plans shall show the location, species
and caliper of plant material for all planted or landscaped areas.
Landscaping plans shall incorporate the elements set forth in § 175-136E.



[Amended 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



      (4)   Utilities.



         (a)   The proposed location of all drainage (including
calculations), sewage and water facilities with proposed grades, sizes,
capacities and types of materials to be used, including any drainage
easements acquired or required across adjoining properties. The method of
sewage and waste disposal and waste incineration, if any, shall be shown;
percolation tests and test borings from sufficient locations on the site to
allow a determination of adequacy shall be included where septic tanks and
leaching fields are permitted and are proposed. Such plans shall be reviewed
by the Board of Health and/or the Board Engineer and/or other appropriate
authority, as applicable, with recommendations to the Planning Board.



         (b)   Proposed lighting facilities shall be included,
showing the direction and reflection of the lighting. All public services
shall be connected to an approved public utilities system where one exists.



         (c)   The applicant shall arrange with the servicing
utility for the underground installation of the utilities' distribution
supply lines and service connections, in accordance with the provisions of
the applicable standard terms and conditions incorporated as part of its
tariff as the same are then on file with the State of New Jersey Board of
Public Utility Commissioners, and the developer shall provide the town with
four copies of a final plan showing the installed location of the utilities.



         (d)   The applicant shall submit to the Board, prior to
the granting of final approval, a written instrument from each serving
utility, which shall evidence full compliance or intended full compliance
with the provisions of this subsection; provided, however, that lots which
abut existing streets where overhead electric or telephone distribution
supply lines and service connections have heretofore been installed may be
supplied with electric and telephone service from these overhead lines, but
any new service connections from the utility's overhead lines shall be
installed underground. In cases where total electrical and telephone load and
service cannot be determined in advance, such as industrial parks, shopping
centers, etc., perimeter utility poles may be used, but service to buildings
from poles shall be underground.



      (5)   A written description of the proposed operations of the
buildings, including the number of employees or members of nonresidential
buildings; the proposed number of shifts to be worked and the maximum number
of employees on each shift; expected truck and tractor-trailer traffic,
emission of noise, glare and air and water pollution; safety hazards; and
anticipated expansion plans incorporated in the building design. Where the
applicant cannot furnish the information required herein because of
nondetermination of use, site plan approval may be conditionally granted
subject to further review and approval of the applicant's final plans. No
certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all such plans are approved.



      (6)   Where the applicant can clearly demonstrate that,
because of peculiar or special conditions pertaining to his land or the
proposed use, the literal enforcement of one or more of these provisions is
impracticable or will exact undue hardship, the Planning Board may grant such
relief for the goals intended and the rules and standards established herein
if it determines that literal enforcement will create an inequitable
situation.



ARTICLE X. Guaranties; Inspections; Acceptance of Improvements



§ 175-72. Guaranties for on-tract improvements.



   A.   Before recording final subdivision plats or as a condition of
final site plan approval or as a condition to the issuance of a zoning permit
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65d, the approving board shall require and accept
in accordance with the standards adopted by this chapter for the purpose of
assuring the installation and maintenance of on-tract improvements:



      (1)   The furnishing of a performance guaranty in favor of the
Town of Hammonton in an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of installation
of improvements it may deem necessary or appropriate, including streets,
grading, pavement, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, street lighting, shade trees,
surveyor's monuments as shown on the final map and required by the Map Filing
Law (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.), water mains, culverts, storm sewers,
sanitary sewers or other means of sewage disposal, drainage structures,
erosion control and sedimentation control devices, public improvements of
open space and, in the case of site plans only, other on-site improvements
and landscaping.



      (2)   Provisions for a maintenance guaranty to be posted with
the Town Council for a period not to exceed two years after final acceptance
of the improvement, in an amount not to exceed 15% of the cost of the
improvement. In the event that other governmental agencies or public
utilities automatically will own the utilities to be installed and/or the
improvements are covered by a performance or maintenance guaranty to another
governmental agency, no performance or maintenance guaranty as the case may
be, shall be required by the Town Council for such utilities or improvements.



   B.   The time allowed for installation of the improvements for which
the performance guaranty has been provided may be extended by the Town
Council by resolution. As a condition or as part of any such extension, the
amount of any performance guaranty shall be increased or reduced, as the case
may be, to an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of the installation as
determined as of the time of the passage of the resolution.



   C.   If the required improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with the performance guaranty, the obligor and surety, if any,
shall be liable thereon to the town for the reasonable cost of the
improvements not completed or corrected, and the town may either prior to or
after the receipt of the proceeds thereof complete such improvements.



§ 175-73. Guaranties for off-tract improvements.



   A.   Performance guaranties. The applicant shall be required to
provide, as a condition for final approval of his subdivision application, a
performance guaranty running to the town.



      (1)   If the improvement is to be constructed by the applicant
under § 175-119C or under § 175-119D(2), a performance bond with surety in
an amount equal to the estimated cost of the improvements, or as to any part
of said improvement that is to be acquired or installed by the town under
said § 175-119C, a cash deposit equal to the estimated cost of such
acquisition or installation by the town.



      (2)   If the improvement is to be constructed by the town as a
general improvement under § 175-119D(2)(a)[1], a cash deposit equal to the
amount of the excess of the estimated cost of the improvement over the
estimated total amount by which all properties, including the subdivision
property, will be specially benefited thereby.



      (3)   If the improvement is to be constructed by the
municipality as a local improvement under § 175-119D(2)(a)[2], a cash
deposit equal to the amount referred to in Subsection A(2), immediately
above, plus the estimated amount by which the subdivision property will be
specially benefited by the improvement.



   B.   Refund of deposit where improvements are not authorized within
five years. In any case in which a subdivider shall deposit money with the
town for the completion of an off-site improvement that is to be constructed
pursuant to this chapter by the town, the applicant shall be entitled to a
full refund of such deposit if the Town Council shall not have enacted an
ordinance authorizing the improvements within five years after the date that
all other subdivision improvements are completed.



   C.   Deposit of funds. All moneys paid by an applicant pursuant to
this chapter for off-tract improvements shall be paid over to the Town
Treasurer, who shall provide a suitable depository therefor. Such funds shall
be used only for the improvements for which they are deposited or
improvements serving the same purpose.



   D.   Redetermination of assessment upon completion of improvement.
Upon completion of off-tract improvements required pursuant to this chapter,
the applicant's liability hereunder shall be recalculated in accordance with
the actual, as compared with the estimated, cost of the improvements. To the
extent that such recalculation shall increase the amount of any cash deposit
made by the applicant hereunder, the applicant shall forthwith pay the amount
of such increase to the town. To the extent that it shall decrease the amount
thereof, the town shall forthwith refund the amount of such decrease to the
applicant. In cases where improvements are specially assessed against all
benefited properties, recalculation shall be made by the Town Assessor in the
course of the special assessment proceedings. In other cases, it shall be
made by the town.



§ 175-74. Certification or guaranty required; estimate of guaranty.



   No final plat shall be approved by the Planning Board until the
satisfactory completion and performance of all such required improvements
have been certified to the Planning Board by the Board Engineer, unless the
subdivision owner shall have filed with the municipality a performance
guaranty sufficient in amount to cover the cost of all such improvements in
uncompleted portions thereof as estimated by the Board Engineer, and assuring
the installation of such uncompleted improvements on or before an agreed upon
date.



   A.   A performance guaranty estimate shall be prepared by the Board
Engineer, setting forth all requirements for improvements as fixed by the
Planning Board and their estimated cost. The Town Council shall pass a
resolution either approving or adjusting this performance guaranty.



   B.   The approved performance guaranty estimate shall fix the
requirements of maintenance of the utilities and improvements to be installed
and completed by the subdivider. A surety company or cash bond meeting the
requirements hereinabove set forth may be furnished to secure the maintenance
guaranty, or the performance bond may be styled or amended to provide such
security in reduced amount in keeping with the requirements.



§ 175-75. Approval by Town Attorney.



   A.   The applicant shall present two copies of the performance
guaranty in an amount equal to the amount of the approved performance
guaranty estimate for approval as to form and execution by the Town Attorney.



   B.   The Town Attorney shall notify the Secretary of the Planning
Board prior to the Planning Board meeting that the performance guaranty is
properly executed and can be added to the agenda.



§ 175-76. Bonding and cash requirements.



   A.   The performance guaranty shall be the approved performance
guaranty estimate and as surety a performance bond in which the applicant
shall be principal, the bond to be provided by an acceptable surety company
licensed to do business in the State of New Jersey, an irrevocable letter of
credit drawn on a banking institution located or licensed to do business in
the State of New Jersey or such other form of security as may be approved by
the Town Attorney, or cash, or a certified check shall be deposited with the
Town of Hammonton by payment to the Town Treasurer. The performance guaranty
in favor of the town shall be in an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of
the installation and improvements. The Town Treasurer shall issue its receipt
for such cash deposits and shall cause the same to be deposited in a bank
named by the town for this purpose to be retained as security for completion
of all requirements and to be returned to the subdivider on completion of all
required work and expiration of the period of maintenance guaranty or, in the
event of default on the part of the subdivider, to be used by the Town of
Hammonton to pay the cost and expense of obtaining completion of all
requirements. Every bond, whether cash or surety, shall contain a clause to
the effect that the obligation shall remain in full force and effect until
such time as certification is received from the Board Engineer that the
principal has met and complied with all specifications and requirements for
which said cash or surety bond has been posted.



   B.   Ten percent of the amount of the approved performance guaranty
estimates shall be deposited with the town by the applicant in cash or
irrevocable letter of credit or other such security as approved by the Town
Attorney, that can be readily converted into cash. The remaining 90% may be
in cash, surety bond or other securities or guaranties approved by the Town
Attorney. In the event of default, the ten-percent fund herein mentioned
shall be first applied to the completion of the requirements and the cash or
the surety bond shall thereafter be resorted to, if necessary, for the
completion of the requirements. The cash or surety bond may recite the
foregoing provisions. The Board Engineer's determination that the principal
has defaulted in his obligation shall be binding and conclusive upon the
principal.



§ 175-77. Inspections and tests.



   A.   All improvements and utility installations shall be inspected
during the time of their installation under the supervision of the Board
Engineer to ensure satisfactory completion. The cost of said inspection shall
be the responsibility of the applicant, and he shall deposit with the Town
Treasurer for placement in a special trust fund account a sum equal to 5% of
the amount of the performance guaranty estimate of the cost of public
improvements to be built in the subdivision to be applied to payment of
inspection costs. If inspection costs exceed such fund, the subdivider shall
deposit with the Town Treasurer additional sums upon notice from the Board
Engineer. The inspection fee shall in no case be less than $100. The Town
Treasurer shall return any balance of the inspection deposit to the
subdivider upon expiration of the maintenance bond, together with the paid
invoices for all expenses charged.



   B.   In no case shall any paving work be done without permission
from the Board Engineer's office. At least two days' notice shall be given to
the Board Engineer's office prior to any such construction so that he or a
qualified representative may be present at the time the work is to be done.



   C.   The Board Engineer's office shall be notified after each of the
following phases of the work has been completed so that he or a qualified
representative may inspect the work:



      (1)   Road subgrade.



      (2)   Curb and gutter forms.



      (3)   Curbs and gutters.



      (4)   Road paving.



      (5)   Sidewalk forms.



      (6)   Sidewalks.



      (7)   Drainage pipes and other drainage structures before
backfilling.



      (8)   Street name signs.



      (9)   Sanitary sewers and/or septic tanks.



      (10)   Monuments.



   D.   A final inspection of all improvements and utilities will be
done by the Board Engineer to determine whether the work is satisfactory and
in agreement with the approved final plat drawings and the town
specifications. The general condition of the site shall also be considered.
Upon a satisfactory final inspection report, action will be taken to release
or declare in default the performance guaranty covering such improvements and
utilities.



   E.   Inspection by the town of the installation of improvements and
utilities by the applicant shall not operate to subject the town to liability
for claims, suits or liability of any kind that may at any time arise because
of defects or negligence during construction or at any time thereafter; it is
recognized that the responsibility to maintain safe conditions at all times
during construction and to provide proper utilities and improvements is upon
the applicant and his contractors, if any.



§ 175-78. Reduction of guaranty.



   A.   Upon substantial completion of all required appurtenant utility
improvements and the connection of same to the public system, the obligor may
notify the Town Council, in writing, by certified mail addressed in care of
the Town Clerk, of the completion or substantial completion of improvements
and shall send a copy thereof to the Board Engineer. Thereupon, the Board
Engineer shall inspect all improvements of which such notice has been given
and shall file a detailed report, in writing, with the Town Council,
indicating either approval, partial approval or rejection of such
improvements with a statement of reasons for any rejection. The cost of the
improvements as approved or rejected shall be set forth.



   B.   The Town Council shall either approve, partially approve or
reject the improvements on the basis of the report of the Board Engineer, and
shall notify the obligor in writing, by certified mail, of the contents of
said report and the action of said Town Council with relation thereto, not
later than 65 days after receipt of the notice from the obligor of the
completion of the improvements. Where partial approval is granted, the
obligor shall be released from all liability pursuant to the performance
guaranty, except for that portion adequately sufficient to secure provision
of the improvements not yet approved, provided that 30% of the amount of the
performance guaranty posted may be retained to ensure completion of all
improvements. Failure of the Town Council to send or provide such
notification to the obligor within 65 days shall be deemed to constitute
approval of the improvements, and the obligor and surety, if any, shall be
released from all liability pursuant to such performance guaranty for such
improvements.



   C.   If any portion of the required improvements is rejected, the
Town Council may require the obligor to complete such improvements and, upon
completion, the same procedure of notification as set forth in this section
shall be followed.



   D.   Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to limit the right
of the obligor to contest by legal proceedings any determination of the Town
Council or the Board Engineer.



   E.   The obligor shall reimburse the town for all reasonable
inspection fees paid to the Board Engineer for the foregoing inspection of
improvements, provided that the town may require of the developer a deposit
for all or a portion of the reasonably anticipated fees to be paid to the
Board Engineer for such inspection.



   F.   In the event that final approval is by stages or sections of
development pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38, the provisions of this section
shall be applied by stage or section.



§ 175-79. Conditions for acceptance of improvements; maintenance guaranty.



   The approval of any plat under this chapter by the Planning Board or
Town Council, or both, shall in no way be construed as acceptance of any
street or drainage system or any other improvement required by this chapter,
nor shall such plat approval obligate the town in any way to maintain or
exercise jurisdiction over such street or drainage system or other
improvement. No improvement shall be accepted by the Town Council unless and
until all of the following conditions have been met:



   A.   The Board Engineer shall have certified in writing that the
improvements are complete and that they comply with the requirements of this
chapter.



   B.   The final plat shall have been approved by the Planning Board.



   C.   Maintenance guaranty.



      (1)   After final acceptance of all improvements, the
subdivider shall have filed with the Town Council a maintenance guaranty in
an amount equal to not more than 15% of the original estimate of the cost of
installing the improvements and shall run for a period not exceeding two
years. The procedures and requirements governing such maintenance guaranty
shall be identical with the procedures and requirements for a performance
guaranty set forth in this article. The requirements for a maintenance
guaranty may be waived by the Town Council only if the Board Engineer has
certified that the improvements have been in continuous use for not less than
two years from the date the Town Engineer certified completion of such
improvements and that during this period the subdivider has maintained the
improvements in a satisfactory manner.



      (2)   In the event that any other town or governmental
agencies or public utilities automatically will own the utilities to be
installed, or the improvements are covered by a performance or maintenance
guaranty to another town or governmental agency, no performance or
maintenance guaranty, as the case may be, shall be required by the town for
such utilities or improvements.



§ 175-80. Certificate of occupancy.



   Occupancy permits will be issued only when the installation of any
curbs, all utilities, all functioning water supply and sewage treatment
facilities, all necessary storm drainage to ensure proper drainage of the lot
and surrounding land, rough grading of lots, base course for the driveway and
base course for the streets are installed to serve the lot and structure for
which the permit is requested. Streets, if installed prior to final approval,
shall not be paved until all heavy construction is completed; shade trees
shall not be planted until all grading and earthmoving is completed; and
seeding of grass areas shall be the last operation. The issuance of a
certificate of occupancy will follow the procedures outlined in this chapter
and the town Uniform Construction Code Ordinance. A separate certificate of
occupancy shall also be required when any change occurs in the use or
occupancy of an existing structure.



ARTICLE XI. Effect of Approvals



§ 175-81. Preliminary approval of major subdivisions and major site plans.



   Preliminary approval of a major subdivision or of a site plan shall,
except as provided in Subsection D of this section, confer upon the applicant
the following rights for a three-year period from the date of the preliminary
approval:



   A.   That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including but not limited to use
requirements; layout and design standards for streets, curbs and sidewalks;
lot size; yard dimensions and off-tract improvements; and, in the case of a
site plan, any requirements peculiar to site plan approval pursuant to this
chapter; except that nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the town
from modifying by ordinance such general terms and conditions of preliminary
approval as relate to public health and safety.



   B.   That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before
the expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary subdivision plat or site plan, as the case may be.



   C.   That the applicant may apply for and the Planning Board may
grant extensions on such preliminary approval for additional periods of at
least one year but not to exceed a total extension of two years, provided
that if the design standards have been revised by ordinance, such revised
standards may govern at the discretion of the Planning Board.



   D.   In the case of a subdivision of or site plan for an area of 50
acres or more, the Planning Board may grant the rights referred to in
Subsections A, B and C above for such period of time, longer than three
years, as shall be determined by the Planning Board to be reasonable, taking
into consideration the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor
areas permissible under preliminary approval; economic conditions; and the
comprehensiveness of the development. The applicant may apply for thereafter
and the Planning Board may thereafter grant an extension to preliminary
approval for such additional period of time as shall be determined by the
Planning Board to be reasonable taking into consideration the number of
dwelling units and nonresidential floor areas permissible under preliminary
approval; the potential number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor
area of the section or sections awaiting final approval; economic conditions;
and the comprehensiveness of the development; provided that if the design
standards have been revised, such revised standards may govern.



§ 175-82. Final approval of major subdivisions and major site plans.



   A.   The zoning requirements granted on preliminary approval and all
other rights conferred upon the developer pursuant to § 175-81, whether
conditionally or otherwise, shall not be changed for a period of two years
after the date of final approval, provided that in the case of a major
subdivision, the rights conferred by this section shall expire if the plat
has not been duly recorded within the time period provided in § 175-20D of
this chapter. If the developer has followed the standards prescribed for
final approval and, in the case of a subdivision, has duly recorded the plat
as required in § 175-20D of this chapter, the Planning Board may extend such
period of protection for extensions of one year but not to exceed three
extensions. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this act, the granting of
final approval terminates the time period of preliminary approval pursuant to
§ 175-81 of this chapter for the section granted final approval.



   B.   In the case of a subdivision or site plan for a planned unit
development or planned unit residential development of 50 acres or more or
conventional subdivision or site plan for 150 acres or more, the Planning
Board may grant the rights referred to in Subsection A of this section for
such period of time, longer than two years, as shall be determined by the
Planning Board to be reasonable, taking into consideration the number of
dwelling units and nonresidential floor areas permissible under final
approval; economic conditions; and the comprehensiveness of the development.
The developer may apply for thereafter and the Planning Board may thereafter
grant an extension of final approval for such additional period of time as
shall be determined by the Planning Board to be reasonable, taking into
consideration the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor areas
permissible under final approval; the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor areas remaining to be developed; economic conditions;
and the comprehensiveness of the development.



[Amended 3-25-2002 by Ord. No. 12-2002]



§ 175-83. Approval of minor subdivisions.



   The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions, whether
conditional or otherwise, upon which minor subdivision approval was granted,
shall not be changed for a period of two years after the date of minor
subdivision approval, provided that the approved minor subdivision shall have
been duly recorded as provided in this section.



§ 175-84. Approval of minor site plan.



   The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions, whether
conditional or otherwise, upon which minor site plan approval was granted,
shall not be changed for a period of two years after the date of minor site
plan approval.



§ 175-85. Suspension of running period of approval.



   In the event that during the period of approval heretofore or hereafter
granted to an application for development the developer is barred or
prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the development
otherwise permitted under such approval by a legal action instituted by a
state agency, political subdivision or other party to protect the public
health and welfare or by a directive or order issued by any state agency,
political subdivision or court of competent jurisdiction to protect the
public health or welfare and the developer is otherwise ready, willing and
able to proceed with said development, the running of the period of approval
under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., or under any act repealed by said act, as
the case may be, shall be suspended for the period of time said legal action
is pending or such directive or order is in effect.



ARTICLE XII Design, Performance and Evaluation Standards



§ 175-86. General standards.



   A.   General. The design of any subdivision shall conform to the
principles of land subdivision as set forth in this chapter and the Master
Plan of the Town of Hammonton and will be such as will encourage good
development patterns within the Town of Hammonton and enhance the public
welfare. Proposed development shall also conform to the standards and
management programs of the New Jersey Pinelands Comprehensive Management Plan
as contained within this chapter. In accordance with good design practices,
extreme deviations from rectangular lot shapes and straight lot lines shall
not be allowed unless made necessary by special topographical conditions or
other special conditions acceptable to the approving authority. All
improvements shall be installed and connected with existing facilities or
installed in required locations to enable future connections with approved
systems or contemplated systems and shall be adequate to handle all present
and probable future development.



   B.   Whenever a development abuts or crosses a municipal boundary,
access to those lots within the town shall be from within the town as the
general rule. Wherever access to a development is required across land in an
adjoining community as the exception, the approving authority may require
documentation that such access is legally established and that the access
road is adequately improved.



   C.   No street shall have a name which will duplicate or so nearly
duplicate as to be confused with the names of existing streets or places
within the Town of Hammonton.



§ 175-87. Accessory buildings.



   A.   Accessory buildings as part of principal buildings. Any
accessory building attached to a principal building shall be considered part
of the principal building, and the total structure shall adhere to the yard
requirements for the principal building, regardless of the technique of
connecting the principal and accessory buildings. Accessory buildings not
attached to principal buildings, and within Downtown Districts, are accessory
structure building types as per § 175-160B(20). 



[Amended 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   B.   Distance between adjacent buildings. The minimum distance
between an accessory building and any other building(s) on the same lot shall
be as prescribed in Article XIII, except that no poultry or livestock shelter
shall be erected nearer than 50 feet to any dwelling on the same lot.



   C.   Height of accessory buildings. The height of accessory
buildings that do not contain dwelling  units shall be limited to 50% of the
maximum height of the principal building. The height of detached accessory
buildings in Downtown Districts shall  follow height restrictions for
accessory building types as per § 175-160B(20). 



[Amended 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   D.   Location. An accessory building may be erected in side and rear
yard areas only, and the required side and rear yards shall be ½ that
required for primary structures, except that in no case shall side or rear
yards for accessory buildings be less than six feet, except that if erected
on a corner lot, the accessory building shall be set back from the side
street to comply with the setback line applying to the principal building for
that side street. Additionally, except as otherwise specified for the Rural
Residential District in § 175-150, no poultry or livestock shelter shall be
erected nearer than 50 feet to any lot line. Seasonal stands are exempt from
front and yard provisions, provided that such seasonal stands occur as
accessory uses to a farm and are constructed as temporary six-foot moveable
structures. Accessory buildings  in Downtown Districts shall follow 
additional location specifications as per § 175-160B.(20). 



[Amended 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   E.   Private garages. No business, service or industry shall be
conducted on the ground floor within a private garage outside of Downtown
Districts, other than the storage of personal vehicles. 



[Amended 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



§ 175-88. Agricultural management.



   A.   It is the express finding and declaration of the Town Council
that agricultural activities serve the interest of the citizens of the town
by ensuring numerous social, economic and environmental benefits, and it is,
therefore, the express intention of this chapter to establish as the policy
of this town the protection of agricultural operations from nuisance action
where recognized methods and techniques of agricultural production are
applied.



   B.   The owner of land used for agricultural or horticultural
purposes or use who conducts agricultural activities in conformance with the
agricultural management practices set forth in this section and all relevant
federal or state statutes or rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto
and which does not pose a direct threat to public health and safety may:



      (1)   Produce agricultural and horticultural crops, trees and
forest products, livestock and poultry and other commodities as described in
the standard industrial classification for agricultural, forestry, fishing
and trapping.



      (2)   Package the agricultural output.



      (3)   Provide for the wholesale and retail marketing of the
agricultural output and related products, including the construction of
building and parking areas in conformance with the town's standards.



      (4)   Replenish soil nutrients in accord with acceptable
management practices.



      (5)   Control pests, predators and diseases of plants and
animals.



      (6)   Clear woodlands using open burning and other techniques,
install and maintain vegetative and terrain alterations and other physical
facilities for water and soil conservation and surface water control in
wetland areas.



      (7)   Conduct on-site disposal of organic agricultural waste.



   C.   The following standards shall apply to all agricultural uses in
the town:



      (1)   All agricultural activities and fish and wildlife
management activities, including the preparation of land and the planting,
nurturing and harvesting of crops, shall be carried out in accordance with
recommended management practices established for the particular agricultural
activity by the New Jersey Department of Agriculture, the Soil Conservation
Service and the New Jersey Agricultural Experimental Station at Rutgers
University.



      (2)   In agricultural production districts and special
agricultural production districts of Hammonton, a resource conservation plan
shall be prepared by the operator of every agricultural use or the
appropriate Soil Conservation District located in an area which has been
designated by any agency of federal, state or local government as having
substandard surface or groundwater. If prepared by the operator, such plan
shall be submitted to the Soil Conservation District for review. The resource
conservation plan shall be reviewed, updated and revised as necessary and
shall provide for the use of recommended management practices as found in the
following publications: 



[Amended 3-15-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]



         (a)   Erosion and runoff: Soil Conservation Service
Technical Guide.



         (b)   Animal waste: Soil Conservation Service Animal
Waste Management Field Manual.



         (c)   Fertilizers and pesticides: Rutgers University,
Cook College, Cooperative Extension Service Annual Recommendations.



      (3)   At such time as the State Agriculture Development
Committee is established pursuant to Section 4 of the Right to Farm Act (P.L.
1983, c. 31), N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq., and any amendments or revisions
thereto, and at such time as said Committee develops and recommends the
program of Agricultural Management Practices pursuant to Section 5 of the
aforesaid Right to Farm Act, said Agricultural Management Practices, as
developed and recommended by said Committee, shall be the standards to be
applied to all agricultural uses in the town, insofar as applicable, to the
extent that the standards set forth in Subsections C(1) and (2) above are
superseded thereby and to the extent that these practices are consistent with
the Pinelands Protection Act and CMP.



   D.   The town, in recognition that agricultural activities, when
reasonable and necessary, produce a benefit to the neighborhood, the
community and society in general by the preservation of open space, the
beauty of the countryside and clean air and by the preservation and
continuance of agricultural operations in the Town of Hammonton, New Jersey,
as a source of agricultural products and values for this and future
generations, creates the following presumptions:



      (1)   In all relevant actions filed subsequent to the
effective date of this chapter, there shall exist a rebuttable presumption
that no agricultural operation, activity or structure, which conforms to the
standards set forth in Subsection C of this section and all relevant federal
or state statutes or rules or regulations adopted pursuant thereto and which
does not pose a direct threat to public health and safety shall constitute a
public or private nuisance, nor shall any such operation, activity or
structure be deemed to otherwise invade or interfere with the use and
enjoyment of any other land or property.



      (2)   In all relevant actions filed subsequent to the
effective date of this chapter, there shall exist an irrebuttable presumption
that no agricultural operation, activity or structure which is conducted or
located within a municipally approved program and which conforms to the
agricultural standards set forth in Subsection C of this section and all
relevant federal or state statutes or rules and regulations adopted pursuant
thereto and which does not pose a direct threat to public health and safety
shall constitute a public or private nuisance, nor shall any such operation,
activity or structure be deemed to otherwise invade or interfere with the use
and enjoyment of any other land or property.



   E.   As a statement of policy, it is the intent of this chapter to
achieve the following objectives with respect to the continuance of
agricultural activities in the town:



      (1)   Farmland within the town's Agricultural Production
District and Special Agricultural Production District shall be maintained and
protected for open space or farming purposes to the maximum extent
practicable. 



[Amended 3-15-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]



      (2)   Continued, renewed or new farming is encouraged
throughout the town and particularly within agricultural production areas.



      (3)   Conflicts between agriculture and other uses should be
minimized. In particular, agriculture uses within the town's Agricultural
Production District and Special Agricultural Production District shall be
exempt from all municipal ordinances and regulations which inhibit efficient
crop production, including but not limited to ordinances and regulations
imposing time limits on operations, dust limits and odor restrictions, except
those ordinances and regulations which are strictly necessary for the
maintenance of public health. 



[Amended 3-15-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]



§ 175-89. Air quality.  [Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



   A.   All development shall adhere to the relevant air quality
standards of N.J.A.C. 7:27 et seq. Adherence to the standards of this section
shall be determined by means of an air quality simulation model approved by
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to N.J.A.C.
7:27-18.3. 



[Amended 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



   B.   Applications for the following developments shall ensure that
all state ambient air quality standards in N.J.A.C. 7:27 et seq. for carbon
monoxide shall not be exceeded at places of maximum concentration and at
sensitive receptors:



      (1)   Residential development of 50 or more units and any
other development involving more than 100 parking spaces located in an RR,
R-1, R-2, R-3, H-B, MI, REC, or any Downtown or Gateway District. [Amended
12-14-1998 by Ord. No. 30-1998; 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



      (2)   Residential development of 100 or more units and any
other development involving more than 300 parking spaces located in a PA, FA,
AP or AP/CLI District.



§ 175-90. Blocks.



   A.   Block length and width or acreage within bounding roads shall
be such as to accommodate the size of lot required in the area by the Zoning
Ordinance and to provide for convenient access, circulation control and
safety of street traffic, but in no case shall be less than 400 feet nor more
than 1,200 feet in length at the center lines.



   B.   Pedestrian crosswalks may be required in locations deemed
necessary by the Planning Board in order to provide access to schools,
recreation areas, shopping facilities, transportation facilities, churches
and other community facilities. Such walkways shall be 10 feet wide and shall
provide a visual connection from street to street.



   C.   For commercial, group housing or industrial use, block size
shall be sufficient to meet all area and yard requirements for such use.



§ 175-91. Buffer areas; motor vehicle screening and storage.  [Amended
10-12-1987 by Ord. No. 13-1987]



   A.   Buffer areas are required along lot and street lines of all
nonresidential lots where said property lines or the center line of adjacent
streets abut residential uses or residential zoning district lines and other
locations as specified in Article XIII. Each permitted use shall provide and
maintain attractively landscaped grounds and suitable screening in order to
safeguard the character of adjacent districts. The width of the buffer area
for each particular zoning district shall be as prescribed in Article XIII
and may be coexistent with the rear yard only if approved by the Planning
Board. Buffer areas shall be measured horizontally and be either
perpendicular to straight lot and street lines or radial to curved lot and
street lines. Buffer areas shall be maintained and kept clear of all debris,
rubbish, weeds and tall grass. No above-surface structure or activity,
stormwater drainage facility, the storage of materials or parking of vehicles
shall be permitted in the buffer area, and all buffer areas shall be planted
and maintained with grass or ground cover, together with a dense screen of
trees, shrubs or other plant materials, meeting the following requirements:



      (1)   Tree species, when used in screen planting, shall be at
least six feet in height when planted and shall be of such density that all
the glare of automobile headlights emitted from the premises is obscured
through the full course of the year. The plant material shall be of a species
native to the area, as listed in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.23, and shall be of nursery
stock and shall be free of insects and diseases. (See § 175-136.)



      (2)   Landscaped berms planted with native tree and shrub
species which, when mature, will present a dense visual screen are
recommended for designated buffer areas.



      (3)   Buffer areas shall be permanently maintained, and plant
material which does not live shall be replaced within one year or one growing
season.



      (4)   The screen planting shall be so placed that at maturity
the plant material will be no closer than three feet from any street or
property line.



      (5)   The buffer area shall not be broken unless specifically
approved by the Planning Board.



   B.   Motor vehicle screening and storage. No more than 10
automobiles, trucks or other motor vehicles, whether or not they are in
operating condition, shall be stored on any lot unless such motor vehicles
are adequately screened from adjacent residential uses and scenic corridors.
All vehicles not in operating condition shall be stored only if the gasoline
tanks of such vehicles are drained. This subsection shall not apply to
vehicles which are in operating condition or which are maintained for
agricultural purposes. 



[Added 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



§ 175-92. Building design.



   A.   Within any residential district, no building with a permitted
professional office or other home occupation shall be constructed or altered
so as to be inharmonious with the residential character of the adjacent
residential areas.  See § 175-160 for additional requirements in DT-1,
DT-2, DT-3, DT-4, GW-1, GW-2, and GW-3.



[Amended 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   B.   The Town Council hereby finds that uniformity in the exterior
design and appearance of dwellings erected in the same residential
neighborhoods tends to adversely affect the desirability of the immediate and
neighboring areas for residential purposes and impairs existing residential
property in such areas; tends to impair the value of both improved and
unimproved real property in such areas; and tends to deprive the municipality
of tax revenue and destroys a proper balance between the taxable value of
real property in such areas and the cost of municipal service provided
therefor. It the purpose of this section to prevent these and other harmful
effects of uniformity in design and appearance of dwellings erected in any
housing development in the same residential neighborhood and, thus, to
promote and protect the general welfare of the community.



      (1)   Except as provided in this chapter, not more than one
construction permit shall hereafter be issued for any dwelling to be erected
in a housing development consisting of two or more houses if it is
substantially alike in exterior design and appearance with any neighboring
dwelling situated on the same or opposite sides of the street within 150 feet
of a dwelling then in existence or for which a construction permit has been
issued or is pending. The distance herein specified shall be construed to
mean the distance between the street property lines of the respective
properties.



      (2)   Houses within such specified distance from each other
shall be considered uniform in exterior design and appearance if they have
any one of the following characteristics:



         (a)   The same basic dimensions and floor plans are used
without substantial differentiation of one or more exterior elevations.



         (b)   The height and design of the roofs are without
substantial change in design and appearance.



         (c)   The size and type of windows and doors in the
front elevation are without substantial differentiation.



      (3)   In addition, there shall be no fewer than two separate
basic house designs in every housing development consisting of nine to 15
houses; no fewer than five basic house designs in every housing development
consisting of 16 to 50 houses; no fewer than six basic house designs in every
housing development consisting of 51 to 77 houses; and no fewer than eight
basic house designs in every housing development consisting of 78 or more
houses.



      (4)   To ensure conformity with the provisions of this
chapter, no construction permit shall hereafter be issued for more than one
dwelling unit in any housing development until the builder shall post or
cause to be posted on the map of the subdivision on file with the
Construction Official the type and model of each house for which a
construction permit has been or is being issued.



      (5)   The provisions, requirements and standards heretofore
set forth shall not be considered met where there is an attempt to make minor
changes or deviations from building plans and location surveys, which changes
show an obvious intent to circumvent the purpose of this section.



      (6)   Underground utilities. The location, size and depth of
all underground utilities shall comply with all applicable state statutes and
shall require the approval of the Planning Board and the Town Engineer.



§ 175-93. Outdoor furnishings in Downtown Districts.



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011] 18



   A.   Umbrella requirements.



      (1)   Umbrellas for the purpose of shielding patrons from
weather and such elements shall be affixed to outdoor tables and weighted
base in a manner which prevents the umbrellas and/or tables and/or chairs
from tipping.  Head clearance of 80 inches is required over any portion of a
pedestrian right of way or aisle way for sidewalk café or building entrances
or egresses. Signage is permitted on removable umbrellas. Signage applied to
an umbrella by the umbrella manufacturer or a retail vendor, such as the
business name, an associated corporate name, or a product name are exempt
from a sign permit. The total signage on an awning or umbrella shall not
exceed 20% of the area of the umbrella.



   B.   Material of tables, chairs, and umbrellas.



      (1)   Tables and chairs shall be of wood or metal and shall be
treated with a weather resistant finish. Picnic-style tables are prohibited.



      (2)   Umbrella fabric shall be of a material suitable for
outdoor use, and must be cloth or canvas-type. No plastic fabrics,
plastic/vinyl-laminated fabrics, or any type of rigid materials are permitted
for use as umbrellas within an outdoor seating area.



   C.   Removal of outdoor furniture during inclement weather.



      (1)   Outdoor café furniture shall be secured to ensure that
they can withstand the effects of normal wind load. In the event of heavy or
gust winds, appropriate measures must be taken to secure any object subject
to such conditions. In the event of below freezing temperatures, ice, or
snow, sidewalks must be cleared of outdoor café dining furniture.



   D.   The elements set forth in § 175-93 shall provide for a clear
pedestrian way in accordance with current ADA standards.



§ 175-94. Corner lots.



   A.   Corner lots for residential use shall have additional width in
order to accommodate the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of
Hammonton for front yard setbacks on both streets.



   B.   Corner lots in Downtown Districts and Gateway Districts shall
adhere to setback specifications from side roads as shown under each building
type's specifications as c.6.D.



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



§ 175-95. Curbs.



   All curbs, where required, shall be not less than 18 inches deep and
six inches in width at the top and eight inches in width at the bottom and
shall have a compressive strength of 3,000 pounds per square inch after 28
days and shall be Class B concrete in accordance with New Jersey State
Highway Specifications. The minimum length of block shall be 10 feet, with a
preformed bituminous expansion joint, filled ½ inch thick, installed every
20 feet. Gutters, where required, shall be constructed of minimum concrete
mixture conforming to the above specifications, with joints and finish the
same, and shall be a minimum of two feet in width and six inches in
thickness. The engineer shall reject any concrete surface which has been
defaced, marred or improperly finished. There shall be provided within all
applications curbs designed to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer so as to
permit ingress and egress by handicapped persons in at least one location
within each block of the subdivision in question.



§ 175-96.  Easements.



   A.   Public use and service areas.



      (1)   Easements along side or rear property lines or elsewhere
for utility installation and maintenance or for access to a public use area
or facility may be required. Such easements shall be at least 25 feet wide
and shall be located in consultation with the companies or municipal
departments concerned. All such easements shall be approved by the Board.



      (2)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse,
drainage way, channel or street, there shall be provided a stormwater
easement or drainage right-of-way, conforming substantially to the lines of
such watercourse and such further width or construction, or both, as will be
adequate for the purpose and shall conform to comprehensive plans for these
facilities in the town, if such exists or should hereafter be adopted.



      (3)   Natural features such as trees, brooks, hilltops and
views shall be preserved whenever possible in designing any subdivision
containing such features.



   B.   Shared parking.  Owners or lessees of land uses that exhibit
off-setting parking demand patterns may reduce the total amount of parking
that they are required to provide if they demonstrate at the time of site
plan review that the total amount of parking being provided for the combined
uses will be available.



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



      (1)   In calculating the total amount of parking available,
applications shall submit a shared parking analysis report using procedures
originally proposed in the report Shared Parking published by the Urban Land
Institute in cooperation with the Institute of Traffic Engineers.  Revised
parking accumulation information published in the report Parking Generation -
3rd Edition, published by the Institute of Traffic Engineers, or later
edition, shall be employed as appropriate.



      (2)   An applicant who seeks to employ a shared parking
approach must:



         (a)   Demonstrate that the shared parking is either 
under the control of the applicant entity or document that the applicant has
entered into a binding agreement authorizing the shared parking arrangement
for a term of not less than three years from the date of final approval of
the development application;



         (b)   Provide the shared parking on the same block as
the parcel to be developed or a contiguous block unless otherwise approved;
and



         (c)   Provide clear informational signage directing
vehicles to the associated parking area(s).



      (3)   Any applicant for development or land-use change in one
of the Downtown or Gateway Districts shall submit an appropriate parking
analysis report as part of a complete development application.



         (a)   If the development requires review by the Planning
Board, the Planning Board shall analyze the report findings and establish
requirements as part of any approval the Board elects to grant.



         (b)   Developments not requiring planning board review,
including changes in use, shall be reviewed administratively by the zoning
officer to determine parking requirements.



         (c)   In cases which an applicant relies upon shared
parking or arranged off-site parking, the applicant shall be required to file
a report every two years with the zoning officer documenting that it is
continuing to satisfy its parking requirement.  Failure to maintain a shared
parking arrangement in conformity with subparagraph 175-96.B.3 may constitute
a violation of the original approval.



         (d)   When an existing property is being changed to
create a more intensive use relative to parking, but will not add any
building space, the plan may be reviewed administratively provided that no
other conditions requiring site plan review  apply.



§ 175-97.  Energy conservation.



   The Planning Board shall, when reviewing all major development
applications, consider energy conservation techniques. Such techniques shall
include, but not be limited to, the orientation of streets and structures to
gain the best solar advantage, the use of clustering, the provision of bike
paths and public transportation amenities such as bus shelters and the
incorporation of active and passive solar power and designs.



§ 175-98. Fences and walls.



   All fences and walls hereinafter constructed shall comply with the
provisions of Chapter 94, Fences and Barriers, of the Code of the Town of
Hammonton.



§ 175-99. Environmental impact statement.  [Amended 2-27-1995 by Ord. No.
2-1995]



   A.   Purpose. The Town of Hammonton has, as one of its governing
body's overall policies, the promotion of the environment. This policy will
foster the health, safety and welfare in the town and encourage all
development to advance with this policy as a criteria to be met.



   B.   Environmental, impact statement. An environmental impact
statement shall include the following information:



      (1)   Identification.



         (a)   The application number.



         (b)   The name of the development.



         (c)   The block and lot numbers.



         (d)   The name, address and telephone number of the
applicant and all shareholders.



         (e)   The name, address and telephone number of all
property owners.



         (f)   The name, address and telephone number of all
agents, lawyers, consultants, etc.



         (g)   The type of development.



         (h)   A list of all licenses, permits and other
approvals required by law.



         (i)   An indication of the area of the site, the area to
be developed and the area to be covered by structures.



         (j)   The method and schedule of construction.



         (k)   The location of the proposed project, including a
location map.



      (2)   Existing conditions.



         (a)   Describe the present condition of the site in
terms of the following (include maps of each item and, if requested,
photographs):



            [1]   Vegetation.



               [a]   Trees greater than 20 inches in
diameter must be individually located.



               [b]   A verbal description summarizing the
general locations of trees greater than 10 inches in diameter shall be given.



               [c]   List dominant vegetation on the site
and explain how the list was compiled.



            [2]   Soils.



               [a]   In the description, include
suitability and limitations.



               [b]   Provide soil-boring logs from both
topographically low and topographically high areas as well as from potential
sites for retention/detention basins.



               [c]   Indicate the date of soil boring.



               [d]   Determine depth to seasonal high-water
table and criteria used to determine that depth.



            [3]   Wetlands, including streams, ponds, lakes,
drainage basins and other bodies of water.



            [4]   Water quality.



               [a]   Using any available data, describe the
quality of groundwater and any surface water.



               [b]   Provide groundwater studies pertaining
to the site.



               [c]   Establish the relationship of the site
to area watersheds.



            [5]   Water supply.



               [a]   Is municipal water available at the
site?



               [b]   What is the proposed source of the
water supply?



               [c]   What are the project's daily and peak
demands for water?



               [d]   List any on-site wells, including
capacity and depth, if possible.



               [e]   Provide information showing that
adequate potable water is available. Include certifications.



            [6]   Sewage.



               [a]   Is the site currently sewered?



               [b]   If not, can the site be serviced by
the municipal sanitary sewer system?



               [c]   If not, how will sewage be handled?



            [7]   Wildlife.



               [a]   List predominate wildlife on the site
and explain how the list was compiled.



               [b]   List aquatic organisms, if any, and
explain how the list was compiled.



            [8]   Structures, roads and other cultural
features.



            [9]   Current population density.



            [10]   Zoning and land use within a
one-fourth-mile radius.



            [11]   Noise levels.



            [12]   Traffic conditions. Verbal description of
traffic passing the site, discussion of origin and route of traffic to the
site and destination and route of traffic leaving the site.



            [13]   Air quality.



         (b)   Submit an ecological inventory of the site,
performed by a qualified consultant (needed only for sites greater than 50
acres).



         (c)   Complete a cultural resource survey.



         (d)   List, locate on a site map and describe any
environmentally sensitive areas, including the following:



            [1]   Freshwater marshes, streams or other
wetlands.



            [2]   Flood-prone areas.



            [3]   Aquifer recharge areas.



            [4]   Woodland and wildlife.



            [5]   Agricultural land.



            [6]   Historical sites.



            [7]   Federal or state lands.



         (e)   List, locate on an appropriate map and describe
any potential environmental hazards, including the following:



            [1]   Any point or nonpoint pollution sources on
or near the site.



            [2]   Any landfills or former landfills on or near
the site. Address their effects or potential effects on water quality.



            [3]   Any hazardous, toxic, dangerous substances
currently used, stored or deposited on the site.



      (3)   During and after development.



         (a)   Describe the project, specifying what is to be
done during construction and subsequently, during the operation of the
facility.



         (b)   Describe any development proposed for flood hazard
areas.



         (c)   What will be the project's effect on:



            [1]   Topography of the site. Describe grading for
aesthetics, construction and drainage.



            [2]   Vegetation. Include any inventory of trees
to be lost, noting size and type. Trees greater than 20 inches in diameter
must be individually located.



            [3]   Surface waters. Include on-site and off-site
drainage plans, drainage control devices, disposition of stormwater and slope
stability.



            [4]   Groundwater quality and quantity.



            [5]   Wildlife, including patterns of animal
behavior.



            [6]   Existing structures and other man-made
resources.



            [7]   Population density.



            [8]   Nearby land use.



            [9]   Aesthetics. Include building and landscape
design.



            [10]   Noise levels. Include location and decibel
rating for noise generation on site during construction and during intended
use.



            [11]   Traffic conditions. Include a verbal
description of traffic passing the site, discussion of origin and route of
traffic to the site and destination and route of traffic leaving the site.



            [12]   Air quality (commercial or industrial
development only). List sources and types of pollution.



            [13]   Environmental hazards. Include what
hazardous materials will be present during and after construction.



            [14]   Recreational uses.



            [15]   Waste disposal.



            [16]   Energy use.



            [17]   Municipal services. Include police, fire,
roads, schools, trash collection, etc., or a fiscal impact statement.



            [18]   Pattern of community and regional growth.



            [19]   Displacement of viable farms.



         (d)   List adverse impacts which cannot be avoided.



         (e)   Describe methods to avoid or minimize adverse
environmental impacts associated with the project.



         (f)   Discuss alternatives to the proposed project
consistent with zoning on the site, and including the alternative of no
additional development of the site.



   C.   Major subdivision or site plan requirement.



      (1)   Every major subdivision or major site plan which is
proposed for the purpose of any kind of development, present or future,
requires an environmental impact statement.



      (2)   The environmental impact statement shall accompany the
preliminary plat in all cases.



      (3)   All items are to receive an answer or comments. The
environmental impact statement is to be completed. All answers or statements
are to be submitted.



   D.   Waiver of certain requirements. The applicant may, by written
request, petition for a reduction in the environmental impact statement. The
Environmental Commission may agree to a modified environmental impact
statement. In such cases, the Environmental Commission shall designate the
items to be included. All of the designated items are to receive an answer or
comments. All answers or statements are to be substantiated.



   E.   Pesticide residue.



[Added 8-26-2002 by Ord. No. 34-2002]



      (1)   Soil quality.



         (a)   All properties subject to development which are
not exempt shall comply with the residential soil cleanup criteria
established by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.



         (b)   The developer shall be required to produce
evidence that soils have been properly sampled and tests for pesticide
residue have been conducted following the guidelines established by the
Historic Pesticide Contamination Tack Force.



         (c)   In the event the soil samples are determined to
contain contaminates in excess of the residential soil cleanup criteria, the
developer is required to enter into a memorandum of agreement with the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and submit to the Town of
Hammonton, the Planning Board and the Zoning Board a "no further action
letter" issued by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection prior
to obtaining final approval.



      (2)   Exemptions. Property shall be deemed exempt from the
requirements of this section if the developer can produce clear and
convincing evidence that the property subject to development was never used
for agriculture purposes.



      (3)   Condition of final approval. A final approval shall not
be issued unless and until the applicant produces a memorandum of agreement
with the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and/or receives a
"no further action letter," which shall be filed with the Town of Hammonton.



§ 175-100. Fire management.



   A.   No development shall be carried out in vegetated areas of the
town which are classified as a moderate, high or extreme hazard as defined in
Subsection B below unless such development complies with the following
standards:



      (1)   All proposed development, or units or sections thereof,
of 25 dwelling units or more will have two access ways of a width and surface
composition sufficient to accommodate and support fire-fighting equipment.



      (2)   All dead-end roads will terminate in a manner which
provides safe and efficient entry and exit for fire equipment.



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



      (3)   The rights-of-way of all roads will be maintained so
that they provide an effective firebreak.



      (4)   A fire-hazard fuel break is provided around structures
proposed for human use by the selective removal of thinning of trees, bushes,
shrubs and ground cover as follows:



         (a)   In moderate fire-hazard areas, a fuel break of 30
feet measured outward from the structure in which:



            [1]   Shrubs, under story trees and bushes and
ground cover are to be selectively removed, mowed or pruned on an annual
basis.



            [2]   All dead plant material is removed.



         (b)   In high fire-hazard areas, a fuel break of 75 feet
measured outward from the structure in which:



            [1]   Shrubs, under story trees and bushes and
ground cover are to be selectively removed, mowed or pruned and maintained on
an annual basis.



            [2]   All dead plant material is removed.



         (c)   In extreme high-hazard areas, a fuel break of 100
feet measured outward from the structure in which:



            [1]   Shrubs, under story trees and bushes and
ground cover are to be selectively removed, mowed or pruned and maintained on
an annual basis.



            [2]   No pine tree (Pinus spp.) is closer than 25
feet to another pine tree.



            [3]   All dead plant material is removed.



      (5)   All residential developments of 100 dwelling units or
more in high or extreme high hazard areas will have a two-hundred-foot
perimeter fuel break between all structures and the forest in which:



         (a)   Shrubs, under story trees and bushes and ground
cover are selectively removed, mowed or pruned and maintained on an annual
basis.



         (b)   All dead plant material is removed.



         (c)   Roads, rights-of-way, wetlands and waste disposal
sites shall be used as fire breaks to the maximum extent practical.



         (d)   There is a specific program for maintenance.



      (6)   All structures will meet the following specifications:



         (a)   Roofs and exteriors will be constructed of
fire-resistant materials such as asphalt rag-felt roofing, tile, slate,
asbestos cement shingles, sheet iron, aluminum or brick.
Fire-retardant-treated wood shingles or shake type roofs are prohibited in
high or extreme fire hazard area.



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



         (b)   All projections such as balconies, decks and roof
gables shall be constructed of fire-resistant materials or materials treated
with fire-retardant chemicals.



         (c)   Any openings in the roof, attic and the floor
shall be screened.



         (d)   Chimneys and stovepipes which are designed to burn
solid or liquid fuels shall be equipped with screens over the outlets.



         (e)   Flat roofs are prohibited in areas where
vegetation is higher than the roof.



   B.   The following classifications of fire hazards shall be defined
as:



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989; 6-12-1989 by Ord. No. 19-1989]



   Hazard   Vegetation Types



   Low   Atlantic White Cedar and Hardwood Swamps



   Moderate   Nonpine barrens forest Prescribed burned areas



   High   Pine barrens forest, including mature forms of pine, pine-oak
or oak-pine



   Extreme   Immature or dwarf forms of pine-oak or oak pine; all
classes of pine-scrub oak and pine-lowland



§ 175-101. Fire hydrants.



   The type of fire hydrant and the layout of the system shall be approved
by the Board of Water Commissioners and the Town Engineer. In residential
subdivisions, fire hydrants shall be located so that the distance between
proposed hydrants shall not exceed 1,000 feet as measured along the curbline.
In commercial and industrial subdivisions, standards of the appropriate fire
insurance rating association shall apply.



§ 175-102. Fish and wildlife.



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



   No development within the town shall be carried out unless it is
designed to avoid irreversible adverse impacts on habitats that are critical
to the survival of any local populations of those threatened or endangered
animal species designated by the Department of Environmental Protection
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 23:2A-1 et seq. All development or other authorized
activity shall be carried out in a manner which avoids disturbance of fish
and wildlife habitats that are essential to the continued nesting, resting,
breeding and feeding of significant populations of fish and wildlife within
the town.



§ 175-103. Floodplain regulations.



   A.   Flood control. The land subject to flooding and land deemed by
the Planning Board to be uninhabitable shall not be platted for residential
construction or occupancy, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 58:16A-50 et seq., nor
for such other uses as may increase danger to health, life or property or
aggravate the flood hazard. However, such land within the plat may be set
aside for such uses as will not be endangered by periodic or occasional
inundation or will not produce unsatisfactory living conditions.



   B.   The purposes of the following floodplain regulations are to
implement the land use rules and regulations promulgated by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection for floodways and the flood fringe
portion of a flood hazard area; to discourage construction and regrading in
flood hazard areas; to prevent encroachments into flood hazard areas which
would obstruct or constrict the area through which water must pass; and to
prevent pollution of watercourses during low- or high-water periods by
preventing the placing or storing of unsanitary or dangerous substances in
the flood hazard area.



      (1)   A flood hazard design elevation shall be determined on
an individual basis based upon stream encroachment line data from the
Division of Water Resources or, in the absence of that data, the flood
elevation based on a one-hundred-year storm frequency. One or the other shall
be delineated on the plat. In addition, the Planning Board Engineer may, upon
receipt of the application and with the consent of the landowner and at the
landowner's expense, determine the precise location of a floodway and flood
fringe area by close inspection, field survey or other appropriate method and
cause, if requested, the same to be marked on the ground and on the plat, and
notify the owner, the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection,
Division of Water Resources and the approving authority. The assistance of
the United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service,
United States Corps of Engineers and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Division of Water Resources, may be sought to aid
in delineating the flood hazard design elevation, except that where state or
federal agencies shall subsequently publish any reports which delineate the
flood hazard design elevation of a watercourse, said report shall be the
officially delineated flood hazard area as if said report were published in
this chapter.



      (2)   Any lot containing a floodway portion of a drainage
course and on which it is proposed to regrade and/or construct an improvement
shall not be permitted unless the proposed use is permitted by this chapter,
plat approval has been granted and a floodway permit has been issued by the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, Division of Water
Resources, where required by state regulations.



      (3)   Any lot containing a flood fringe portion of the flood
hazard area and on which it is proposed to regrade and/or construct an
improvement shall not be permitted unless the proposed use is permitted by
this chapter and until plat approval has been granted.



      (4)   Any structure permitted shall be firmly anchored to
prevent the structure from floating away and thus threatening life and
property.



      (5)   Any structure permitted shall be constructed and placed
on the lot so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of water.



      (6)   Structures and fill, if approved, shall be constructed
on the lot so as to offer minimum obstruction to the raising of the flood
hazard level; no fill material may be brought onto the floodplain. All fill
(if approved) must come from the floodplain on the lot. Fill shall consist of
soil or rock materials only. Sanitary landfill will not be permitted.



      (7)   No on-site sewage disposal system or septic systems
shall be built within the floodplain.



      (8)   The procedure for reviewing any proposed regrading
and/or construction shall be the same as set forth for plat review. No
application shall be approved and no permit granted until all zoning
violations have either been corrected or a variance granted.



      (9)   The applicant shall submit maps, reports and other
appropriate documents permitting the approving authority to evaluate whether
the proposal has an inherent low flood damage potential; does not obstruct
flood flows or increase flood heights and/or velocities; does not affect
adversely the water-carrying capacity of any delineated floodway and/or
channel; does not increase local runoff and erosion; does not unduly stress
the natural environment of the floodplain or degrade the quality of surface
water or the quality and quantity of ground waters; does not require channel
modification or relocation; does not require fill or the erection of
structures; and does not include the storage of equipment and materials.



      (10)   The applicant shall demonstrate compliance with §
175-140, Wetlands, of this chapter.



      (11)   All applications for development in the Town of
Hammonton shall conform to the provisions of Chapter 147 of the Code of
Ordinances of the Town of Hammonton entitled "Flood Hazard Areas."



[Added 7-25-1988 by Ord. No. 16-1988]



§ 175-104. Forestry.



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989; 6-12-1989 by Ord. No. 19-1989;
7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997; 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 005-2013]



   A.   Permit required. No forestry shall be carried out by any person
unless a permit for such an activity has been issued by the Town Zoning
Officer. Notwithstanding this requirement, no such permits shall be required
for the following forestry activities:



      (1)   Normal and customary forestry practices on residentially
improved parcels of land that are five acres or less in size;



      (2)   Tree harvesting, provided that no more than one cord of
wood per five acres of land is harvested in any one year and that no more
than five cords of wood are harvested from the entire parcel in any one year;



      (3)   Tree planting, provided that the area to be planted does
not exceed five acres in any one year, no soil disturbance occurs other than
that caused by the planting activity and no trees other than those authorized
by N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.25 are to be planted;



      (4)   Forest stand improvement designed to selectively thin
trees and brush, provided that no clearing or soil disturbance occurs and
that the total land area on the parcel in which the activity occurs does not
exceed five acres in any one year; and



      (5)   Prescribed burning and the clearing and maintaining of
fire breaks.



   B.   Forestry application requirements. The information in
Subsection B(1) or (2) below shall be submitted to the Town Zoning Officer
prior to the issuance of any forestry permit:



      (1)   For forestry activities on a parcel of land enrolled in
the New Jersey Forest Stewardship Program, a copy of the approved New Jersey
Forest Stewardship Plan. This document shall serve as evidence of the
completion of an application with the Pinelands Commission as well as
evidence that the activities are consistent with the standards of the
Pinelands Comprehensive Management Plan. No certificate of filing from the
Pinelands Commission shall be required.



      (2)   For all other forestry applications:



         (a)   The applicant's name and address and interest in
the subject parcel;



         (b)    The owner's name and address, if different from
the applicant's, and the owner's signed consent to the filing of the
application;



         (c)   The description, including block and lot
designation and street address, if any, of the subject parcel;



         (d)   A description of all existing uses of the subject
parcel;



         (e)   A brief written statement generally describing the
proposed forestry operation;



         (f)   A USGS Quadrangle map, or copy thereof, and a copy
of the municipal tax map sheet on which the boundaries of the subject parcel,
the Pinelands management area designation and the municipal zoning
designation are shown;



         (g)   A forestry management plan that includes, as
appropriate:



            [1]   A cover page for the plan containing:



               [a]   The name, mailing address and
telephone number of the owner of the subject parcel;



               [b]   The municipality and county in which
the subject parcel is located;



               [c]   The block and lot designation and
street address, if any, of the subject parcel;



               [d]   The name and address of the forester
who prepared the plan, if not prepared by the owner of the subject parcel; and



               [e]   The date the plan was prepared,
subsequent revision dates and the period of time the plan is intended to
cover;



            [2]   A clear and concise statement of the owner's
objectives for undertaking the proposed forestry activities, including a
description of the short- (five years) and long-term (20 years) objectives
for all proposed silvicultural techniques that will be used to manage the
parcel;



            [3]   A description of the existing conditions of
the subject parcel and of each forest stand in which a proposed activity,
prescription or practice will occur. These stand descriptions shall include
photographs of each stand taken at eye level showing the location of all
Pinelands Native Forest Types, as identified at N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.43, and shall
be keyed to an activity map that shall include, as appropriate, the following
information:



               [a]   The number of acres;



               [b]   The general condition and quality of
each stand;



               [c]   The overall site quality, relative to
the management goals and objectives identified in Subsection (2)(g)[2] above;



               [d]   An inventory and map of Pinelands
Native Forest Types with Native Forest Types broken into "stands," including
information on type, size and volume by species;



               [e]   The age of representative trees;



               [f]   The species composition, including
over story, under story, ground layer structure and composition;



               [g]   The stand cohort composition;



               [h]   The percent cover;



               [i]   The basal area;



               [j]   The structure, including age classes,
diameter breast height (DBH) classes and crown classes;



               [k]   The condition and species composition
of advanced regeneration when applicable;



               [l]   A stocking table showing the stocking
levels, growth rates and volume;



               [m]   Projections of intended future stand
characteristics at 10-, 20-, and 40-year intervals;



               [n]    A description of the forestry
activities, silvicultural prescriptions, management activities and practices
proposed during the permit period and the acreage proposed for each activity.
These may include, but are not necessarily limited to, a description of:



                  [i]   Stand improvement practices;



                  [ii]   Site preparation practices;



                  [iii]   Harvesting practices;



                  [iv]   Regeneration and reforestation
practices;



                  [v]   Improvements, including road
construction, stream crossings, landings, loading areas and skid trails;



                  [vi]   Herbicide treatments;



                  [vii]   Silvicultural treatment
alternatives;



                  [viii]   If planting will occur to
accomplish reforestation, the application shall include seed sources records,
if such records are available;



                  [ix]   Implementation instructions; and



                  [x]   Measures that will be taken to
prevent the potential spread of exotic plant species or Phragmites into
wetlands; and



               [o]   A description, if appropriate, of the
forest products to be harvested, including volume expressed in cords and
board feet; diameter breast height (DBH) classes and average diameter; age;
heights; and number of trees per acre; and



            [4]   A map of the entire parcel which includes
the following:



               [a]   The owner's name, address and the date
the map was prepared;



               [b]   An arrow designating the north
direction;



               [c]   A scale which is not smaller than one
inch equals 2,000 feet or larger than one inch equals 400 feet;



               [d]   The location of all property lines;



               [e]   A delineation of the physical features
such as roads, streams and structures;



               [f]   The identification of soil types (a
separate map may be used for this purpose);



               [g]   A map inset showing the location of
the parcel in relation to the local area;



               [h]   Clear location of the area and acreage
in which each proposed activity, prescription or practice will occur. If
shown on other than the property map, the map or maps shall note the scale,
which shall not be smaller than one inch equals 2,000 feet or larger than one
inch equals 400 feet, and shall be appropriately keyed to the property map;
and



               [i]   A legend defining the symbols
appearing on the map.



         (h)   A letter from the Office of Natural Lands
Management identifying any threatened or endangered plants or animals
reported on or in the immediate vicinity of the parcel and a detailed
description by the applicant of the measures proposed to meet the standards
set forth in §§ 175-102 and 175-136A;



         (i)   A cultural resource survey documenting cultural
resources on those portions of the parcel where ground disturbance due to
site preparation or road construction will occur and a detailed description
of the measures proposed by the applicant to treat those cultural resources
in accordance with § 175-107;



         (j)   A statement identifying the type, location and
frequency of any proposed herbicide treatments and how such treatments will
comply with the standards set forth in Subsection C(9)(b) below;



         (k)   A statement identifying the specific steps to be
taken to ensure that trees or areas to be harvested are properly identified
so as to ensure that only those trees intended for harvesting are harvested;



         (l)    Written comments from the New Jersey State
Forester concerning the extent to which the proposed forestry activities are
consistent with the guidelines provided in the New Jersey Forestry and
Wetlands Best Management Practices Manual developed by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, dated October 1995, as amended.  Any
such comments which indicate that the proposed activities are not consistent
with said Manual must be addressed by the applicant in terms of their
potential impact on the standards set forth in Subsection D. below; and



         (m)   A Certificate of Filing from the Pinelands
Commission issued pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.34; and



         (n)   When prior approval for the forestry activities
has been granted by the Zoning Officer or other town approval agency, a
letter from the Pinelands Commission indicating that the prior approval has
been reviewed pursuant to § 175-60.



   C.   Forestry standards. Forestry operations shall be approved only
if the applicant can demonstrate that the standards set forth below are met:



      (1)   All forestry activities shall serve to maintain
Pinelands native forest types, including those which are locally
characteristic, except in those stands where other forest types exist;



      (2)   Any newly developed access to lands proposed for
harvesting shall avoid wetland areas except as absolutely necessary to
harvest wetlands species or to otherwise gain access to a harvesting site;



      (3)   The following actions shall be required to encourage the
establishment, restoration or regeneration of Atlantic White Cedar in cedar
and hardwood swamps:



         (a)   Clear cutting cedar and managing slash;



         (b)   Controlling competition by other plant species;



         (c)   Utilizing fencing and other retardants, where
necessary, to protect cedar from over browsing;



         (d)   Utilizing existing streams as cutting boundaries,
where practical;



         (e)   Harvesting during dry periods or when the ground
is frozen; and



         (f)   Utilizing the least intrusive harvesting
techniques, including the use of winches, corduroy roads and helicopters,
where practical.



      (4)   All forestry activities and practices shall be designed
and carried out so as to comply with the standards set forth in §§ 175-102
and 175-136A. The species accounts provided in the "Recommended Forestry
Management Practices Report," Appendix I - Endangered Animals, dated March
2006, as amended and supplemented and available at the principal office of
the Commission or at www.nj.gov/pinelands, may be utilized as a guide for
meeting these standards;



      (5)   All forestry activities and practices shall be designed
and carried out so as to comply with the standards for the land application
of waste set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.79, except as expressly authorized in
this section;



      (6)   All forestry activities and practices shall be designed
and carried out so as to comply with the standards for the protection of
historic, archaeological and cultural resources set forth in § 175-107;



      (7)   A vegetated streamside management zone shall be
maintained or established adjacent to streams, ponds, lakes and marshes,
except that no streamside management zone shall be required when Atlantic
White Cedar is proposed to be harvested, established, restored or
regenerated. The streamside management zone shall be at least 25 feet in
width. Where soils are severely erodible, slopes exceed 10% or streamside
vegetation is not vigorous, the streamside management zone shall be increased
up to a maximum of 70 feet to buffer the water body from adjacent forestry
activities;



      (8)   Stream crossings, access roads, timber harvesting, skid
trails, log decks, portable sawmill sites, site preparation, and
reforestation shall be designed and carried out so as to:



         (a)   Minimize changes to surface and ground water
hydrology;



         (b)   Minimize changes to temperature and other existing
surface water quality and conditions;



         (c)   Prevent unnecessary soil erosion, siltation and
sedimentation; and



         (d)   Minimize unnecessary disturbances to aquatic and
forest habitats.



      (9)   The following standards shall apply to silvicultural
practices for site preparation, either before or after harvesting:



         (a)   In areas with slopes of greater than 10%, an
undisturbed buffer strip of at least 25 feet in width shall be maintained
along roads during site preparation to catch soil particles;



         (b)   Herbicide treatments shall be permitted, provided
that:



            [1]   The proposed treatment is identified in the
forestry application submitted to the Zoning Officer pursuant to Subsection
B(2)(j) above;



            [2]   Control of competitive plant species is
clearly necessary;



            [3]   Control of competitive plant species by
other, non-chemical means is not practical;



            [4]   All chemicals shall be expressly labeled for
forestry use and shall be used and mixed in a manner that is consistent with
relevant State and Federal requirements; and



            [5]    In Pine-Shrub Oak Native Forest Types,
herbicide treatments shall only be permitted as a method to temporarily
suppress shrub-oak under story in order to facilitate pine regeneration. All
such herbicide treatments shall be applied in a targeted manner so that there
will be no significant reduction in tree or shrub-oak re-sprouting outside
those areas subject to the herbicide treatment;



         (c)   Broadcast scarification and mechanical weeding
shall be permitted in all Pinelands Native Forest Types;



         (d)   Disking shall be permitted, provided that:



            [1]   It shall not be permitted in Pine Plains
Native Forest Types;



            [2]   Disking shall only be permitted in
Pine-Shrub Oak Native Forest Types as a method to temporarily suppress
shrub-oak under story in order to facilitate pine regeneration, and shall be
limited as follows:



               [a]   Disking may occur one time during the
first year of the establishment of a stand to assure the successful growth of
pine seedlings and may be repeated one time during the second year of the
growth of the stand only in areas where pine seedling establishment has not
successfully occurred; and



               [b]   Only single-pass disking, which
penetrates the soil no deeper than six inches, shall be permitted.



            [3]   It shall not occur in wetlands, except as
may be necessary to establish, restore or regenerate Atlantic White Cedar.
When so used, disking shall be limited to shrub-dominated parcels and
recently abandoned agricultural lands; and



            [4]   It shall follow land contours when slopes
are discernible;



         (e)   Root raking shall be permitted, provided that:



            [1]   It shall not be permitted in Pine-Shrub Oak
Native Forest Types or Pine Plains Native Forest Types;



            [2]   When used to establish, restore or
regenerate Atlantic White Cedar, root raking shall be limited to
shrub-dominated parcels and recently abandoned agricultural lands; and



            [3]   Root raking debris shall not be piled in
wetlands;



         (f)   Bedding shall be permitted only in recently
abandoned, cultivated wetlands where there are no established Pinelands
Native Forest Types; and



         (g)   Drum chopping shall be permitted, provided that:



            [1]   It shall not be permitted in Pine Plains
Native Forest Types except to create road shoulder fuel breaks, which shall
be limited to 25 feet in width, or to create scattered early successional
habitats under two acres in size;



            [2]   It shall not be permitted in wetlands,
except as may be necessary to establish, restore or regenerate Atlantic White
Cedar. When so used, drum chopping shall be limited to shrub-dominated
parcels and recently abandoned agricultural lands; and



            [3]   It shall adhere to the following procedures:



               [a]   No more than two passes shall be
permitted except to create scattered early successional habitats under two
acres in size;



               [b]   Drums shall remain unfilled when used
during the dormant season;



               [c]   Chop up and down the slope on a parcel
so the depressions made by the cleats and chopper blades run parallel to the
contour of the land to help reduce the occurrence of channeled surface
erosion;



               [d]   Chop so the depressions made by the
cleats and chopper blades run parallel to a wetland or water body; and



               [e]   Avoid short-radius, 180-degree turns
at the end of each straight pass.



      (10)   The following standards shall apply to silvicultural
practices for harvesting:



         (a)   Clear cutting shall be permitted, provided that:



            [1]   It shall not be permitted in Pine Plains
Native Forest Types;



            [2]   It shall be limited to 300 acres or 5% of a
parcel, whichever is greater, during any permit period;



            [3]   A 50-foot-wide buffer strip, in which only
periodic pruning and thinning may occur, shall be maintained between any
clear-cut and the parcel boundaries;



            [4]   A buffer strip, in which only periodic
pruning and thinning may occur, shall also be maintained to separate each
25-acre or larger clear-cut from other 25-acre or larger clear cuts, coppice
cuts and seed tree cuts that occur within a 15-year period. The buffer strip
separating two 25-acre harvests shall be 50 feet in width and, for a larger
harvest, shall increase in width by one foot for each acre of that harvest
above 25, to a maximum of 300 feet in width;



            [5]   Where present on a parcel, a minimum of 18
dead snags per acre of at least 10 inches diameter breast height (DBH) and
six feet in height shall be left on the parcel for a minimum of five years;
and



            [6]   The area of the parcel subject to the
clear-cut shall have contoured edges unless the boundary of the clear-cut
serves as a firebreak in which case straight edges may be used;



         (b)   Coppicing shall be permitted in all Pinelands
Native Forest Types, provided that:



            [1]   It shall be limited to 500 acres in size or
10% of a parcel, whichever is greater, during any permit period;



            [2]   A 50-foot-wide buffer strip, in which only
periodic pruning and thinning may occur, shall be maintained between any
coppice cut and the parcel boundaries;



            [3]   A buffer strip, in which only periodic
pruning and thinning may occur, shall also be maintained to separate each
25-acre or larger coppice cut from other 25-acre or larger clear cuts,
coppice cuts and seed tree cuts that occur within a 15-year period. The
buffer strip separating two 25-acre harvests shall be 50 feet in width and,
for a larger harvest, shall increase in width by one foot for each acre of
that harvest above 25, to a maximum of 300 feet in width;



            [4]   Where present on a parcel, a minimum of 18
dead snags per acre of at least 10 inches DBH and six feet in height shall be
left on the parcel for a minimum of five years; and



            [5]   The area of the parcel subject to the
coppice cut shall have contoured edges unless the boundary of the coppice cut
serves as a firebreak in which case straight edges may be used;



         (c)   Seed tree cutting shall be permitted in all
Pinelands Native Forest Types, provided that:



            [1]   It shall be limited to 500 acres in size or
10% of a parcel, whichever is greater, during any permit period;



            [2]   A 50-foot-wide buffer strip, in which only
periodic pruning and thinning may occur, shall be maintained between any seed
tree cut and the parcel boundaries;



            [3]   A buffer strip, in which only periodic
pruning and thinning may occur, shall also be maintained to separate each
25-acre or larger seed tree cut from other 25-acre or larger clear cuts,
coppice cuts and seed tree cuts that occur within a 15-year period. The
buffer strip separating two 25-acre harvests shall be 50 feet in width and,
for a larger harvest, shall increase in width by one foot for each acre of
that harvest above 25, to a maximum of 300 feet in width;



            [4]   Where present on a parcel, a minimum of 18
dead snags per acre of at least 10 inches DBH and six feet in height shall be
left on the parcel for a minimum of five years;



            [5]   The area of the parcel subject to the seed
tree cut shall have contoured edges unless the boundary of the seed tree cut
serves as a firebreak in which case straight edges may be used;



            [6]   Dominant residual seed trees shall be
retained at a distribution of at least seven trees per acre; and



            [7]   Residual seed trees shall be distributed
evenly throughout the parcel; and



         (d)   Shelter wood cutting, group selection and
individual selection shall be permitted in all Pinelands Native Forest Types.



      (11)   The following standards shall apply to silvicultural
practices for forest regeneration:



         (a)   Natural regeneration shall be permitted in all
Pinelands Native Forest Types and shall be required in the Pine Plains Native
Forest Type, except as provided in Subsection (11)(b) below; and



         (b)   Artificial regeneration shall be permitted in all
Pinelands Native Forest Types provided that:



            [1]   The use of non-native cuttings, seedlings or
seeds shall not be permitted;



            [2]   The use of hybrid cuttings, seedlings or
seeds shall be permitted if it can be demonstrated that the cutting is from a
locally native, naturally occurring hybrid which will be planted within its
natural range and habitat;



            [3]   Cuttings, seedlings or seeds shall be
collected and utilized so as to ensure genetic diversity; and



            [4]   When used in Pine Plains Native Forest
Types, artificial regeneration shall only be permitted to restore drastically
disturbed sites if seeds or seedlings from the immediate vicinity have been
collected from local, genetically similar sources.



      (12)   Following site preparation and harvesting activities,
slash shall either be retained in piles on the parcel, distributed throughout
the parcel, removed from the parcel or burned.



      (13)   Thinning shall be permitted in all Pinelands Native
Forest Types, including that which serves to maintain an under story of
native plants and/or manage stand composition, density, growth and spatial
heterogeneity.



      (14)   A copy of the forestry permit issued by the Town Zoning
Officer shall be conspicuously posted on the parcel which is the site of the
forestry activity.



   D.   Forestry permit procedures.



      (1)   Applications for forestry permits shall be submitted to
the Zoning Officer and shall be accompanied by an application fee of $25.



      (2)   Within 14 days of receipt of an application, the Zoning
Officer shall determine whether the application is complete and, if
necessary, notify the applicant in writing of any additional information
which is necessary to complete the application. Should the Zoning Officer
fail to make such a determination within 14 days, the application shall be
considered to be complete as of the 15th day following its submission.



      (3)   Within 45 days of determining an application to be
complete pursuant to Subsection D(2) above, or within such further time as
may be consented to by the applicant, the Zoning Officer shall issue a
forestry permit if the activities proposed in the application comply with the
standards in Subsection C above or disapprove any application which does not
meet the requirements of Subsection C above. Any such notice of disapproval
shall specifically set forth the deficiencies of the application.



      (4)   Upon receipt of a notice of disapproval pursuant to
Subsection D(3) above, the applicant shall have 30 days in which to correct
the deficiencies and submit any necessary revisions to the application to the
Zoning Officer for review. The Zoning Officer shall review the revised
application to verify conformity with the standards in Subsection C above and
shall, within 14 days of receipt of the revised application, issue a forestry
permit or disapprove the application pursuant to Subsection D(3) above.



      (5)   Failure of the Zoning Officer to act within the time
period prescribed in Subsection D(3) and (4) above shall constitute approval
of the forestry application as submitted. At the request of the applicant, a
certificate as to the failure of the Zoning Officer to act shall be issued by
the municipality and it shall be sufficient in lieu of the written
endorsement or other evidence of municipal approval required herein.



      (6)   In reviewing and issuing permits for forestry
applications, the Zoning Officer shall also comply with the Pinelands Area
notice and review procedures set forth in §§ 175-60D through G.



      (7)   Forestry permits shall be valid for a period of 10
years. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit any person from
securing additional permits, provided that the requirements of this chapter
and the Pinelands Comprehensive Management Plan are met.



   E.   Administrative fees. Upon the issuance of a forestry permit
pursuant to Subsection D(3) above, the applicant shall be required to pay of
a sum of $250 which shall serve as reimbursement for any administrative costs
incurred by the municipality during the ten-year permit period. The applicant
shall not be subject to any additional fees or escrow requirements for the
duration of the forestry permit.



   F.   Notification of harvesting. No harvesting shall be commenced
until the applicant has provided the Zoning Officer with 72 hours' written
notice of the intention to begin harvesting operations.



§ 175-105. Grading and filling.



   A.   All lots being filled shall be cleared of all debris, including
brush and tree stumps, and shall be filled with a clean fill and/or topsoil
to allow complete surface draining of the lot into local storm sewer systems
or natural drainage rights-of-way. No construction shall be permitted which
creates or aggravates water stagnation or a drainage problem on adjacent
properties.



   B.   No trees, brush or debris shall be used as landfill or in lieu
thereof, nor shall any landfilling operation be performed in such a manner as
to cover unremoved trees and debris on any streets, lots or otherwise.



§ 175-106. Height limitations. 



[Amended 10-12-1987 by Ord. No. 13-1987; 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



   A.   A height limitation of 35 feet shall apply to all structures,
including radio and television transmission and other communication
facilities which are not accessory to an otherwise permitted use except as
otherwise noted.



   B.   The height limitation in Subsection A above shall not apply to
any of the following structures, provided that such structures are compatible
with uses in the immediate vicinity: antennas which do not exceed a height of
200 feet and which are accessory to an otherwise permitted use; silos, barns
and other agricultural structures; church spires; cupolas; domes; monuments;
water towers; fire observation towers; electric transmission lines and
supporting structures; windmills; smokestacks; derricks; conveyors; flag
poles and masts; or aerials, solar energy facilities, chimneys and similar
structures to be placed above the roof level and not intendant for human
occupancy. Such features shall be erected only to such height as is necessary
to accomplish the purpose that they are to serve.



   C.   Except in the PA, FA, AP, AP/CLI and SAP Districts,
quasi-public buildings and public buildings, schools, churches, and other
similar permitted uses may exceed the height limit established in Subsection
A above, provided that such uses shall increase the front, rear and side
yards one foot for each foot by which such buildings exceed the height limit
established for the district within which the use is located. 



[Amended 3-15-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]



   D.   The height limitation in Subsection A above shall not apply to
the antenna and any supporting structure of a local communication facility of
greater than 35 feet, provided that the standards set forth in N.J.A.C.
7:50-5.40 are met.



   E.   Height limitations in Downtown and Gateway Districts shall be
measured in both feet and stories.  When measuring by stories, building
heights shall be counted in half-stories, to account for buildings with
visible basements or pitched roofs.  The ground story of a building is the
first floor of a building that is level to or elevated above grade.  The
upper stories of a building begin at the first floor above the ground story,
if located within the roof structure. 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



§ 175-107. Historical, archaeological and cultural preservation.



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



   A.   A cultural resource survey shall accompany all applications for
development in the RR, R-1, R-2, R-3, H-B, M-1, REC and M-2 Districts, all
Downtown and Gateway Districts, and all applications for major development as
defined in § 175-54A in order to determine whether any significant historic
resources exist on the parcel. Guidelines for this survey are contained in
Appendix B of the "Cultural Resource Management Plan," dated April 1991, as
amended. In general, the survey shall include: a statement as to the presence
of any properties listed on the National and State Registers of Historic
Places on the site or within the area of the projects' potential
environmental impacts; a thorough search of state, local and any other
pertinent inventories to identify sites of potential significance; a review
of the literature and consultation with professional and a vocational
archaeologists knowledgeable about the area; thorough pedestrian and natural
resource surveys; archaeological testing as necessary to provide reasonable
evidence of the presence or absence of historic resources of significance;
adequate methodologies and sources used; and a list of personnel involved and
qualifications of the person(s) performing the survey. 



[Amended 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997; 12-14-1998 by Ord. No. 30-1998;
11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



      (1)   This requirement for a survey may be waived by the local
approval agency if:



         (a)   There is insufficient evidence of cultural
activity on the project site or, in the case of archaeological resources,
within the vicinity;



         (b)   The evidence of cultural activity on the site
lacks the potential for importance because further recording of the available
data will not contribute to a more comprehensive understanding of Pinelands
culture; or



         (c)   The evidence of cultural activity lacks any
potential for significance pursuant to the standards of Subsection A(2) below.



      (2)   A resource shall be deemed to be significant if it
possesses integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship,
feeling and association which reflects its significance in American history,
architecture, archaeology or culture under one or more of the following
criteria:



         (a)   The presence of structures, sites or areas
associated with events of significance to the cultural, political, economic
or social history of the nation, state, local community or the Pinelands.



         (b)   The presence of structures, sites or areas
associated with the lives of persons or institutions of significance to the
cultural, political, economic or social history of the nation, state, local
community or the Pinelands.



         (c)   The presence of structures that represent the work
of a master or that possess high artistic values or that embody the
distinctive characteristics of a type, period or method of construction or
that represent a distinguishable entity of significance to the architectural,
cultural, political, economic or social history of the nation, state, local
community or the Pinelands, although its components may lack individual
distinction.



         (d)   The presence of a site or area which has yielded
or is likely to yield significant information regarding the history or
archaeological history of the Pinelands.



   B.   The standards governing the issuance of certificates of
appropriateness in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.156(c) shall be followed by the Planning
Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment.



   C.   The effect of the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness
is as follows:



      (1)   All subsequent development approvals shall be issued or
denied in a manner consistent with the certificate of appropriateness except
as provided in Subsection C(2) below.



      (2)   A certificate of appropriateness issued as a result of
the cultural resource survey requirement set forth in Subsection A above
shall be effective for two years. If the resource is not designated by the
Pinelands Commissions pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.154 or by the Town Council
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. within that two-year period, the
historic resource standards of this section shall no longer apply to the
resource in question until such time as the Pinelands Commission designates
the resource pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.154. 



[Amended 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



   D.   The following information will be required to document
resources which are not found to be significant but which are otherwise found
to present graphic evidence of a cultural activity:



      (1)   A narrative description of the resource and its cultural
environment.



      (2)   Photographic documentation to record the exterior
appearance of buildings, structures and engineering resources.



      (3)   A site plan depicting in correct scale the location of
all buildings, structures and engineering resources.



      (4)   A New Jersey state inventory form as published by the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection for buildings and a
narrative description of any process or technology if necessary to elaborate
upon the photographic record.



   E.   If archaeological data is discovered on a site at any time
after construction has been commenced, the developer shall immediately cease
construction, notify the Planning Board and the Pinelands Commission and take
all reasonable steps to protect the archaeological data in accordance with
the guidelines established by the United States Department of the Interior
governing the recovery of archaeological data.



§ 175-108. Home occupations.



   Home occupations such as seamstresses, tailors, transcriptionists, web
designers, graphic artists and the like are permitted as noted in Article
XIII and shall adhere to the minimum standards of a particular zone and shall
also meet the following criteria:



[Amended 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   A.   The use shall be one which is customarily incidental to the use
of the premises as a dwelling and subordinate to the residential use of the
property.



   B.   There shall be no employees working on the premises other than
the bona fide residents of the dwelling. 



[Amended 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   C.   That portion of the dwelling unit utilized for the home
occupation shall not exceed 25% of the total floor area of said dwelling
unit, or a maximum of 400 square feet, whichever is lower. 



[Amended 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   D.   The occupation shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling
or within an existing accessory building or buildings.



   E.   No related displays of articles for sale shall be visible from
the street.



   F.   Only articles made on the premises may be sold.



   G.   Commercial signage is not permitted. 



[Amended 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   H.   There shall be no external change to the premises or its
buildings unless said change continues the appearance of the property's
principal use. If building type is changed on a lot with permitted home
occupations to a building type that does not permit home occupation, home
occupation will require a variance. 



[Amended 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   I.   No mechanical equipment may be used except that which is
normally used for purely domestic or household purposes.



   J.   In no case shall any home occupation require parking to occur
on the adjacent residential streets.



   K.   Not more than four off-street parking spaces shall be allowed
for the residential plus home occupation use.



   L.   Buffers may be required based on the location of any new
parking areas. (See § 175-91.)



§ 175-109. Home professional office.



   Home professional uses are permitted as noted in Article XIII and shall
adhere to the minimum standards of a particular zone and shall also meet the
following criteria:



   A.   The term "professional office" shall include but not be limited
to an office for the use of a physician, dentist, lawyer, engineer,
accountant or other professional persons.



   B.   The use shall be one which is customarily incidental to the use
of the premises as a dwelling and subordinate to the residential use of the
property.



   C.   There shall be no more than two employees working on the
premises other than the bona fide residents of the dwelling.



   D.   The use shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling or
within an accessory building or buildings.



   E.   No sign shall be larger than two square feet on each of two
sides.



   F.   Not more than one professional person may utilize the
residence, except that one additional professional may be permitted, provided
that both professionals are members of the same immediate family.



   G.   That portion of the dwelling unit utilized for the professional
office shall not exceed 30% of the total floor area of said dwelling unit.



   H.   No mechanical equipment may be used except that which is
normally used for purely domestic or household purposes and with the
exception of medical, dental or office equipment.



   I.   In no case shall any home profession require parking to occur
on the adjacent residential streets.



   J.   Not more than four off-street parking spaces shall be allowed
for the residential plus home occupation use.



   K.   Buffers may be required based on the location of any new
parking areas. (See § 175-91.)



§ 175-110. Homeowners' association.  [Amended 12-13-1999 by Ord. No.
25-1999]



   A homeowners' association established for the purpose of owning and
maintaining common lands and facilities, including conservation, open space,
floodplain, stormwater management and drainage facilities, recreation and
park areas and other lands which would otherwise be dedicated to the town,
shall be in accordance with the following provisions:



   A.   Membership in any created homeowners' association by all
property owners shall be mandatory. Such required membership in any created
homeowners' association and the responsibilities upon the members shall be in
writing between the association and the individual, in the form of a
covenant, with each member agreeing to his liability for his pro rata share
of the association's costs, provided that the town shall be a party
beneficiary to such covenant and entitled to enforce its provisions.



   B.   Executed deeds, with restrictions stating that the prescribed
use(s) of the lands in the common ownership shall be absolute and not subject
to reversion for possible future development, shall be tendered to the town
simultaneously with the granting of final subdivision approval.



   C.   The homeowners' association shall be responsible for liability
insurance, municipal taxes, maintenance of land and any facilities that may
be erected on any land deeded to the homeowners' association and shall hold
the town harmless from any liability.



   D.   The assessment levied by the homeowners' association shall
become a lien on the private properties in the development. The duly created
homeowners' association shall be allowed to adjust the assessment to meet
changing needs, and any deeded lands may be sold, donated or in any other way
conveyed to the town for public purposes only.



   E.   The homeowners' association initially created by the developer
shall clearly describe in its bylaws the rights and obligations of any
homeowner and tenant in the development. Before final approval, copies of the
bylaws, covenants, model deeds and articles of incorporation shall be
submitted to the town. 



[Amended 3-25-2002 by Ord. No. 12-2002]



   F.   The developer shall provide a procedure by which lands will be
transferred to the homeowners' association. This schedule shall be based on a
percentage of the lots and/or homes sold or occupied. The bylaws of the
homeowners' association should include provisions which will ensure that the
maintenance responsibilities for the commonly owned land are the obligation
of the association.



   G.   Prior to preliminary approval, the developer shall submit
preliminary public water and/or public sewer system plans for the dwelling
units in the development. Prior to final approval, the developer shall submit
final plans for these systems which shall have been approved by the local
and/or County Board of Health and the State Department of Environmental
Protection. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any building or
part thereof until all streets, drainage, parking facilities and water and
sewer facilities servicing said structure are properly completed and
functioning.



   H.   All members of the homeowners' association shall be given
notice in the homeowners' association documents that, should the homeowners'
association become insolvent or file for protection under the United States
Bankruptcy Act, the individual lot owners shall be required to repair and
replace any part of the stormwater management system, including any
structural component, for a period of two years after inspection and release
of the maintenance guarantee for the site improvements. If the owner fails to
complete any required repairs and/or replacement required to the stormwater
management system, the town may perform said repair and/or replacement and
the cost thereof shall be charged to this owner of the property in accordance
with § 175-133C(3).



§ 175-111. Hotels and motels.



   A.   Any hotel or motel that may be constructed on a lot or parcel
of land must contain a minimum of at least 10 units of accommodation,
exclusive of a permanent, on-site superintendent's living quarters. The
minimum number of units of accommodation in any single building shall be five.



   B.   Each unit of accommodation shall conform to all applicable
building codes of the State of New Jersey.



   C.   Each unit of accommodation shall include a minimum of two
rooms, a bedroom and a separate bathroom.



   D.   There shall be a residency limitation for guests of 30 days
maximum. The foregoing residency limitation shall not apply to an employee
living on the premises.



   E.   All of the area, yard, building coverage and height
requirements of the respective zone and other applicable requirements of this
chapter must be met.



§ 175-112. On-site lighting.



   All parking areas and walkways thereto and appurtenant passageways and
driveways serving commercial, public, office, industrial, apartment or other
similar uses having common off-street parking and/or loading areas and
building complexes requiring area lighting shall be adequately illuminated
for security and safety purposes. The lighting plan in and around the parking
areas shall provide for nonglare, color-corrected lights focused downward.
The light intensity provided at ground level shall be a minimum of 0.3
foot-candle anywhere in the area to be illuminated and shall average a
minimum of 0.5 foot-candle over the entire area, and shall be provided by
fixtures with a mounting height not more than 25 feet for the height of the
building, whichever is less, measured from the ground level to the center
line of the light source, spaced a distance not to exceed five times the
mounting height. Any other outdoor lighting, such as building and sidewalk
illumination, driveways with no adjacent parking, the lighting of signs and
ornamental lighting, shall be shown on the lighting plan in sufficient detail
to allow determination of the effects to adjacent properties, traffic safety
and overhead sky glow. The objective of these specifications is to minimize
undesirable off-premises effects. No light shall shine directly into windows
or onto streets and driveways in such a manner as to interfere with or
distract driver vision. To achieve these requirements, the intensity of such
light sources, the light shielding and similar characteristics shall be
subject to site plan approval by the Planning Board.



§ 175-112.1. Lot grading and drainage. 



[Added 7-25-2005 by Ord. No. 31-2005]



   A.   Applicability.



      (1)   The requirements set forth herein shall apply to the
development of all lots within the Town of Hammonton for residential
purposes. For developments where an overall grading plan has already been
reviewed and approved by either the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, the review and approval of an individual lot grading plan prior
to the issuance of a building permit is required to ensure general compliance
with the overall grading plan. Any lot greater than one acre shall not be
subject to the requirement to submit an individual lot grading plan, unless
in the opinion of the Town Construction Official or the Town Engineer there
are special circumstances to require an individual lot grading plan.



      (2)   This section applies to any construction, reconstruction
or relocation of any residential structure; the enlargement of a residential
structure; the construction or placement of any accessory structure on a
residential lot resulting in a land disturbance in excess of 500 square feet
on a one-third-acre parcel or in excess of 800 square feet on a lot over 1/3
acre.



   B.   Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the Town Engineer from
requiring a new, overall grading plan for review and approval. If in the
opinion of the Town Engineer the revised grading plan substantially deviates
from the prior approval, the applicant shall be required to seek the approval
of the applicable board.



   C.   If in the opinion of the Town Engineer a revised grading plan
substantially deviates from the prior approval, the applicant shall be
required to seek the approval of the applicable board.



   D.   Foundation location survey. The State of New Jersey, through
the Uniform Construction Code, requires that a foundation location survey be
submitted to the Town Construction Official as soon as possible after the
installation of the foundation wall. Further, the final verification of such
a prior approval rests with the Construction Official. This plan shall be
prepared by a land surveyor licensed by the State of New Jersey and show all
building corners of the foundation in relation to the approved setbacks. The
plan shall also note appropriate elevations to confirm that the top of block
elevation conforms to the approved plan. The permittee shall also submit a
copy of the foundation location survey to the Town Engineer for review. The
foundation survey shall contain the top of block elevations.



   E.   Final survey (as-built plan).



      (1)   Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the
permittee shall submit two copies of an accurate final survey (as-built plan)
to the Town Construction Official and the Town Engineer for approval. The
final survey (as-built plan) shall be prepared by a New Jersey-licensed
professional land surveyor. The purpose of the final survey (as-built plan)
is to ensure that the lot grading is in substantial conformance to the
approved plan and that the lot will adequately drain, provide stormwater
storage or recharge facilities if required, and have no adverse impact on
adjoining properties. The final survey (as-built plan) shall be reviewed by
the Town Engineer and the Construction Official and determined to comply with
the above standards.



      (2)   The final survey (as-built plan) must be on file with
the Construction Official's office no later than 14 days prior to the
applicant seeking a certificate of occupancy. Any applications submitted
after this time frame are not guaranteed an approval or issuance of a
certificate of occupancy prior to closing.



   F.   Performance standards.



      (1)   All grading and stormwater storage or recharge
facilities shall be done in a manner that will result in no adverse impact to
adjacent properties. Adjacent properties with natural swales and/or wetlands
must be evaluated to ensure that adequate capacity is available to accept the
runoff from the site being developed and graded. Whenever possible, the land
shall be graded in one of the following methods:



         (a)   The rear yard shall drain over land to the street
through side yard swales on either side of the house, located on the common
property lines with adjoining lots, and the front yard shall drain directly
to the street;



         (b)   The rear yard shall drain and be collected in a
system of interior yard inlets and piping designed in accordance with
accepted standards, connected to the development's overall stormwater
drainage system, and the front yard shall drain directly to the street; or



         (c)   The rear yard shall drain overland onto adjoining
properties as permitted by right, i.e., no net increase in rate of runoff or
manner of flow or via an acceptable easement, and the front yard shall drain
directly to the street.



         (d)   The grading plans at all times shall be consistent
with the current state stormwater standards. On-site collection, storage and
recharge facilities shall be constructed to assist in the infiltration of
stormwater runoff within the individual lot.



      (2)   No more than three lots in a row shall be allowed to
drain through a swale unless protected by an acceptable easement.



      (3)   The minimum slope for swales, lawns, and disturbed areas
shall be 2% and for smooth, hard surfaces, i.e., driveways, 0.5%. If slopes
of 2% cannot be maintained for swales, a grade of 1.5% may be acceptable, if
in the opinion of the Town Engineer the proposed grading plans provide
adequate provisions for on-site stormwater recharge and no adverse impacts to
adjacent parcels will result from the proposed improvements and grading of
the subject property.



      (4)   The maximum grade for driveways shall be 10% unless
waived by the Town Engineer under special circumstances.



      (5)   The top of block elevation shall be a minimum of eight
inches above the highest adjacent grade and shall be provided on all grading
plans. The notation of the finished floor alone is not acceptable.



      (6)   Grading within eight feet of the dwelling shall be in
accordance with local building codes.



      (7)   Retaining walls over three feet in height must be
designed by a licensed professional and then reviewed and approved by the
Town Engineer and Construction Official.



      (8)   Topsoil moved during the course of construction shall be
redistributed so as to provide at least five inches of spread cover to all
seeded and planted areas of the development and shall be stabilized in
accordance with Soil Conservation District (SCD) standards to prevent the
potential for erosion. Topsoil shall be reasonably free of stone and contain
no stones larger than two inches in any dimension. In the event that the
quantity of topsail at the site is insufficient to provide five inches of
cover for all seeded and planted areas, the permittee shall provide and
distribute a sufficient quantity of topsoil to provide such cover. The
composition of any borrowed topsoil shall be in accordance with New Jersey
Department of Transportation (NJDOT) and Soil Conservation District (BCD)
standards and suitable for use in a residential setting.



      (9)   The permittee may request a waiver of a particular
performance standard upon presentation of supporting documentation provided
by the applicant's engineering professional that satisfactorily addresses
grading and stormwater recharge concerns. The Town Engineer shall have the
authority to review the request and grant such a waiver request, provided
that it is not inconsistent with the intent of the section.



   G.   Performance bond and inspection escrow. Where a performance
bond and inspection escrow have already been or will be established in
accordance with major subdivision application standards, the requirements for
the posting of fees and escrows may be waived as set forth in this section,
unless the permittee elects to proceed with the fixed fee schedule. In those
instances where a permittee elects not to proceed with the fixed fee
schedule, a separate line item for lot grading and stabilization shall be
included in the performance bond estimate and inspection escrow deposit,
which shall be calculated pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law (Chapter
291, Laws of N.J. 1975, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.). If the applicant seeks a
certificate of occupancy prior to stabilizing the property in accordance with
SCD standards, the bond amount for grading, stabilization and yard drainage
for nonmunicipal property shall be $2,000 per acre actually disturbed.
Separate items are to be listed for municipal private residential property.
The item of grading and stabilization for private residential property shall
not convert over to any subsequent maintenance bond. Dollar amounts set aside
for grading and stabilization purposes shall be updated as the need arises.



   H.   All conditions and requirements herein shall be consistent with
the Pinelands Stormwater Management Standards as set forth in the Pinelands
Comprehensive Management Plan and any standard adopted hereto.



   I.   All of the requirements for the control of grading and drainage
of residential lots shall be required to adhere to a checklist and
application which shall be prepared by the Town Construction Official after
review and approval by the Planning Board.



   J.   Fees:



      (1)   Town application fee: $30.



      (2)   Grading plan review, as-built review and inspection
escrow: $300.



      (3)   Review revised grading plan escrow (as needed): $100.



      (4)   Foundation location and elevation review escrow (as
needed): $50.



      (5)   Reinspection of as-built conditions escrow (as needed):
$100.



§ 175-113. Lots.



   A.   Lot dimensions and area shall not be less than the requirements
of the Zoning Ordinance.



   B.   Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to
straight street lines and radial to curved street lines.



   C.   Each lot must have at least 50 feet of frontage upon an
accepted street, unless otherwise specified in this code.



[Amended 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   D.   Where extra width has been dedicated for the widening of
existing streets, lots shall begin at such new street line, and all setbacks
shall be measured from such line.



   E.   Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or
lots for their intended use due to factors such as rock formations,
topography, internal drainage, flood conditions or similar circumstances, the
Board may, after adequate investigation, withhold approval of such lots. The
Board may require certification by a professional engineer substantiated with
soil borings that the soil has sufficient bearing capacity for building
foundations and that the surface elevation is sufficiently above groundwater
depth in the area.



   F.   Building lot abutting street. No permit for the erection of any
building or structure shall be issued unless the lot abuts a street giving
access to such proposed building or structure. Such street shall have been
duly placed on the Official Map or shall be an existing state, county or
municipal street or highway; a street shown upon a plat approved by the
Planning Board; or a street on a duly filed plat in the office of the County
Clerk prior to the passage of an ordinance under this act or any prior law
which required prior approval of plats by the governing body or other
authorized body. Before any such permit shall be issued, such street shall
have been certified to be suitably improved to the satisfaction of the Town
Council, or such suitable improvement shall have been assured by means of a
performance guaranty in accordance with standards and specifications for road
improvements approved by the Town Council, as adequate in respect to the
public health, safety and general welfare of the special circumstances of the
particular street.



   G.   Relaxation of abutment requirement. Where the enforcement of
Subsection F above would entail practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship,
or where the circumstances of the case do not require the building or
structure to be related to a street, the Zoning Board of Adjustment or
Planning Board may, upon application or appeal, vary the application of
Subsection F and direct the issuance of a permit subject to conditions that
will provide adequate access for fire-fighting equipment, ambulances and
other emergency vehicles necessary for the Protection of health and safety,
and that will protect any future street layout shown on the Official Map or
on a general circulation plan element of the Municipal Master Plan. [See
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28b(4).]



      (1)   Any application or appeal pursuant to this section shall
be governed by §§ 175-28, 175-30 and 175-31A, F and G of this chapter.



      (2)   Lot dimensions and area shall not be less than the
requirements of the zoning provisions.



      (3)   Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be either
at right angles or radial to street lines.



§ 175-114. Mobile agricultural employee housing.



[Amended 3-12-1990 by Ord. No. 7-1990; 6-25-1990 by Ord. No. 13-1990]



   The seasonal housing of agricultural employees in mobile homes shall be
permitted accessory to an active agricultural operation, provided that:



   A.   Such farm contains at least 10 acres in agricultural production
and is situate within an AP Zoning District.



   B.   Occupancy of all such housing shall be permitted only from May
1 through October 31 of each year, provided that each mobile home is
inspected prior to occupancy and a certificate of occupancy is issued
designating therein the maximum number of persons permitted to occupy the
mobile home. All fees shall be paid consistent with fees charged for the
issuance of occupancy permits for each mobile home or building.



   C.   Such buildings, between November 1 and April 30 of each year,
shall be disconnected from all utilities and removed to a designated storage
area.



   D.   Such buildings shall be certified for occupancy by OSHA and any
other agency having jurisdiction thereof.



   E.   Applicants for the establishment of such buildings shall obtain
approval from the Planning Board and comply with the Pinelands notice and
review procedures contained in § 175-60.



§ 175-115. Mobile homes. 



[Amended 3-12-1990 by Ord. No. 7-1990; 6-25-1990 by Ord. No. 13-1990]



   No trailer, auto trailer, travel trailer, mobile home or camper shall
be used for dwelling purposes or as sleeping quarters for one or more
persons, nor shall any such trailer or camper be used for storage or space
for the permanent conduct of any business, profession, occupation or trade,
except that such facilities may be used for temporary residency for the
emergency replacement of a damaged dwelling unit, seasonal agricultural
housing in accordance with § 175-114 and for use as a temporary construction
office located on a site during construction, provided that a temporary
permit has been issued by the Building Inspector. In addition, the use of
mobile homes for seasonal agricultural employee housing shall require
Planning Board approval and shall be subject to the Pinelands notice and
review requirements of § 175-60. However, it shall not be necessary for
applicants for such agricultural housing to obtain permits annually unless
the provisions of § 175-114 have been violated or a change in the housing
has occurred or is proposed from that which was previously approved. This
section shall not be construed so as to prohibit the parking or storage of
such trailers and campers on private premises or the recreational use of the
same in campgrounds in conformance with all applicable ordinances and codes.



§ 175-116. Monuments.



   Monuments shall be of the size and shape required by Section 3 of P.L.
1960, c. 141, 19   and shall be placed in accordance with said statute.



§ 175-117. Nonconforming uses, structures or lots.



   A.   The lawful use of land or structures or building types existing
at the date of adoption of this chapter, as amended, may be continued
although such use or structure is nonconforming to the provisions specified
in this chapter, as amended, for the zoning district in which such use or
structure or building type is located, except as provided by law.



[Amended 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   B.   Any nonconforming use or structure or building type which has
been changed to a conforming use or structure or building type shall not be
changed back again into a nonconforming use or structure. 



[Amended 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   C.   Any nonconforming use, structure, building type or lot may
change ownership and continue to function as the same nonconforming use,
structure, building type or lot, provided that all other provisions of this
chapter and other applicable laws are met. 



[Amended 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   D.   Repairs and maintenance work required to keep a structure in
sound condition may be made to a nonconforming structure or a structure
containing a nonconforming use or building type. No structure containing a
nonconforming use or building type shall be enlarged, extended, constructed,
reconstructed or structurally altered in any manner without an appeal to the
Board of Adjustment subject to Section 5-102 of the CMP. A prior
nonconforming structure or building type may be enlarged, extended,
constructed or structurally altered if such alteration or enlargement neither
increases the existing nonconformity nor creates a new violation. A prior
nonconforming structure or building type shall not be reconstructed if
destroyed, without an appeal to the Board of Adjustment. 



[Amended 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   E.   Any lot upon which a nonconforming use or structure is located
shall not be reduced in size, nor shall any lot already nonconforming be made
more nonconforming in any manner. Also, no expansion of a structure not
meeting current setback requirements shall be permitted to that portion
[front, rear and/or side(s)] of the structure not meeting current setback
requirements. 



[Amended 10-12-1987 by Ord. No. 13-1987]



   F.   Any lot on which is located a dwelling with existing
nonconforming building setbacks on either the existing or the created lot
utilizing the current standards for the zoning district in which each lot is
located. However, subject to the compliance with the zoning standards
pertaining to the particular zoning district in question. 



[Added 10-12-1987 by Ord. No. 13-1987]



   G.   Any vacant lot in an RR, R-1, R-2, R-3 or MD Zoning District
existing at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter,
whose area or dimensions do not meet the requirements of the district in
which the lot is located but which has a minimum frontage of 50 feet and a
minimum lot area of 6,000 square feet, may have a construction permit issued
for a single-family detached dwelling, provided that the building coverage
does not exceed 40%, parking requirements are met, front and rear yard
building setbacks are a minimum of 30 feet or the setback of adjacent
properties, whichever is less, and no side yard shall be less than 10 feet,
provided that public sanitary sewer and water is available. 



[Amended 10-12-1987 by Ord. No. 13-1987; 7-26-2004 by Ord. No. 18-2004]



§ 175-118. Off-street parking and loading. 



[Amended 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   A.   General provisions.



      (1)   Lighting. All parking areas providing five or more
parking spaces shall be lighted in accordance with the provisions specified
in § 175-112 of this chapter.



      (2)   Surfacing and curbing. All on-site, off-street parking
and loading areas and access driveways shall be paved and curbed as
recommended by the Town Engineer and approved by the Planning Board as part
of the site plan approval.



      (3)   Location of parking spaces. All required off-street
parking spaces shall be located on the same lot or premises as the use
served, unless premises is located in a Downtown or Gateway District, when
shared-parking agreements or easements may be considered  (see § 175-96 
Easements).



      (4)   Landscaping.



         (a)   Each off-street parking area shall have a minimum
area equivalent to one parking space per every 30 parking spaces landscaped,
with ½ of said spaces having shrubs no higher than three feet and the other
half having trees with branches no lower than seven feet. Such space shall be
distributed throughout the parking area in order to break the view of long
rows of parked cars in a manner not impairing visibility.



         (b)   All loading areas shall be landscaped and screened
sufficiently to obscure the view of the loading platforms from any public
street, adjacent residential districts or uses and the front yards of
adjacent commercial and industrial uses. Such screening shall be by a fence,
wall, planting or combination of the three and shall not be less than four
feet in height.



      (5)   Type of facility. Parking spaces may be on, above or
below the surface of the ground. When parking spaces are provided within a
garage or other structure, said structure shall adhere to the proper
accessory or principal building setbacks, as applicable.



      (6)   The provision of parking spaces shall also include
adequate driveways and necessary turning areas for handling the vehicles for
which provision is made. Except for detached and two-family dwelling units,
parking areas shall be designed to permit each motor vehicle to proceed to
and from the parking space provided for it without requiring the moving of
any other motor vehicles. Aisles providing access to parking spaces shall
have the following minimum dimensions. Where the angle of parking is
different on both sides of the aisle, the larger aisle width shall prevail.



 

Angle of Parking Spaces
(degrees)
 
One-Way Aisle
(feet)
 
Two-Way Aisle (feet)


90º
 
22
 
25


60º
 
18
 
20


45º
 
15
 
20


30º
 
12
 
18


Parallel
 
12
 
18



 



   B.   Specific requirements. Each individual use shall provide
parking spaces according to the following provisions. Where a permitted use
of land includes different specific activities with different specific
parking requirements, the total number of required parking spaces shall be
obtained by individually computing the parking requirements for each
different activity and adding the resulting numbers together.



      (1)   Residential.



         (a)   Single-family detached or attached or two-family
dwelling units shall provide two spaces for each dwelling unit.



         (b)   Apartments or other multifamily-type units shall
provide 1.75 spaces per unit.



      (2)   Churches shall provide one space per every five
permanent seats. One seat shall be considered 22 inches in calculating the
capacity of pews or benches.



      (3)   Golf courses and public utilities shall provide
sufficient spaces and maneuvering area to prevent any parking along public
rights-of-way or private driveways, fire lanes and aisles.



      (4)   Local retail and service activities, banks and offices
shall provide parking at a ratio of five spaces per 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area, or in accordance with the Institute of Transportation
Engineers Parking Generation Manual or alternative documented sources. 
These requirements may be waived if shared parking agreements are created.



      (5)   Theaters shall provide one space for every four seats.
This requirement may be waived if the theater is located within a shopping
center and the minimum requirements for the theater can be met by other
shopping center activities.



      (6)   Bowling alleys shall provide four spaces per bowling
lane.



      (7)   Service stations shall provide at least six spaces for
the first lift, wheel alignment pit or similar work area; five additional
spaces for a second work area; and an additional three spaces for each
additional work area. Such spaces shall be separated from the driveway and
general apron areas which give access to the gasoline and air pumps and
service areas. No designated parking space shall obstruct access to such
facilities.



      (8)   Automobile, camper and travel trailer sales shall
provide 10 spaces for customer convenience, separated from vehicular displays
and not used by employees.



      (9)   Car washes shall provide two access lanes for each
mechanized car wash entrance, with each lane having a minimum capacity for 15
vehicles; one separate space for each waxing, upholstery, cleaning or similar
specialized service area; and one space for every two employees. All vehicle
entrances shall be from the rear of the building, and all parked and waiting
vehicles shall be accommodated on the lot.



      (10)   Hotels and motels shall provide 11/4 spaces per room.



      (11)   Manufacturing plants, industrial plants and wholesale
distribution centers and warehouses shall provide parking at the ratios of
one space for every 1,000 square feet of gross floor area used for inside
storage and warehousing, plus one space for every 700 feet of gross floor
area used for manufacturing, plus one space for every 200 square feet of
gross floor area used for offices. Additionally, one space shall be provided
for every vehicle owned and/or operated by the use operating from the site.



      (12)   Auto body shops, welding shops and auto repair garages
shall provide parking at a ratio of one space for every 700 feet of gross
floor area used for the auto body, repair or welding work, plus one space for
every 200 square feet of floor area used for office space. Additionally, one
space shall be provided for every vehicle owned or operated by the use
operating from the site.



      (13)   Club, eating and/or drinking establishments shall
provide 10 parking spaces for the first 200 square feet of floor area and one
space for each additional 100 square feet thereafter.



      (14)   Other uses. Uses other than specified herein shall
provide one parking space for each 400 square feet of floor spaces.



      (15)   A reduction of up to 20% in the total number of spaces
required may be granted upon a showing of adequacy of fewer spaces; provided,
however, that area for the additional spaces is available if necessary at a
later date.



   C.   Specific requirements for Downtown Districts and Gateway
Districts. This parking standard for residential development is based on the
need to provide flexibility with respect to permitted changes of use, both
residential and non-residential, for this structure type within the context
of infill development and redevelopment in the Downtown Districts. This
standard is consistent with the master plan for the downtown area and with
the Off Street Parking Standards in § 175-118.A. and B. This standard shall
be effective if a de-minimus exception, waiver or special area standard is
granted pursuant to the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C.
5:21-3, otherwise the standards provided in Table 4.4 at N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.14
shall be effective.  This standard shall be effective if a de minimus
exception, waiver or special area standard is granted pursuant to the
Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-3, otherwise the
standards provided in Table 4.4 at N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.14 shall be effective. 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



§ 175-119. Contributions for off-tract improvements.



   A.   An applicant or developer, as a condition for approval of a
subdivision or site plan, shall be required to pay his pro rata share of the
cost of providing only reasonable and necessary street improvements and
water, sewage and drainage facilities, and easements therefor, located
outside the property limits of the subdivision or development but
necessitated or required by construction or improvements within such
subdivision or development. Such cost distributed shall be based on
circulation and comprehensive utility service plans pursuant to §
175-11A(2)(d) and (e) [See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28b(4) and (5)], respectively.
Fair and reasonable standards shall be used to determine the proportionate or
pro rata amount of the cost of such facilities that shall be borne by each
applicant/developer or owner within a related and common area. These
standards shall not be altered subsequent to preliminary approval.



   B.   Where an applicant/developer pays the amount determined as his
pro rata share under protest, he shall institute legal action within one year
of such payment in order to preserve the right to a judicial determination of
the fairness and reasonableness of such amount.



   C.   Improvements to be constructed at the sole expense of the
applicant. In cases where the need for an off-site improvement is created by
the proposed subdivision and where no other property owners receive a special
benefit thereby, the Planning Board may require the applicant, as a condition
for subdivision approval and at the applicant's expense, to acquire lands
outside of the subdivision and improve and dedicate such lands to the town or
the county or, in lieu thereof, require the applicant to deposit with the
town a sum of money sufficient to allow the town to acquire and to improve
such lands, subject to and in furtherance of the terms and provisions of this
chapter.



   D.   Other improvements.



      (1)   In cases where the need for any off-site improvements is
created by the proposed subdivision and where the Planning Board determines
that properties outside the subdivision will also be benefited by the
improvement, the Planning Board shall forthwith forward to the Town Council a
list and description of all such improvements, together with its request that
the Town Council determine and advise the Board of the procedure to be
followed in the construction or installation thereof.



      (2)   The Town Council, after receipt of said list and
description, shall determine and advise the Planning Board whether:



         (a)   The improvement or improvements are to be
constructed or installed by the town:



            [1]   As a general improvement, the cost of which
is to be borne at general expense (except as hereinafter otherwise provided
as to a contribution thereto by the applicant);



            [2]   As a local improvement, all or part of the
cost of which is to be specifically assessed against properties benefited
thereby in proportion to benefits conferred by the improvements in accordance
with Chapter 56 of Title 40 of the Revised Statutes (except as hereinafter
otherwise provided as to a contribution thereto by the applicant); or



         (b)   The improvement or improvements are to be
constructed or installed by the applicant under a formula for partial
reimbursement as hereinafter set forth.



      (3)   If the governing body shall determine that the
improvement or improvements shall be constructed or installed under
Subsection D(2)(a)[1] hereinabove, the Planning Board shall estimate, with
the aid of the Board Engineer or such other persons as have pertinent
information or expertise, the amount, if any, by which the total cost thereof
will exceed the total amount by which all properties, including the
subdivision, will be specifically benefited thereby, and the applicant shall
be liable to the town for such excess. Further, the Town Council shall adopt
an ordinance authorizing and providing for the financing of the improvement
or improvements in a manner consistent with the obligation of the applicant
to any excess of total cost over total benefits conferred, as set forth above.



      (4)   If the Town Council shall determine that the improvement
or improvements shall be constructed or installed under Subsection D(2)(a)[2]
hereinabove, the Planning Board shall, as provided in Subsection D(3)
hereinabove, estimate the difference between the total costs to be incurred
and the total amount by which all properties to be benefited thereby,
including the subdivision property, will be specially benefited by the
improvement, and the applicant shall be liable to the town therefor, as well
as for the amount of any special assessments against the subdivision property
for benefits conferred by the improvement or improvements. Further, the Town
Council shall adopt an ordinance authorizing and providing for the financing
of the improvement or improvements and the assessment of benefits arising
therefor in a manner consistent with the obligation of the applicant with
respect thereto; and proceedings under said ordinance shall be in accordance
with Chapter 56 of Title 40 of the Revised Statutes, except to the extent
modified by the obligation of the applicant for any excess of total cost over
total benefits conferred, as set forth above.



      (5)   If the Town Council shall determine that the improvement
or improvements are to be constructed or installed by the applicant under
Subsection D(2)(b) hereinabove, the Planning Board shall in like manner
estimate the amount of such excess and the applicant shall be liable to the
town therefor, as well as for the amount of any special assessments against
the subdivision property for benefits conferred by the improvement or
improvements. However, the applicant shall be entitled to be reimbursed by
the town for the amount of any special assessments against property other
than the subdivision for benefits conferred by the improvement or
improvements, such reimbursement to be made if, as and when the special
assessments against such other property are received by the town. Further,
the Town Council shall adopt an ordinance authorizing and providing for the
assessment against all properties, including the subdivision, of benefits
conferred by the improvement or improvements; and proceedings under said
ordinance shall be in accordance with Chapter 56 of Title 40 of the Revised
Statutes. However, any such assessment against the subdivision property shall
be marked paid and satisfied in consideration of the construction or
installation of the improvement or improvements by the applicant.



      (6)   If the Town Council shall not adopt such an ordinance or
resolution within said time, the final subdivision shall be designed
accordingly, and the Planning Board shall thereupon grant or deny final
approval.



§ 175-120. Performance standards.



   An application for a permit shall provide relevant documentation that
the intended use will comply with the performance standards enumerated below.
In the case of a structure being built where the future use is not known, a
construction permit may be issued until such time as this documentation is
submitted with respect to the particular occupant. It shall be the burden of
the applicant to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the proposed use meets
the standards required by this chapter.



   A.   Electricity. Electric or electronic equipment shall be shielded
so that there is no interference with any radio or television reception at
the lot line or beyond the operator's dwelling unit, in the case of
multifamily dwellings, as the result of the operation of such equipment.
Electronic equipment shall be in accordance with Federal Communications
Commission standards.



   B.   Glare. No use shall produce a strong, dazzling light or a
reflection of a strong, dazzling light or glare beyond its lot lines.
Exterior lighting shall be shielded, buffered and directed so that glare,
direct light or reflection will not become a nuisance to adjoining
properties, adjoining dwelling units, adjoining districts or streets.



   C.   Heat. No use shall produce heat perceptible beyond its lot
lines. Further, no use shall be permitted which would cause the temperature
to rise or fall in any part of ponds, streams or other watercourses.



   D.   Noise. Noise levels for commercial and industrial enterprises
shall be designed and operated in accordance with the regulations established
by the New Jersey State Department of Environmental Protection, as they are
adopted and amended.



   E.   Odor. Odors shall not be discernible at the lot line or beyond
to such an extent that they become a nuisance.



   F.   Storage and waste disposal. No materials or wastes shall be
deposited upon a lot in such form or manner that they may be transferred off
the lot by natural causes or forces, nor shall any substance be deposited
which can contaminate an underground aquifer or otherwise render such
underground aquifer undesirable as a source of water supply or recreation or
which will destroy aquatic life. All materials or wastes which might cause
fumes or dust or which constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible or
otherwise attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored indoors and
enclosed in appropriate containers adequate to eliminate such hazards.



   G.   Vapor. No use shall produce smoke, ash, dust, fumes, vapors,
gases or other forms of air pollution which could cause damage to the health
of any person, animal or vegetation or which could cause excessive soiling.



   H.   Vibration. There shall be no vibration which is discernible to
the human sense of feel beyond the immediate site on which such use is
located.



   I.   Airborne emissions. In all districts, no use, activity,
operation or device shall be established, modified, constructed or used
without having obtained valid permits and certificates from the Bureau of Air
Pollution Control, N.J.D.E.P. 7:27-8. Specifically, no use, activity,
operation or device shall be established, modified or constructed without a
valid permit to construct. No use, activity, operation or device shall be
operated, occupied or used without a valid certificate to operate control
apparatus or equipment. Proof of compliance with this requirement shall be
the submission of duplicate copies of the permit to construct and certificate
to operate. In addition to the requirements of the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, the following shall also apply:



      (1)   Steam emissions. No visible emissions of steam having an
equivalent capacity greater than 60% and excepting direct results of
combustion shall be permitted within 500 feet of a residential district.



      (2)   Toxic matter. Emissions of chemicals, gases, components
or elements, listed as being toxic matter by the American Conference of
Governmental Hygienist, the New Jersey Department of Labor and Industry or
the United States Environmental Protection Agency shall not exceed the
threshold level, as determined in accordance with A.S.T.M.D. 1391. The
emission of concentrations, levels or mass loadings in excess of the
threshold value shall be permitted only if the emissions of said toxic matter
comply with the applicable regulations of the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, the New Jersey Department of Labor and Industry,
and the United States Environmental Protection Agency. Proof of compliance
shall require the submission of duplicate copies of certifications or permits
from the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and the New Jersey
Department of Labor and Industry approving the concentrations, level or
loading proposed by the applicant.



   J.   Greenhouse gas emissions. Effort shall be made to reduce
vehicle trips required per household.



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



§ 175-121. Number of principal structures and uses permitted.



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989; 3-22-2010 by Ord. No. 3-2010;
11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   Unless otherwise specified for a particular zoning district, no more
than one principal building or structure shall be permitted on one lot except
as otherwise noted in this chapter. Unless otherwise specified for a
particular zoning district, no more than one principal use shall be located
on one lot, except for forestry, agriculture, horticulture, fish and wildlife
management, and recreational development on agricultural lands.



§ 175-122. Public utilities.



   All public services shall be connected to an approved public utilities
system where one exists.



   A.   Except as permitted under the provisions of Subsection B of
this section, the developer shall arrange with the servicing utility for the
underground installation of the utilities' distribution supply lines and
service connections. New utility distribution lines and telephone lines to
locations not presently served by utilities shall be placed underground,
except for those lines which are located on or adjacent to active
agricultural operations. 



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



   B.   The developer may be required to submit to the approving
authority, prior to the granting of final approval, a written instrument from
each serving utility which shall evidence full compliance or intended full
compliance with the provisions of this section; provided however, that lots
which abut existing streets where overhead electric or telephone distribution
supply lines and service connections have heretofore been installed may be
supplied with electric and telephone service utilities overhead. In the case
of existing overhead utilities, should a road widening or an extension of
service or other such condition occur as a result of the development and
necessitate the replacement, relocation or extension of overhead lines, such
new facilities shall be installed underground.



   C.   Any installation under this section to be performed by a
servicing utility shall be exempt from requiring performance guaranties.



   D.   Public utility uses, such as water towers, pumping stations,
electric substations, radio towers, transmission lines and switching stations
which must be provided above ground, may be permitted as a conditional use,
all zones specified, provided that the use and/or structures shall adhere to
the minimum standards of the particular zone and the following:



      (1)   A statement is submitted setting forth the reasons that
the proposed installation must be provided above ground in a specific
location, and why it is necessary and convenient for the efficiency of the
public utility system or for the satisfactory and convenient provision of
service by the utility to the neighborhood or area in which the particular
use is to be located.



      (2)   The design of any building in connection with such
facility conforms to the general character of the area and will not adversely
affect the safe and comfortable enjoyment of property rights of the zone in
which it is located.



      (3)   Adequate and attractive fences and other safety devices
will be provided.



      (4)   Sufficient landscaping, including shrubs, trees and lawn
in accordance with § 175-125 of this chapter, are provided for screening and
will be periodically maintained. This requirement shall not apply to water
towers. 



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



      (5)   Water supply and distribution. The water distribution
system shall be approved by and designed in accordance with the requirements
and specifications as set forth by the Board of Water Commissioners of the
Town of Hammonton.



      (6)   Sewerage facilities and system. Eight-inch vitrified
clay, asbestos cement or an equivalent approved pipe shall be used for all
sanitary sewer pipe, unless otherwise directed. All joints shall be an O-ring
type gasket to meet the specification of 100 gallons per inch of diameter per
mile of pipe. The type of system, main size, specifications, etc., shall be
reviewed by the Town Engineer and approved by the Mayor and Town Council.



   E.   All electric transmission lines shall be located on existing
towers or underground to the maximum extent practical.



§ 175-123. Open space and recreation. 



[Amended 8-28-2006 by Ord. No. 16-2006]



   A.   Purpose. It is the purpose and intent of this section that all
subdivisions of land and other forms of development that include residential
uses within the Town of Hammonton preserve a portion of the land area as
hereafter specified for open space and recreational uses. It is hereby
declared it is the intent and purpose of this section that open space and
recreation, which may include both active and passive facilities, are of
equal importance; and both serve to advance and promote the public health,
safety, morals and general welfare.



   B.   Exemption. The following zoning districts and subdivisions are
hereby exempt from the provisions of this section:



      (1)   Subdivisions in PA, FA, AP, AP/CLI and M-1 Zoning
Districts that do not include residential uses.



      (2)   Subdivisions in the B1 and B2 Zoning Districts that do
not include residential uses.



   C.   Contributions in lieu of active recreation for subdivisions and
other residential development.



      (1)   Applicants for minor subdivisions creating one dwelling
unit, in addition to the remaining lot, shall make a contribution in lieu of
active recreation facilities in the amount of $2,500 per lot prior to the
signing of the deeds or final plat by any Planning Board representative.



      (2)   Applicants for subdivisions of land and/or other
residential development that create an aggregate of two or more lots and/or
dwelling units shall be required by pay $5,000 per lot or unit prior to the
signing of the deeds or final plat by any Planning Board representative.



§ 175-124. Service stations and car washes.



   A.   Service stations.



      (1)   The minimum lot size for service stations shall be
20,000 square feet, and the minimum frontage shall be 150 feet.



      (2)   No service station shall be located within 500 feet of
any firehouse, school, playground, church, hospital, public building or
institution.



      (3)   All appliances, pits, storage areas and trash
facilities, other than gasoline filling pumps or air pumps, shall be within a
building. Gasoline filling pumps and air pumps shall be permitted within the
required front yard space of service stations, but shall not be closer than
20 feet to any future street line. All lubrication, repair or similar
activities shall be performed in a fully enclosed building, and no dismantled
parts shall be displayed outside of any enclosed building.



      (4)   Service stations shall comply with Chapter 118, Motor
Vehicles: Inoperable, 20 of the Code of the Town of Hammonton with respect to
the storage of junked or inoperable motor vehicles upon their premises.



      (5)   Not more than two items, such as motor vehicles,
trailers or similar equipment, shall be displayed for sale as part of a
service station.



      (6)   No parking shall be permitted on unpaved areas.



      (7)   Auto service stations shall be permitted the following
signs:



         (a)   One freestanding sign advertising the name of the
station or garage and the principal products sold on the premises, including
any special company or brand name, insignia or emblem, provided that each
such sign shall not exceed 35 feet in the area on a side and shall be set
back 20 feet from street lines and 50 feet from side lot lines, and provided
further that the sign shall be not less than 10 nor more than 20 feet above
ground.



         (b)   One temporary sign located inside the property
line and specifically advertising special seasonal servicing of automobiles,
provided that said sign does not exceed seven square feet in area.



         (c)   Directional signs or lettering displayed over
individual entrance doors or bays and consisting only of the words "washing,"
"lubrication," "repairs," "mechanic on duty" or other words closely similar
in import, provided that there shall not be more than one such sign over each
entrance or bay.



         (d)   Customary lettering or other insignia which are a
structural part of a gasoline pump, consisting only of the brand name of a
gasoline sold, lead-warning sign, a price indicator and any other sign
required by law.



   B.   Car washes.



      (1)   All activities must be conducted within a totally
enclosed building.



      (2)   Drainage from inside the building(s) shall feed into the
municipal sanitary sewer system or dry well as approved by the Town Engineer,
but in no case shall drainage be discharged into the municipal storm sewer or
any natural drainage way or swale. Nothing contained herein shall be
construed to limit the town's power of review and approval of connections to
the municipal sanitary sewer system. A discharge of any type must adhere to
the requirements of NJPDES regulations and § 175-137 of this chapter.



      (3)   All of the area, yard, building coverage and height
requirements of the respective zone and other applicable requirements of this
chapter must be met.



§ 175-125. Shade trees.



   A.   In areas where there is no natural shade, shade trees will be
set along the lot frontage a minimum of 10 feet inside the property line. The
type and suggested spacing are as follows:



      (1)   Pin and willow oaks (Green spire linden): 50 feet apart
in B-1, R-1, R-2, MD.



      (2)   Sugar maple: 30 feet apart in B-1, R-1, R-2, MD.



      (3)   Callery pear: 25 feet apart in B-1, R-1, R-2, MD.



   B.   The age, height, caliper and layout shall be as specified by
the Planning Board.



   C.   All trees planted in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter shall be nursery grown of substantially uniform size and shape and
shall have straight trunks. Ornamental trees need not have straight trunks,
but must conform in all other respects to the provisions for trees and tree
planting outlined in this chapter. Native vegetation shall be utilized for
landscaping, including but not limited to those species listed in N.J.A.C.
7:50-0.23(a)1.iii of the New Jersey Pinelands Comprehensive Management Plan.



   D.   Stripping trees from a lot or filling around trees on a lot
shall not be permitted unless it can be shown that grading or construction
requirements necessitate removal of trees, in which case these lots shall be
replanted with trees to reestablish the tone of the area and to conform to
adjacent lots. Special attention shall be directed toward the preservation of
major trees by professional means. Also see § 175-136, Vegetation, of this
article.



§ 175-126. Sidewalks.  [Amended 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   A.   Concrete sidewalks shall have a compressive strength of 2,500
pounds per square inch after 28 days and shall be Class C concrete in
accordance with New Jersey State Highway Specifications. Sidewalks shall not
be less than four feet in width, nor less than four inches in thickness,
except as driveways and aprons, which shall be not less than six inches in
thickness. Sidewalks in Downtown Districts and Gateway Districts (see §
175-154.1 through § 175-154.7) shall not be less than five feet in width,
not including planting strips. A preformed bituminous expansion joint filter,
½ inch thick, shall be a float finish with the edges finished with a
suitable finishing tool. The engineer shall reject any concrete surface which
has been defaced, marred or improperly finished.



   B.   Sidewalks in Downtown Districts DT-4 (see § 175-154.4 through
§ 175-154.7) shall be continuous, not including joints and brick pavers,
from the build-to line to the curb.



   C.   Sidewalk construction shall comply with the latest standards of
the American Disabilities Act (ADA) throughout the town.  Within the
downtown, and adjacent districts thereto, a specific theme for sidewalk
construction which includes a brick ribbon border shall apply.



§ 175-127. Sight triangles.



   A.   On a lot in any district, sight triangles shall be required in
addition to the right-of-way, in which no grading, planting or structure
shall be erected or maintained so as to interfere with vision between a
height of two feet and 10 feet as measured from the center-line grade of an
intersecting street or driveway. The "sight triangle" is defined as that area
inside or outside the right-of-way which is bounded by the AASHTO defined
sight lines.  All sight triangles are subject to AASHTO standards.



[Amended 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   B.   Setback requirements. The setback requirements for sight
triangles shall be measured from the point of intersection of the center
lines, in accordance with the following schedule:



      (1)   Arterial streets: 300 feet.



      (2)   Major streets: 250 feet.



      (3)   Collector streets: 200 feet.



      (4)   Secondary streets: 200 feet.



      (5)   Minor streets: 90 feet.



      (6)   Marginal streets: 90 feet.



§ 175-128.  (Reserved) 20.1



20.1   Editor's Note: Former § 175-128, Signs, as amended, was superseded
by Ord. No. 23-2011, adopted 11-28-2011. See now § 175-161, Signs.



§ 175-129. Soil erosion and sediment control.



   A soil erosion and sediment control plan for any proposed development
must be submitted to the Cape-Atlantic Soil Conservation District for its
review and comments. A copy of the approved plan must also be filed with the
Mayor and Town Council and the Town Engineer for review and comment.



§ 175-130. Soil removal and redistribution.



   A.   The excavation and grading for completion of a development
shall be done in accordance with the soil conservation district approved plan
which contains soil erosion and sediment control provisions. Excavation of
soil other than required for the construction of approved structures and
supporting facilities, such as but not limited to streets, driveways and
parking areas, except when resource extraction is authorized under the
provisions of Article VIII and § 175-105 of this chapter, shall be
prohibited. Regrading of property so as to redistribute topsoil throughout
the site from areas excavated for such approved structures and supporting
facilities shall be permitted, but shall be done to minimize or eliminate the
erosion of soil. These areas shall be stabilized by seeding and planting.



   B.   No topsoil shall be removed from the site or used as spoil.
Topsoil moved during the course of construction shall be redistributed so as
to provide at least five inches of cover to all areas of subdivision and
shall be stabilized by seeding or planting in accordance with § 175-136.



§ 175-131. Storage of recreational vehicles and boats.



   The outdoor storage of an unoccupied recreational vehicle, motor home,
travel trailer, camper or small boat shall be permitted on single-family
properties, provided that:



   A.   Such storage shall not be located in any required front yard.



   B.   The travel trailer, camper or small boat shall not exceed 35
feet in length and eight feet in width.



   C.   Only one such travel trailer, camper or small boat shall be
permitted to be stored outdoors at any single-family residence.



   D.   Recreational vehicles and motor homes exceeding 35 feet in
length may be stored only within the required building setback lines.



   E.   Any such vehicles stored in accordance with this section shall
not be occupied and shall not be provided with utility connections other than
for the maintenance of such vehicles.



   F.   No travel trailer, camper or boat stored in conformance with
this section shall remain in such storage for longer than 12 consecutive
months.



§ 175-132. Storage of commercial vehicles.



   Automobiles, station wagons, small pickups or panel trucks less than
one ton, jeep vehicles, travelalls and similar types of vehicles used for
commercial purposes are permitted in all zones. Trucks and other commercial
vehicles not mentioned above shall not be parked or stored overnight in any
residential zone, except for vehicles engaged in construction parked or
stored on an active construction site.



§ 175-133. (Reserved) 21



21.   Editor's Note: Former § 175-133, Stormwater Management, as amended,
was superseded by Ord. No. 14-2007, adopted 5-21-2007. See now Art. XVII,
Stormwater Management.



§ 175-134. Streets.



   A.   Reserve strips denying or controlling access thereto from
abutting lands are not permitted, except where control or ownership of such
strips is vested in the Town of Hammonton for future street or road purposes
or where reverse frontage is provided and tree planting, noise abatement or
other buffer zones are established and such lots or lands do not require
direct access.



   B.   Minor streets and alleys shall be so designated as to
discourage through traffic.



[Amended 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   C.   Subdivisions abutting arterial streets shall provide either a
marginal access service road, reverse frontage with a planted buffer strip or
an additional lane for acceleration and deceleration along the entire
frontage of the subdivision to prevent direct-turning movements onto or from
arterial streets, as determined by the Board to be appropriate.



   D.   Subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets that do
not conform to widths shown on the Master Plan or as required by this chapter
shall dedicate additional width along either one or both sides of said
street. If the subdivision is along one side only, ½ of the required extra
width shall be dedicated.



   E.   Dead-end streets (culs-de-sac) shall not exceed 600 feet in
length and shall provide a turnaround at the end with a radius of not less
than 50 feet at the curbline and tangent whenever possible to the right side
of the street. If a dead-end street is of a temporary nature, a turnaround
shall be provided with a fifty-foot radius tangent to the right side of the
street, and provisions shall be made for future extension of the street and
reversion of the excess right-of-way to the adjoining properties.



   F.   All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of
sufficient radius to provide a smooth transition and proper sight distance.



   G.   A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between
reverse curves on arterial and collector streets, as stipulated in the design
requirements of the New Jersey State Highway Department.



   H.   Horizontal curves at all ninety-degree street bends shall have
a minimum radius of 100 feet along the inside curve line.



   I.   Street intersections.



      (1)   Angles at intersections, streets or roads connecting
with any road in the town shall be at right angles in the case of arterials
and collectors. All other streets shall be at right angles wherever possible,
but not less than 60º measured at the center line of the street or road. The
block corner at intersections shall be rounded at the curbline with a curve
having a radius of not less than 20 feet. Access road connections shall be at
the safest possible angle as determined by the Town Engineer.



      (2)   Spacing. Two new streets connecting with existing town
streets shall be required for a subdivision or development where frontages in
excess of 1,200 feet are present. Streets shall connect with the same side of
a town street at intervals of 600 feet between center lines, unless waived to
increase safety by the specific recommendation of the Town Engineer. In
determining the spacing of streets, consideration shall be given to the
intersections on all sides of the development. If possible, streets which
connect with the existing road system from opposite sides of a town road
shall not be offset. If the roads must be offset, they shall be separated by
at least 150 feet between their center lines.



      (3)   Grading. A maximum road grade of 2% shall be used to
ensure safe stopping under icy conditions on any new streets connecting with
existing and proposed streets at their approaches to the intersection. Grades
shall be designed to direct surface drainage away from the existing streets,
unless intercepting underground drainage facilities are provided to prevent
flow of water over the street surface.



   J.   Construction design standards.



      (1)   Hot mixed asphalt constructed in two courses, as
follows, and in accordance with the current New Jersey State Highway
Department Specifications for such construction. The first or base course
shall be a hot mixed asphalt base course having a minimum compacted thickness
of two and a half inches. The second or finish course shall be hot mixed
asphalt surface course having a minimum compacted thickness of two inches.
All streets shall be curbed on both sides.  Streets having a grade of more
than 5% or less than 0.5%, but in no case less than 0.4%, shall be guttered
on both sides. The minimum requirement for the Dense Grated Aggregate ("DGA")
subbase course of any street shall be six inches thick and conform to the
requirements specified in the current New Jersey State Highway Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.



      (2)   Where subbase conditions of proposed streets are wet,
springy or of such a nature that surfacing would be inadvisable without first
treating the subbase, the treatment of the subbase shall be made in the
following manner. The street shall be excavated to a depth that shall be a
minimum of 12 inches below the proposed finished subbase grade. Where
required by the Town Engineer, a system of porous concrete pipe subsurface
drains shall be constructed beneath the surface of the road and connected to
a suitable drain. After this subbase material has been properly placed and
compacted, the street surfacing material as described heretofore shall be
spread thereon. All streets shall be provided with catch basins and pipes
where same may be necessary for proper surface drainage. (The requirements of
this section shall not be satisfied by the construction of dry wells.)



      (3)   Prior to the construction of the final paving, the
developer shall have installed all underground utility mains and services
such as water, sanitary and storm sewer pipe, telephone, electric and gas.
The services mentioned shall consist of the installation of connections and
laterals from the main to a point on the property side of the curb. 



[Amended 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   K.   Street continuation.



      (1)   All streets or roads which are designed to become part
of the street or road system of the Town of Hammonton, as shown on the
preliminary and final plans, shall be coterminous with adjoining links to
said system. The street pattern shall provide for connections to surrounding
property to interlink future residential streets.



      (2)   Dead-end streets shall be avoided wherever possible. If
their use is unavoidable, all such street and roads serving several otherwise
isolated lots, where necessary in the opinion of the Town Engineer and the
Planning Board, shall have circular turning spaces at the end with a minimum
radius of 50 feet at the curbline; and, if sidewalks need to be provided for,
the overall minimum radius of the right-of-way shall be 60 feet. Where future
street extensions result in a dead-end street, the road surface may be paved
the full width of the right-of-way for temporary turning movements, if
required by the Town Engineer.



   L.   In all developments, the minimum street right-of-way shall be
measured from lot line to lot line and shall be in accordance with the
following schedule, but in no case shall a new street that is a continuation
of an existing street be continued at a width less than the existing street,
although a greater width may be required in accordance with the following
schedule. Where any arterial or collector street intersects another arterial
or collector street, the right-of-way and cartway requirements shall be
increased by 10 feet on the right side of the street(s) approaching the
intersection for a distance of 300 feet from the intersection of the center
lines.



 

Type of Street
 
Right-of-Way (feet)
 
Traffic Lanes
 
Shoulder


Number
 
Width (feet)
 
Widths Within Gutters (feet)
 
Width Between Gutters (feet)


Court
 
50
 
2
 
12
 
--
 
24


Lane
 
50
 
2
 
12
 
--
 
24


Sub collector
 
60
 
2
 
15
 
--
 
30


Collector
 
66
 
4
 
11
 
6
 
56


Arterial
 
80
 
4
 
12
 
8
 
64



 



   M.   In case of residential development, Residential Site
Improvement Standards (RSIS) for street dimensions shall apply. 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



§ 175-135. Swimming pools.



   A.   No private residential swimming pool shall be constructed or
installed on any lot unless the lot contains a residence building. Pools
shall be located in rear yard areas only and shall meet the setback distances
for accessory buildings as specified in Article XIII for each particular
zoning district, except that in no case may a swimming pool be located closer
than 15 feet to any lot line.



   B.   A swimming pool shall occupy no more than 75% of the yard area
in which it is located.



   C.   All private residential swimming pools shall be constructed in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 251, Swimming Pools, of the Code of
the Town of Hammonton.



§ 175-136. Vegetation. 



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989; 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



   A.   No development shall be carried out by any person unless it is
designed to avoid irreversible adverse impacts on the survival of any local
populations of the threatened or endangered plants of the Pinelands cited in
N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.27, and as may be from time to time amended, of the
Comprehensive Management Plan.



   B.   All clearing and soil disturbance activities shall be limited
to that which is necessary to accommodate an activity, use or structure which
is permitted by this chapter.



   C.   Where practical, all clearing and soil disturbance activities
associated with an activity, use or structure, other than agriculture,
forestry and resource extraction, shall:



      (1)   Avoid wooded areas, including New Jersey's Record Trees
as published by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection in 1991
and periodically updated; and



      (2)   Revegetate or landscape areas temporarily cleared or
disturbed during development activities.



   D.   All applications for major development shall contain a
landscaping or revegetation plan which incorporates the elements set forth in
Subsection E below.



   E.   In order to conserve water, conserve natural features and
reduce pollution from the use of fertilizers, pesticides and other soil
supplements, all landscaping or revegetation plans prepared pursuant to
Subsection D above or required pursuant to §§ 175-69B(3) and 175-71C(3)
shall incorporate the following elements:



      (1)   The limits of clearing shall be identified.



      (2)   Existing vegetation, including New Jersey's Record Trees
as published by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection in 1991
and periodically updated, shall be incorporated into the landscape design
where practical.



      (3)   Permanent lawn or turf areas shall be limited to those
specifically intended for active human use such as play fields, golf courses
and lawns associated with a residence or other principal nonresidential use.
Existing wooded areas shall not be cleared and converted to lawns except when
directly associated with and adjacent to a proposed structure.



      (4)   Shrubs and trees authorized by N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.25 shall
be used for revegetation or landscaping purposes. Other shrubs and trees may
be used in the following circumstances:



         (a)   When the parcel to be developed or its environs
contain a predominance of shrubs and tree species not authorized by N.J.A.C.
7:50-6.25;



         (b)   For limited ornamental purposes around buildings
and other structures; or



         (c)   When limited use of other shrubs or tree species
is required for proper screening or buffering.



§ 175-137. Water quality.



   A.   All development permitted under this chapter shall be designed
and carried out so that the quality of surface and groundwater will be
protected and maintained. Agricultural use shall not be considered
development for purposes of this section.



   B.   Except as specifically authorized in this section, no
development which degrades surface or ground water quality or which
establishes new point sources of pollution shall be permitted. 



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



   C.   No development shall be permitted which does not meet the
minimum water quality standards of the State of New Jersey or the United
States.



   D.   The following point and nonpoint sources may be developed and
operated in the town: 



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989; 6-12-1989 by Ord. No. 19-1989]



      (1)   Development of new or the expansion of existing
commercial, industrial and wastewater treatment facilities, or the
development of new or the extension of existing nonpoint sources, except
those specifically regulated in Subsections D(2) through (6) below, provided
that: 



[Amended 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



         (a)   There will be no direct discharge into any surface
water body;



         (b)   All discharges from the facility or use are of a
quality and quantity such that groundwater exiting from the parcel of land or
entering a surface body of water will not exceed two parts per million
nitrate/nitrogen;



         (c)   All public wastewater treatment facilities are
designed to accept and treat septage; and



         (d)   All storage facilities, including ponds or
lagoons, are lined to prevent leakage into groundwater.



      (2)   Development of new wastewater treatment or collection
facilities which are designed to improve the level of nitrate/nitrogen
attenuation of more than one existing on-site wastewater treatment system
where a public health problem has been identified may be exempted from the
standards of Subsection D(1)(b) above, provided that



         (a)   There will be no direct discharge into any surface
water body;



         (b)   The facility is designed only to accommodate
wastewater from existing residential, commercial and industrial development;



         (c)   Adherence to Subsection D(1)(b) above cannot be
achieved due to limiting site conditions or that the costs to comply with the
standard will result in excessive user fees; and 



[Amended 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



         (d)   The design level of nitrate/nitrogen attenuation
is the maximum possible within the cost limitations imposed by such user fee
guidelines but in no case shall groundwater exiting from the parcel or
entering a surface body of water exceed five parts per million
nitrate/nitrogen. 



[Amended 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



      (3)   Improvements to existing commercial, industrial, and
wastewater treatment facilities which discharge directly into surface waters,
provided that:



         (a)   There is no practical alternative available that
would adhere to the standards of Subsection D(1)(a) above; 



[Amended 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



         (b)   There is no increase in the existing approved
capacity of the facility; and



         (c)   All discharges from the facility into surface
waters are such that the nitrate/nitrogen levels of the surface waters at the
discharge point do not exceed two parts per million. In the event that
nitrate/nitrogen levels in the surface waters immediately upstream of the
discharge point exceed two parts per million, the discharge shall not exceed
two parts per million nitrate/nitrogen.



      (4)   Individual on-site septic wastewater treatment systems
which are not intended to reduce the level of nitrate/nitrogen in the
wastewater, provided that:



[Amended 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



         (a)   The proposed development to be served by the
system is other wise permitted pursuant to this chapter;



         (b)   The design of the system and its discharge point,
and the size of the entire contiguous parcel on which the system or systems
is located, will ensure that groundwater exiting from the entire contiguous
parcel or entering a surface body of water will not exceed two parts per
million nitrate/nitrogen, calculated pursuant to the Pinelands dilution model
dated December 1993, as amended, subject to the provisions of Subsection
D(4)(c) below. The entire contiguous parcel may include any contiguous lands
to be dedicated as open space as part of the proposed development but may not
include previously dedicated road rights-of-way or any contiguous lands that
have been deed restricted pursuant to § 175-145E(10) or 175-145J;



         (c)   Only contiguous land located within the same
zoning district and Pinelands management area as the proposed system or
systems may be utilized for septic dilution purposes, except for the
development of an individual single-family dwelling on a lot existing as of
January 14, 1981, or nonresidential development on a lot of five acres or
less existing as of January 14, 1981; 



[Amended 3-25-2002 by Ord. No. 12-2002]



         (d)   The depth to seasonal high-water table is at least
five feet;



         (e)   Any potable water well will be drilled and cased
to a depth of at least 100 feet, unless the well penetrates an impermeable
clay aquiclude, in which case the well shall be cased to at least 50 feet;



         (f)   The system will be maintained and inspected in
accordance with the requirements of N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.85(a);



         (g)   The technology has been approved for use by the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection; and



         (h)   Flow values for nonresidential development shall
be determined based on the values contained in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-7.4, as amended,
except that number of employees may not be utilized in calculating flow
values for office uses. In the event that N.J.A.C. 7:9A-7.4 does not provide
flow values for a specific use, but a flow value is assigned for that use in
7:14A-23.3(a), the flow value specified in N.J.A.C. 7:14A-23.3(a) shall be
used in calculating flow.



      (5)   Individual on-site septic waste water treatment systems
which are intended to reduce the level of nitrate/nitrogen in the wastewater,
provided that: 



[Amended 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



         (a)   The standards set forth in Subsection D(4)(a) and
(c) through (h) above are met;



         (b)   If the proposed development is nonresidential, it
is located outside the PA, FA, AP, AP/CLI and SAP Districts; and



[Amended 3-15-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]



         (c)   The design of the system and its discharge point,
and the size of the entire contiguous parcel on which the system or systems
is located, will ensure that groundwater exiting from the entire contiguous
parcel or entering a surface body of water will not exceed two parts per
million nitrate/nitrogen, calculated pursuant to the Pinelands dilution model
dated December 1993, as amended, subject to the provisions of Subsection
D(4)(c) above and the assumptions and requirements set forth in N.J.A.C.
7:50-6.84(a)5iv. The entire contiguous parcel may include any contiguous
lands to be dedicated as open space as part of the proposed development but
may not include previously dedicated road rights-of-way or any contiguous
lands that have been deed restricted pursuant to § 175-144E(10) or 175-144J.



      (6)   Surface water runoff, provided that the standards set
forth in § 175-132A(7) are met.



[Added 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



      (7)   Alternate design pilot program treatment systems,
provided that: 



[Added 5-27-2003 by Ord. No. 7-2003]



         (a)   The proposed development to be served by the
system is residential and is otherwise permitted pursuant to the provisions
of this subsection;



         (b)   The design of the system and its discharge point
and the size of the entire contiguous parcel on which the system or systems
is located will ensure that groundwater exiting from the entire contiguous
parcel or entering a surface body of water will not exceed two parts per
million nitrate/nitrogen, calculated pursuant to the Pinelands dilution model
dated December, 1993, as amended, subject to the provisions of Subsection
D(7)(c) below. The entire contiguous parcel may include any contiguous lands
to be dedicated as open space as part of the proposed development but may not
include previously dedicated road rights-of-way or any contiguous lands that
have been deed restricted pursuant to §§ 175-145E(10) or 175-145J;



         (c)   Only contiguous lands located within the same
zoning district and Pinelands management area as the proposed system or
systems may be utilized for septic dilution proposes, except for the
development of an individual single-family dwelling on a lot existing as of
January 14, 1981, nonresidential development on a lot of five acres or less
existing as of January 14, 1981, or cluster development as permitted by
N.J.A.C. 7:50-5.19;



         (d)   The depth to seasonal high water table is at last
five feet;



         (e)   Any potable water well will be drilled and cased
to a depth of at least 100 feet, unless the well penetrates an impermeable
clay aquiclude, in which came the well shall be cased to at least 50 feet;



         (f)   No more then 10 alternate design pilot program
treatment systems utilizing the same technology shall be installed in the
development of any parcel if those systems are each serving one single-family
dwelling;



         (g)   Each system shall be equipped with automatic
dialing capability to the manufacturer or its agent in the event of a
mechanical malfunction;



         (h)   Each system shall be designed and constructed so
that samples of effluent leaving the alternate design pilot program septic
system can be readily taken to confirm the performance of the technology;



         (i)   The manufacturer or its agent shall provide to
each owner an operation and maintenance manual approved pursuant to N.J.A.C.
7:50-10.22(a)2iv;



         (j)   Each system shall be covered by a five-year
warranty and a minimum five-year maintenance contract consistent with those
approved pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-10.22(a)2v that cannot be cancelled and is
renewable and which includes a provision requiring that the manufacturer or
it agent inspect the system at least once a year and undertake any
maintenance or repairs determined to be necessary during any such inspection
or as a result of observations made at any other time;



         (k)   The property owner shall record with the deed to
the property a notice consistent with that approved pursuant to N.J.A.C.
7:50-10.22(a)2vi that identifies the technology, acknowledges the owner's
responsibility to operate and maintain it in accordance with the manual
requited in Subsection D(7)(i) above, and grants access, with reasonable
notice, to the local Board of Health, the Commission and its agents for
inspection and monitoring purposes. The recorded deed shall run with the
property and shall ensure that the maintenance requirements are binding on
any owner of the property during the life of the system and that the
monitoring requirements are binding on any owner of the property during the
time period the monitoring requirements apply pursuant to the pilot program
or any subsequent regulations adopted by the Commission that apply to said
system; and



         (l)   No system shall be installed after August 5, 2007.



   E.   Water-saving devices such as water-saving toilets, showers and
faucets shall be installed in all new developments.



   F.    21 Commercial petroleum tanks within the Pinelands Area shall
be inspected and maintained in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.85(c).



   G.   The storage and use of chemicals and materials within the
Pinelands Area shall comply with the requirements of N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.87.



   H.   Interbasin transfer of water between watersheds shall be
avoided in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.86. Water shall not be exported
from the Pinelands except as otherwise provided in N.J.S.A. 58:1A-7.1. 



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



§ 175-138. Waste management. 



[Amended 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



   No hazardous or toxic substances, including hazardous wastes, shall be
stored, transferred, processed, discharged, disposed or otherwise used in the
town. The land application of waste or waste derived materials is prohibited
in the Pinelands Area, except as expressly authorized in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.79.
Waste management facilities shall only be permitted in the town in accordance
with the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.



§ 175-139. Water supply.



   A.   The developer shall arrange for the construction of water mains
in such a manner as to make adequate water service available to each lot,
dwelling unit or use within the development. The entire system shall be
designed in accordance with the requirements and standards of the agency
having approval authority and shall be subject to their approval. The system
shall also be designed with adequate capacity and sustained pressure for
present and probable future development.



   B.   Where water distribution systems are installed, outside
streets, easements or rights-of-way shall be required in accordance with §
175-96, Easements, of this article.



§ 175-140. Wetlands.



   Wetlands are those areas where the substrate is inundated or saturated
by surface or ground water at a frequency, magnitude and duration sufficient
to support, and under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of
vegetation adapted for life in saturated soil conditions known as
"hydrophytes." Wetlands include lands with poorly drained or very poorly
drained soils as designated by the National Cooperative Soils Survey of the
Soil Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture. The
Town of Hammonton does not have any area of coastal wetlands classification,
but does possess inland wetlands, including submerged lands as defined in
N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.3 of the New Jersey Comprehensive Management Plan.



   A.   Regulated activities.



      (1)   Development shall be prohibited in all wetlands and
wetlands transition areas within the town except as otherwise specified in
this section.



[Amended 6-28-1993 by Ord. No. 13-1993]



      (2)   Horticulture of native pinelands species and berry
agriculture shall be permitted in all wetlands subject to the requirements of
§ 175-88 of this chapter.



      (3)   Beekeeping shall be permitted in all wetlands.



      (4)   Forestry shall be permitted in all wetlands subject to
the requirements of § 175-104 of this chapter.



      (5)    Fish and wildlife activities and wetlands management in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.10. 



[Amended 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 005-2013]



      (6)   Low intensity recreational uses which do not involve use
of a structure, including hunting, fishing, trapping, hiking, boating and
swimming, and other low intensity recreational uses, provided that any
development associated with those other uses does not result in a significant
adverse impact on the wetland as set forth in Subsection B of this section.



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



      (7)   Docks, piers, moorings and boat launches for the use of
a landowner shall be permitted in all wetlands, provided that the use will
not result in a significant adverse impact as set forth in Subsection B of
this section.



      (8)   Commercial or public docks, piers, moorings and boat
launches shall be permitted, provided that there is a demonstrated need for
the facility that cannot be met by existing facilities; the development
conforms to all state and federal regulations; and the development will not
result in a significant adverse impact as set forth in Subsection B of this
section.



      (9)   Bridges, roads, trails and utility transmission and
distribution facilities and other similar linear facilities shall be
permitted in wetlands, provided that: 



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989; 6-28-1993 by Ord. No. 13-1993]



         (a)   There is no feasible alternative route for the
facility that does not involve development in a wetland or, if none, that
another feasible route which results in less significant adverse impacts on
wetlands does not exist.



         (b)   The need for the proposed linear improvement
cannot be met by existing facilities or modification thereof.



         (c)   The use represents a need which overrides the
importance of protecting the wetlands.



         (d)   Development of the facility will include all
practical measures to mitigate the adverse impact on the wetland.



         (e)   The resources of the Pinelands will not be
substantially impaired as a result of the facility and its development as
determined exclusively based on the existence of special and unusual
circumstances.



      (10)   No development, except for those uses which are
specifically authorized in this section, shall be carried out within 300 feet
of any wetlands unless the applicant has demonstrated that the proposed
development will not result in a significant adverse impact on the wetlands
as set forth below in Subsection B.



   B.   For the purpose of determining a significant adverse impact on
wetlands, the following standards shall be used. Determinations under this
section shall consider the cumulative modifications of the wetland due to the
development being proposed and any other existing or potential development
which may affect the wetland. A significant adverse impact shall be deemed to
exist where it is determined that one or more of the following modifications
of a wetland will have an irreversible effect on the ecological integrity of
the wetland and its biotic components, including but not limited to
threatened or endangered species of plants or animals: 



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989; 6-12-1989 by Ord. No. 19-1989]



      (1)   An increase in surface water runoff discharging into a
wetland.



      (2)   A change in the normal seasonal flow patterns in the
wetland.



      (3)   An alteration of the water table in the wetland.



      (4)   An increase in erosion resulting in increased
sedimentation in the wetland.



      (5)   A change in the natural chemistry of the ground- or
surface water in the wetland.



      (6)   A loss of wetland habitat.



      (7)   A reduction in wetland habitat diversity.



      (8)   A change in wetland species composition.



      (9)   A significant disturbance of areas used by indigenous
and migratory wildlife for breeding, nesting or feeding.



§ 175-141. Yard areas.



   A.   No open space provided around any principal building for the
purposes of complying with the front, side, rear or other yard provisions of
this chapter shall be considered as providing the yard provisions for any
other principal building.



   B.   Permitted projections into required yards.



      (1)   Cornices and eaves may project into a required yard not
more than three feet.



      (2)   Chimneys may be erected within a yard, provided that
they do not exceed six square feet in aggregate external cross section and do
not obstruct ventilation.



      (3)   A fire escape or outside stairway may project not more
than five feet into a rear yard.



   C.   Rear yard exceptions.



      (1)   When no part of the first floor of a proposed building
in the Downtown Districts is to be used for living quarters, no rear yard
shall be required. However, if the second floor of such building is used for
living quarters, the second-floor rear wall shall be located at a distance
from the rear lot line equal to the rear yard depth established for the
district.



      (2)   In the Downtown Districts, if no part of a proposed
building is to be used as living quarters or if a building is to extend from
street to street or from street or alley, no rear yard shall be required.



      (3)   None of the above shall be construed to mean that
parking or other site requirements do not have to be provided.



[Amended 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   D.   Scenic corridors. Except for those roads which provide for
internal circulation within residentially developed areas, all public paved
roads in the Preservation Area and Forest Area Districts shall be considered
scenic corridors, to which the following standards apply: 



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, no
permit shall be issued for development on a scenic corridor other than for
agricultural produce sales establishments unless the applicant demonstrates
that all buildings are set back at least 200 feet from the center line of the
corridor.



      (2)   If compliance with the two-hundred-foot setback is
constrained by environmental or other physical considerations, such as
wetlands, or active agricultural operations, the building shall be set back
as close to 200 feet as practical and the site shall be landscaped in
accordance with the provisions of §§ 175-136 and 175-91 of this chapter so
as to provide screening from the corridor.



      (3)   If an applicant for development approval demonstrates
that existing development patterns of the corridor are such that buildings
are set back less than 200 feet within 1,000 feet of the site proposed for
development, then a setback shall be set for the proposed development which
is consistent with the established development pattern, provided that the
site is landscaped in accordance with the provisions of §§ 175-136 and
175-91 of this chapter so as to provide screening between the building and
the corridor. 



[Amended 6-12-1989 by Ord. No. 19-1989]



ARTICLE XIII
Zoning



§ 175-142. Zoning districts designated. 



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989; 12-14-1998 by Ord. No. 30-1998]



   For the purpose of this chapter, the Town of Hammonton is divided into
the following zoning districts:



   PA   Preservation Area



   FA   Forest Area



   AP   Agricultural Production



   AP/CLI   Agricultural Production/Compatible Light Industry



   SAP   Special Agricultural Production



[Added 3-15-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]



   RR   Rural Residential



   R-1   Residential-1



   R-2   Residential-2



   R-3   Residential-3



   H-B   Highway Business 



[Amended 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   M-1   Industrial Park



   M-2   Multi-Use District 



[Amended 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   REC   Recreation



   GW-1   Gateway Avenue 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   GW-2    Gateway Boulevard 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   GW-3   Gateway Crossroads 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   DT-1    Near Town 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   DT-2    In Town, Railway 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   DT-3    In Town 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   DT-4    Downtown 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   IDZ   Inclusionary Development Zone



[Added 12-19-2016 by Ord. No. 012-2016]



§ 175-143. Zoning Map. 



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989; 12-27-1999 by Ord. No. 35-1999;
11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   The boundaries of all zoning districts set forth in this article are
shown on a map entitled "Zoning Map of the Town of Hammonton, Atlantic
County, New Jersey," and dated the same date as the effective date of this
chapter or as may from time to time be amended. Said map and all notations,
references and data shown thereon are hereby incorporated by reference to
this chapter and shall be as much a part of this chapter as if all were fully
described herein. 22



§ 175-144. Zone boundaries.



   A.   Zone boundaries are intended to follow the center lines of
streets, lot lines, hypothetical extensions of lot lines, property lines or
other natural lines, such as center lines of watercourses, ditches, etc.,
unless such district or zone boundary is fixed by dimension on the Zoning Map
or by description and shall include lands acquired by accretion or stream
diversion by natural causes.  Zone boundaries shall follow the lines that
define the rear of a lot whenever possible, so that zoning is consistent on
each facing side of a street. 



[Amended 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   B.   Where a zone boundary fixed by dimension on the Zoning Map
approximately follows and is not more than 20 feet from a lot line, such lot
line shall be construed to be the zone boundary.



   C.   In unsubdivided land and where a zone boundary divides a lot,
the location of such boundary, unless the same is indicated by dimensions
shown on the map, shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing
thereon.



   D.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following municipal
limits shall be construed as following municipal limits.



   E.   Where a zone boundary line divides a lot held in single
ownership at the effective date of this chapter, the use regulations
applicable to the less restricted zone district extend over the portion of
the lot in the more restricted district a distance of not more than 50 feet
beyond the zone boundary line.



§ 175-145. General regulations.



   A.   General.



      (1)   No building shall hereafter be used, erected, altered,
converted, enlarged, added to, moved or reduced either wholly or in part, nor
shall any land be designed, used or physically altered for any purpose or in
any manner except in conformity with this chapter. Where a lot is formed from
part of a lot already occupied by a building, such subdivision shall be
effected in such a manner as not to impair any of the requirements of this
chapter with respect to the existing building and all yards and other open
space in connection therewith, and so that all resulting lots have adequate
dimensions consistent with the requirements of the zoning district in which
they are located, and so that all lots have frontage on a street.



      (2)   In all districts, after the effective date of this
chapter with the exception of Subsection B below, any existing building,
structure or tract of land which is not in conformity with the regulations
for the district in which it is located shall be deemed nonconforming and
subject to the regulations of § 175-117 of this chapter.



      (3)   Where this chapter is silent as to the allowance of a
use in a zone district, such silence shall be interpreted to mean that the
use is not permitted. A use is not permitted in any zone district of the town
unless specifically included as a use or category of use in this chapter and
in the specific zone district.



   B.   Minimum standards for substandard lots. Notwithstanding the
density limitations or other provisions of this chapter, the owner of a
parcel of land of an acre or more in the town, not including the Preservation
Area, shall be entitled to develop one detached single-family dwelling on the
parcel, provided that: 



[Amended 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



      (1)   The dwelling unit will be the principal residence of the
property owner or a member of the immediate family of the property owner;



      (2)   The parcel has been in the continuous ownership since
February 7, 1979, of the person whose principal residence the dwelling unit
will be, a member of that person's immediate family or a partnership or
corporation in which members of that person's immediate family collectively
own more than a majority interest in such partnership or corporation;



      (3)   The parcel was not in common ownership with any
contiguous land on or after February 8, 1979, that contains substantial
improvements; and



      (4)   The parcel includes all vacant contiguous lands in
common ownership on or after February 8, 1979.



   C.   Adult bookstores and movie houses; massage parlors. Such uses
shall be conditional uses in the H-B Zone; provided, however, that no such
use shall be located within 750 feet of a property line of any existing
similar use, place of religious worship, school, recreational or health care
facility, library, institutional use, any establishment licensed for the sale
or consumption of alcoholic beverages or any existing or approved residential
development consisting of 10 or more units. All conditional use and major
site plan requirements and procedures shall be followed. Bulk requirements
for the H-B Zone shall apply. 



[Amended 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   D.   Community residences and other entities set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-66.1 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.2. 



[Amended 11-18-2002 by Ord. No. 40-2002]



      (1)   Community residences for the developmentally disabled,
community shelters for victims of domestic violence, community residences for
the terminally ill, community residence for persons with head injuries, adult
family-care homes for elderly persons and physically disabled adults and all
other entities which may, in the future, be set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.1
and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.2, are permitted uses in all residential districts of
the Town. The requirements for said uses shall be the same as for
single-family dwelling units located within such districts.



   E.   Pinelands development credits established. 



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



      (1)   Except for land which was owned by a public agency on
January 14, 1981, land which is thereafter purchased by the state for
conservation purposes, land which is subject to an easement limiting the use
of land to nonresidential uses or land otherwise excluded from entitlement
pursuant to this section, every parcel of land in the PA, AP, AP/CLI and SAP
Districts shall have a use right known as "Pinelands development credits"
that can be used to secure a density bonus for lands located in a regional
growth area. Pinelands development credits may also be allocated to certain
properties in the town by the Pinelands Commission pursuant to N.J.A.C.
7:50-4.61 et seq. 



[Amended 6-28-1993 by Ord. No. 13-1993; 3-15-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]



      (2)   Pinelands development credits are hereby established in
the PA District at the following ratios:



         (a)   Uplands which are undisturbed but currently or
previously approved for resource extraction pursuant to this chapter: two
Pinelands development credits per 39 acres. 



[Amended 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



         (b)   Uplands which are mined as a result of a resource
extraction permit approved pursuant to this chapter: 0 Pinelands development
credits per 39 acres.



         (c)   Other uplands: 1 Pinelands development credit per
39 acres.



         (d)   Wetlands: 0.2 Pinelands development credits per 39
acres.



      (3)   Pinelands development credits are hereby established in
the AP, AP/CLI and SAP Districts at the following ratios: 



[Amended 3-15-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]



         (a)   Uplands which are undisturbed but approved for
resource extraction pursuant to this chapter: 2 Pinelands development credits
per 39 acres.



         (b)   Uplands which are mined as a result of a resource
extraction permit approved pursuant to this chapter: 0 Pinelands development
credits per 39 acres.



         (c)   Other uplands and areas of active berry
agricultural bogs and fields: 2 Pinelands development credits per 39 acres.



         (d)   Wetlands in active field agriculture use currently
and as of February 7, 1979: two Pinelands development credits per 39 acres. 



[Amended 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



         (e)   Other wetlands: 0.2 Pinelands development credits
per 39 acres. 



[Added 6-12-1989 by Ord. No. 19-1989]



      (4)   The allocations established in Subsection E(2) and (3)
above shall be reduced as follows: 



[Amended 10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 15-1990]



         (a)   Any property of 10 acres or less which is
developed for a commercial, industrial, resource extraction, intensive
recreation, institutional, campground or landfill use shall not receive
Pinelands development credit entitlement. For such an improved property of
more than 10 acres, the area actively used for such use or 10 acres,
whichever is greater, shall not receive Pinelands development credit
entitlement.



         (b)   The Pinelands development credit entitlement of a
parcel of land shall be reduced by 0.25 Pinelands development credit
entitlement for existing dwelling units on the property.



         (c)   The Pinelands development credit entitlement for a
parcel of land shall be reduced by 0.25 Pinelands development credit for each
reserved right to build a dwelling unit on the parcel retained by the owner
of the property pursuant to Subsection E(8) below or when a variance for
cultural housing is approved by the town pursuant to Subsection I of this
section. 



[Amended 6-28-1993 by Ord. No. 13-1993]



         (d)   The Pinelands development credit (PDC) entitlement
for a parcel of land shall also be reduced by 0.25 PDC for each dwelling unit
approved pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.61 et seq. when a waiver of strict
compliance is granted by the Pinelands Commission. 



[Added 6-28-1993 by Ord. No. 13-1993]



      (5)   The owners of parcels of land which are smaller than 39
acres shall have a fractional Pinelands development credit at the same ratio
established in Subsection E(2) and (3) above.



      (6)   Notwithstanding the provisions above, the owner of
record of 1/10 or greater acres of land in the PA, AP or AP/CLI Districts as
of February 7, 1979, shall be entitled to 1/4 Pinelands development credits,
provided that the parcel of land is vacant, was not in common ownership with
any contiguous land on or after February 7, 1979, and has not been sold or
transferred except to a member of the owner's immediate family. The
provisions of this section shall also apply to owners of record of less than
1/10 acres of land in the PA, AP or AP/CLI Districts, as of February 7, 1979,
provided that said owners acquire vacant, contiguous lands to which Pinelands
development credits are allocated pursuant to Subsection E(2) or (3) above,
which lands, when combined with the acreage of the parcel owned prior to
February 7, 1979, total at least 1/10 of an acre. 



[Amended 10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 15-1990; 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



      (7)   No Pinelands development credit may be conveyed, sold,
encumbered or transferred unless the owner of the land from which the credit
has been obtained has received a Pinelands development credit certificate
from the New Jersey Pinelands Development Credit Bank pursuant to N.J.A.C.
3:42-3 and has deed restricted the use of the land in perpetuity to those
uses set forth in Subsection E(10) below by a recorded deed restriction which
is in favor of a public agency or not-for-profit incorporated organization
and specifically and expressly enforceable by the Pinelands Commission. 



[Amended 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



      (8)   Notwithstanding the provision of Subsection E(7) above,
an owner of property from which Pinelands development credits are sold may
retain a right for residential development on that property, provided that
the recorded deed restriction expressly provides for the same and that the
total allocation of Pinelands development credits for that property is
reduced by 0.25 Pinelands development credit for each reserved right to build
a dwelling unit. Subdivision of the property shall not be required until such
time as the residential development right is exercised. 



[Amended 10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 15-1990]



      (9)   No conveyance, sale or transfer of Pinelands development
credits shall occur until the municipality with jurisdiction over the parcel
of land from which the Pinelands development credits were obtained, the
agency or organization to which the restriction is in favor, and the
Pinelands Commission have been provided with evidence of recordation of a
restriction on the deed to the land from which the development credits were
obtained.



      (10)   Such deed restriction shall specify the number of
Pinelands development credits sold and that the property may only be used in
perpetuity for the following uses:



         (a)   In the PA District: Berry agriculture;
horticulture of native Pinelands plants; forestry; beekeeping; fish and
wildlife management; wetlands management; agricultural employee housing as an
accessory use; and low-intensity recreational uses in which the use of
motorized vehicles is not permitted except for necessary transportation,
access to water bodies is limited to no more than 15 feet of frontage per
1,000 feet of frontage on the water body, clearing of vegetation does not
exceed 5% of the parcel, and no more than 1% of the parcel will be covered
with impervious surfaces.



[Amended 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 005-2013]



         (b)   In the AP and AP/CLI Districts: Agriculture;
forestry; agricultural employee housing as an accessory use; low-intensity
recreational uses in which the use of motorized vehicles is not permitted
except for necessary transportation, access to water bodies is limited to no
more than 15 feet of frontage per 1,000 feet of frontage on the water body,
clearing of vegetation does not exceed 5% of the parcel, and no more than 1%
of the parcel will be covered with impervious surfaces; agricultural
commercial establishments, excluding supermarkets and restaurants and
convenience stores, where the principal goods or products available for sale
were produced in the Pinelands and the sales area does not exceed 5,000
square feet; airports and heliports accessory to agricultural uses and which
are used exclusively for the storage, fueling, loading and operation of
aircraft as part of an ongoing agricultural operation; and agricultural
products processing facilities.



[Amended 10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 15-1990; 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 005-2013]



         (c)   In all other zoning districts: Agriculture;
forestry and low intensity recreational uses. 



[Added 6-28-1993 by Ord. No. 13-1993]



         (d)   In the SAP District: Berry agriculture;
horticulture of native Pinelands plants; forestry; beekeeping; fish and
wildlife management; wetlands management; and agricultural employee housing
as an accessory use.



[Added 3-15-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001; 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 005-2013]



      (11)   No development involving the use of Pinelands
development credits shall be approved until the developer has provided the
Pinelands Commission and the town with evidence of his ownership of the
requisite Pinelands development credits; provided, however, that the town may
grant preliminary subdivision or site plan approval conditioned upon such
evidence being presented as a prerequisite to final subdivision or site plan
approval. For such a final subdivision or site plan, the developer shall
provide evidence of Pinelands development credit ownership to secure the same
proportion of lots or residential units as was approved for Pinelands
development credit use in the preliminary approval. In no case shall a
building or construction permit be issued for any development involving the
use of PDC's until the developer has provided the Pinelands Commission and
the town with evidence of his ownership of the requisite PDC's and those
PDC's have been redeemed with the town. Notification of any such preliminary
or final approval shall be made to the Pinelands Commission pursuant to §
175-60D(3) and to the New Jersey Pinelands Development Credit Bank in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 3:42-3. Redemption of Pinelands development credits
shall thereafter be accomplished in accordance with N.J.A.C. 3:42-3.6. 



[Amended 6-28-1993 by Ord. No. 13-1993; 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



      (12)   Pinelands development credits shall be used in the
following manner: 



[Added 6-28-1993 by Ord. No. 13-1993]



         (a)   When a variance of density or lot area
requirements for a residential or principal nonresidential use in the RR,
R-1, R-2, R-3, H-B, M-1, REC, M-2, and the GW-2 Gateway Districts is granted
by the town, Pinelands development credits shall be used for all dwelling
units or lots in excess of that permitted without the variance. 



[Amended 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997; 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



         (b)   When a variance for cultural housing is granted by
the town in accordance with Subsection I of this section.



         (c)   When a waiver of strict compliance is granted by
the Pinelands Commission pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.61 et seq.



   F.   Manufactured housing. Such housing in accordance with § 175-10
shall be permitted in the Town of Hammonton to the same extent and under the
same regulations as single-family detached dwelling units.



   G.   Residential dwelling units on 3.2 acre lots may be permitted in
the PA, FA, AP, AP/CLI and SAP Districts, provided that: 



[Added 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989; amended 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997;
3-15-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]



      (1)   The dwelling unit will be the principal residence of the
property owner or a member of the immediate family of the property owner;



      (2)   The individual whose principal residence the dwelling
unit will be has not developed a dwelling unit under this section within the
previous five years;



      (3)   The parcel of land on which the dwelling is to be
located has been in the continuous ownership since February 7, 1979, of the
person whose principal residence the dwelling unit will be, a member of that
person's immediate family, or a partnership or corporation in which members
of that person's immediate family collectively own more than a majority
interest in such partnership or corporation; and



      (4)   The person whose principal residence the dwelling unit
will be has resided in the Pinelands for at least five years and that person
or one or more members of that person's immediate family has resided in the
Pinelands for a total of at least 20 different years.



   H.   Except as otherwise authorized in this chapter, the extraction
or mining of mineral resources other than sand, gravel, clay and ilmenite is
prohibited. 



[Added 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



   I.   Additional provisions for cultural housing. Residential
dwelling units on one-acre lots may be permitted in the PA, FA, AP, AP/CLI
and SAP Districts, provided that: 



[Added 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989; amended 6-12-1989 by Ord. No. 19-1989;
6-28-1993 by Ord. No. 13-1993; 3-15-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]



      (1)   The applicant satisfies all of the requirements set
forth in Subsection G above.



      (2)   The lot to be developed existed as of February 8, 1979,
or was created a result of an approval granted by the Pinelands Development
Review Board or by the Pinelands Commission pursuant to the Interim Rules and
Regulations prior to January 14, 1981.



      (3)   The applicant qualifies for and receives from the
township a variance from the three-and-two-tenths-acre lot size requirement
set forth in Subsection G above.



      (4)   The applicant purchases and redeems 0.25 Pinelands
development credits.



      (5)   Any Pinelands development credits allocated to the lot
to be developed are reduced pursuant to Subsection E(4) of this section.



   J.   Density transfer program. Residential dwelling units on
one-acre lots existing as of January 14, 1981, shall be permitted in the FA
District, provided that:



[Added 6-28-1993 by Ord. No. 13-1993]



      (1)   The owner of the lot proposed for development acquires
sufficient vacant contiguous or noncontiguous land which, when combined with
the acreage of the lot proposed for development, equals at least 34 acres.



      (2)   All lands acquired pursuant to Subsection J(1) above,
which may or may not be developable, are located within the FA District.



      (3)   All noncontiguous lands acquired pursuant to Subsection
J(1) and (2) above shall be permanently protected through recordation of a
deed of restriction in accordance with the following requirements:



         (a)   The deed of restriction shall permit the parcel to
be managed for:



            [1]   Low intensity recreation, ecological
management and forestry, provided that no more than 5% of the land may be
cleared, no more than 1% of the land may be covered with impervious surfaces
and any such uses or activities are approved and conducted in accordance with
the requirements of this Chapter;



            [2]   Where agricultural use exists on a parcel to
be protected, the following standards shall apply:



               [a]   For those agricultural uses in
existence as of April 6, 2009, the deed of restriction may provide for the
continuation of agricultural uses and the expansion of the area of
agricultural use by up to 50%;



               [b]   For those agricultural uses
established after April 6, 2009, the deed of restriction may provide for the
continuation of agricultural uses, provided the agricultural use has been in
existence for a period of at least five years prior to submission of an
application for density transfer;



               [c]   For those agricultural uses
established after April 6, 2009 which do not meet the standards of Subsection
[2][b] above, the deed of restriction shall permit the land to be managed
only in accordance with subsection a. above and shall not provide for
continuation of any agricultural use on the parcel; and



               [d]   The deed of restriction to be recorded
pursuant to Subsection [2][a] or [b] above shall authorize agricultural uses
and provide that impervious surface may not exceed that which currently
exists or three percent, whichever is greater, unless a Resource Management
System Plan has been prepared. Before these impervious surface limits may be
exceeded, evidence of Pinelands Commission approval of the Resource
Management System Plan shall be provided. If the deed of restriction is in
favor of Atlantic County or the State Agricultural Development Committee,
evidence of their approval shall also be provided.



         (b)   The deed of restriction shall be in favor of the
parcel to be developed and the Town or another public agency or non-profit
conservation organization. In all cases, such restriction shall be expressly
enforceable by the Pinelands Commission. The deed restriction shall be in a
form to be approved by the Town Solicitor and the Pinelands Commission. 



[Amended 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 005-2013]



      (4)   Tax assessments for the acquired noncontiguous lands are
combined and assigned to the land to be developed.



      (5)   The lot proposed for development otherwise meets the
minimum standards of Article XII of this chapter.



   K.   Special provision for substandard lots in Blocks 1501, 1502 and
1601 in the Forest Area Zone. Notwithstanding the density limitations of §
175-147B, the owner of a parcel of land of 3.2 acres or more in the Forest
Area Zone shall be entitled to develop one detached single-family dwelling on
the parcel, provided that: 



[Added 12-14-1998 by Ord. No. 30-1998]



      (1)   The parcel to be developed was not in common ownership
with any contiguous land on or after November 1, 1998, that contains
substantial improvements;



      (2)   The parcel to be developed includes all vacant
contiguous lands in common ownership on or after November 1, 1998; and



      (3)   The parcel to be developed is located within Block 1501,
1502 or 1601.



   L.   Flag Lots.



[Added 9-27-2010 by Ord. No. 21-2010]



      (1)   Definitions. As used in this Subsection L, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:



   FLAG LOT



   A lot not satisfying the conventional minimum lot frontage requirements
of the zone district, generally configured in the shape of a flag, with its
road frontage provided by a strip of land referred to as the "pole" or
"flagstaff" portion of the lot.



   FLAGSTAFF or POLE



   The portion of a flag lot consisting of a strip of land with
insufficient lot frontage which, when setback limitations are applied,
contains no building envelope. The primary purpose of the flagstaff or pole
is to provide road frontage and access for a flag lot.



   FLAG



   The portion of the flag lot at the end of the pole.



      (2)   In a minor subdivision, one lot may be permitted which
fails to meet the minimum lot width requirements for a conventional
residential development in the subject zone, provided that:



         (a)   That portion of the flag lot providing access to
the rear of said lot must be no less than 50 feet in width, no more than 400
feet in length extending uniformly from the lot frontage line to the rear lot
line of the non-flag-type lot. This area shall be known as the "pole" of the
flag. Notwithstanding the previous sentences, the total area of the pole
shall not exceed 20% of the total lot area. If the access strip is more than
400 feet long or serves more than one dwelling unit, access to the rear shall
be only by a standard municipal street and a cul-de-sac dedicated as a public
street. Any dedicated municipal street must meet residential site improvement
standards ("RSIS"). No structures may be constructed in the pole area nor in
the areas of the pole as extended to the rear of the lot, except for a
mailbox and/or trash enclosure which shall not be located within the sight
triangle. (The "pole" of the flag, must be part of the lot as set forth above
and cannot be satisfied through the obtainment of an easement across any
other lot).



         (b)   Only one lot of insufficient width is permitted,
and such lot shall have at least three times the minimum lot area, but in no
case shall a flag lot be less than 1.6 acres in size when such lot has public
sewerage available; and 3.2 acres in size when such lot has no public
sewerage available.



         (c)   The flag portion of the flag lot shall require
one-hundred-foot front and rear yard setbacks and eighty-foot side yard
setbacks for any dwelling, building and/or structure.



         (d)   All lots other than the flag lot shall have a
minimum lot width of 100 feet.



         (e)   An applicant requesting a flag lot subdivision may
not own any contiguous lot or lots which would, if combined, provide
sufficient lot frontage and lot width to create conforming, non-flag-type
lots.



         (f)   Placement of a private driveway within the pole
shall provide for a ten-foot-minimum open space grass or landscaped area
between the adjacent property line and the edge of the private driveway. A
private driveway within the pole shall be no less than 20 feet wide and shall
be no less than 24 feet, measured along the curbline, from any adjacent
driveway.



         (g)   The flag lot must contain a turnaround area so
that an exiting vehicle can exit in a forward direction.



         (h)   All flag lots shall meet all applicable standards
as established by the Town of Hammonton Fire Chief to ensure safe access to
the property by emergency vehicles.



      (3)   Drawings attached for illustrative purposes only:
Editor's Note: Said drawings are included at the end of this chapter.



         (a)   Two-Lot Flag Lot Minor Subdivision.



         (b)   Three-Lot Flag Lot Minor Subdivision.



§ 175-146. Preservation Area.



   The following uses are permitted in the PA Zoning District:



   A.   Residential dwelling on lots of 3.2 acres in accordance with §
175-145G and on lots of one acre in accordance with § 175-145I.



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989; 6-28-1993 by Ord. No. 13-1993]



   B.   Agricultural employee housing as an element of and accessory to
an active agricultural operation.



   C.   Berry agriculture and horticulture of native plants and other
agricultural activities compatible with the existing soil and water
conditions that support traditional Pinelands berry agriculture.



   D.   Forestry.



   E.   Beekeeping.



   F.   Fish and wildlife management and wetlands management.



[Amended 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 005-2013]



   G.   Low intensity recreational uses, provided that:



      (1)   The parcel proposed for low intensity recreational use
has an area of at least 50 acres.



      (2)   The recreational use does not involve the use of
motorized vehicles except for necessary transportation.



      (3)   Access to bodies of water is limited to no more than 15
linear feet of frontage per 1,000 feet of water body frontage.



      (4)   The parcel will contain no more than one campsite per
two acres, provided that the campsites shall not be clustered at a net
density exceeding six campsites per acre.



      (5)   Clearing of vegetation, including ground cover and soil
disturbance, does not exceed 5% of the parcel.



      (6)   No more than 1% of the parcel will be covered with
impervious surfaces.



[Amended 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 005-2013]



   H.   Public service infrastructure which is necessary to serve only
the needs of the Preservation Area District uses. Centralized wastewater
treatment and collection facilities shall be permitted to service the
Preservation Area District only in accordance with § 175-137D(2).



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989; 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



   I.   Signs.



   J.   Accessory uses.



   K.   Pinelands development credit.



[Added 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



   L.   Notwithstanding the minimum lot areas set forth above, no such
minimum lot area for a nonresidential use within the PA Zone shall be less
than that needed to meet the water quality standards of § 175-137D(4),
whether or not the lot may be served by a centralized sewer treatment or
collection system. No nonresidential structure shall be located on a parcel
of less than one acre in size.



[Added 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989; amended 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



§ 175-146.1. Special Agricultural Production District.



[Added 3-15-2001 by Ord. No. 14-2001]



   The following uses are permitted in the SAP District:



   A.   Residential dwelling units on lots of 3.2 acres in accordance
with § 175-145G and on lots of one acre in accordance with § 175-145I.



   B.   Residential dwelling units, provided that the dwelling is:



      (1)   Accessory to an active agricultural operation;



      (2)   For an operator or employee of the farm who is actively
engaged in and essential to the agricultural operation;



      (3)   To be located on a parcel of land of at least 40 acres
in size which is under or qualified for agricultural assessment; and



      (4)   Located on a property which has an active production
history or where a farm management plan has been prepared which demonstrates
that the property will be farmed as a unit unto itself or as part of another
farm operation in the area.



   C.   Berry agriculture and horticulture of native plants and other
agricultural activities compatible with the existing soil and water
conditions that support traditional Pinelands berry agriculture.



   D.   Forestry.



   E.   Beekeeping.



   F.   Fish and wildlife management and wetlands management.



[Amended 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 005-2013]



   G.   Pinelands development credits.



   H.   Public service infrastructure which is necessary to serve only
the needs of the SAP District uses. Centralized wastewater treatment and
collection facilities shall be permitted to service the SAP District only in
accordance with § 175-137D(2).



   I.   Signs.



   J.   Accessory uses, including agricultural employee housing as an
element of and necessary to an active agricultural operation.



§ 175-147. Forest Area.



   The following uses are permitted in the FA Zoning District.



   A.   Residential dwelling units on lots of 3.2 acres in accordance
with § 175-145G.



[Amended 10-12-1987 by Ord. No. 13-1987; 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



   B.   Additional residential development may be approved, provided
that the gross density of this development does not exceed one unit per 34
acres of land throughout the Forest Area. These units may be clustered on
lots of at least 3.2 acres in size, provided that the gross density does not
increase and that the remainder of the parcel not assigned to individual
residential lots shall be permanently dedicated through recordation of a
restriction on the deed to the parcel as open space with no further
development permitted. Recreational amenities may be permitted on the
deed-restricted lands insofar as they are consistent with the types of
recreational amenities which could have been developed as accessory uses on
the residential lots, absent clustering.



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989; 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



   C.   Agriculture.



   D.   Agricultural employee housing as an element of and necessary to
an active agricultural operation.



   E.   Forestry.



   F.   Low intensity recreational uses, provided that:



      (1)   The parcel proposed for low intensity recreational use
has an area of at least 50 acres.



      (2)   The recreational use does not involve the use of
motorized vehicles except for necessary transportation.



      (3)   Access to bodies of water is limited to no more than 15
linear feet of frontage per 1,000 feet of water body frontage.



      (4)   Clearing of vegetation, including ground cover and soil
disturbance, does not exceed 5% of the parcel.



      (5)   No more than 1% of the parcel will be covered with
impervious surfaces.



[Amended 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 005-2013]



   G.   Public service infrastructure intended to primarily serve the
needs of the Pinelands. Centralized wastewater treatment and collection
facilities shall be permitted to service the Forest Area District only in
accordance with § 175-137D(2).



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989; 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



   H.   Signs.



   I.   Accessory uses.



   J.   Campgrounds not to exceed a density of one campsite per gross
acre, provided that the campsites may be clustered at a net density not to
exceed 10 campsites per acre.



[Amended 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



   K.   Agricultural commercial establishments, excluding supermarkets,
restaurants and convenience stores, provided that:



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



      (1)   The principal goods or products available for sale were
produced in the Pinelands.



      (2)   The sales area of the establishment does not exceed
5,000 square feet.



   L.   Roadside retail sales and service establishments, provided that:



      (1)   The parcel proposed for development has roadway frontage
of at least 50 feet.



      (2)   No portion of any structure proposed for development
will be more than 300 feet measured along a line parallel to the roadway from
the closest part of a roadside retail sales and service establishment
structure that was in existence on February 7, 1979.



      (3)   The proposed use will not unduly burden public services,
including but not limited to water, sewer and roads.



   M.   Notwithstanding the minimum lot areas set forth above, no such
minimum lot area for a nonresidential use within the FA Zone shall be less
than that needed to meet the water quality standards of § 175-137D(4),
whether or not the lot may be served by a centralized sewer treatment or
collection system. No nonresidential structure shall be located on a parcel
of less than one acre in size.



[Added 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989; amended 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



   N.   Residential dwelling units on lots of one acre in accordance
with § 175-145I or 175-145J.



[Added 6-28-1993 by Ord. No. 13-1993]



   O.   Residential dwelling units on lots of 3.2 acres in accordance
with § 175-145K.



[Added 12-14-1998 by Ord. No. 30-1998]



§ 175-148. Agricultural Production District.



   The following uses are permitted in the AP Zoning District:



   A.   Residential dwelling units on lots of 3.2 acres in accordance
with § 175-145G and on lots of one acre in accordance with § 175-145I.



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989; 6-28-1993 by Ord. No. 13-1993]



   B.   Residential dwelling units not to exceed a gross density of one
unit per 10 acres, provided that:



[Amended 10-12-1987 by Ord. No. 13-1987; 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



      (1)   The dwelling is accessory to an active agricultural
operation;



      (2)   The dwelling is for an operator or employee of the farm
who is actively engaged in and essential to the agricultural operation;



      (3)   The dwelling is to be located on a lot which is under or
qualified for agricultural assessment;



[Amended 6-12-1989 by Ord. No. 19-1989]



      (4)   The dwelling is located on a lot which has an active
production history or where a farm management plan has been prepared which
demonstrates that the property will be farmed as a unit unto itself or as
part of another farm operation in the area;



      (5)   A residential lot has not been subdivided from the
property within the previous five years, unless the lot has been subdivided
pursuant to § 175-145G of this chapter; and



[Amended 10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 15-1990]



      (6)   No more than one lot may be created for a dwelling
pursuant to this subsection at any one time.



[Added 10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 15-1990]



   C.   Agriculture.



   D.   Agricultural employee housing.



[Amended 3-12-1990 by Ord. No. 7-1990]



      (1)   Freestanding, detached housing for agricultural
employees as an element of and accessory to an active agricultural operation.



      (2)   The following are conditional uses permitted in the AP
Zone:



         (a)   Seasonal agricultural employee housing in mobile
homes as accessory to an active agricultural operation, subject to §§
175-114, 175-115 and the Pinelands notice and review requirements of §
175-60.



[Amended 6-25-1990 by Ord. No. 13-1990]



   E.   Forestry.



   F.   Low intensity recreational uses, provided that:



      (1)   The parcel proposed for low intensity recreational use
has an area of at least 50 acres.



      (2)   The recreational use does not involve the use of
motorized vehicles except for necessary transportation.



      (3)   Access to bodies of water is limited to no more than 15
linear feet of frontage per 1,000 feet of water body frontage.



      (4)   Clearing of vegetation, including ground cover and soil
disturbance, does not exceed 5% of the parcel.



      (5)   No more than 1% of the parcel will be covered with
impervious surfaces.



[Amended 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 005-2013]



   G.   Agricultural commercial establishments, excluding supermarkets,
restaurants and convenience stores, provided that:



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



      (1)   The principal goods or products available for sale were
produced in the Pinelands; and



      (2)   The sales area of the establishment does not exceed
5,000 square feet.



   H.   Agricultural products processing facilities.



   I.   Public service infrastructure. Centralized wastewater treatment
and collection facilities shall be permitted to service the Agricultural
Production District only in accordance with § 175-137D(2).



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989; 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



   J.   Signs.



   K.   Accessory uses.



   L.   Editor's Note: Former Subsection L, which established Pinelands
resource-related industries as a permitted use in the AP Zoning District, was
repealed 10-12-1987 by Ord. No. 13-1987. Airports and heliports which are
accessory to agricultural uses and are used exclusively for the storage,
fueling, loading and operation of aircraft as a part of an ongoing
agricultural operation.



   M.   Fish and wildlife management and wetlands management.



[Amended 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 005-2013]



   N.   Residential dwelling units at a gross density of one unit per
40 acres, provided that:



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989; 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



      (1)   The units shall be clustered on one-acre lots;



      (2)   The remainder of the parcel, including all contiguous
lands in common ownership, which is not assigned to individual residential
lots shall be permanently dedicated for agricultural uses through recordation
of a restriction on the deed to the parcel; and



      (3)   The restriction on the deed to the parcel, including any
rights to be redeemed for future residential development, shall be done in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:50-5, Part IV, so as to sever any Pinelands
development credits allocated to the parcel.



   O.   Pinelands development credits.



[Added 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



   P.   Notwithstanding the minimum lot areas set forth above, no such
minimum lot area for a nonresidential use within the AP Zone shall be less
than that needed to meet the water quality standards of § 175-137D(4),
whether or not the lot may be served by a centralized sewer treatment or
collection system. No nonresidential structure shall be located on a parcel
of less than one acre in size.



[Added 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989; amended 6-12-1989 by Ord. No. 19-1989;
7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



§ 175-149. Agricultural Production/Compatible Light Industry District.



[Amended 7-22-2013 by Ord. No. 011-2013]



   The following uses are permitted in the AP/CLI Zoning District:



   A.   All uses permitted in § 175-148, to the same extent noted
therein.



   B.   Airport facilities, including facilities for the takeoff and
landing or aircraft such as runways, aprons, taxi-ways, helicopter pads, air
traffic control facilities, informational facilities and devices and terminal
buildings, as well as fences, lighting antennae systems, on-premises signs,
driveways, access roads and other accessory uses.



[Amended 10-22-1990 by Ord. No. 15-1990]



   C.   Ancillary airport uses, including, but not limited to, airport
maintenance facilities, aviation instruction facilities, aircraft chartering
and aircraft storage buildings.



   D.   Light industrial uses, including distribution centers,
warehouses, enclosed services and repair facilities, business offices and
similar activities subject to the following:



[Amended 10-12-1987 by Ord. No. 13-1987; 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



      (1)   Minimum lot size:  five acres.



      (2)   Minimum lot width: 250 feet.



      (3)   Minimum building setback: 100 feet.



      (4)   Minimum side yard, each: 50 feet.



      (5)   Minimum rear yard: 100 feet.



      (6)   Maximum building coverage: 25%.



   E.   A planted buffer area of at least 50 feet shall be provided in
the manner set forth in § 175-91 along all property lines where any proposed
use in the AP/CLI Zoning District abuts or may abut a residential use, a
residential district, and agricultural production district or an active
agricultural use.



[Amended 10-9-1989 by Ord. No. 33-1989]



   F.   The uses permitted in B., C., and D. above shall be permitted
only if they will not generate subsidiary or satellite development not
otherwise permitted in the Pinelands Forestry Area, Preservation Area
District, Special Agricultural Production Area or Agricultural Production
Area.



   G.   Notwithstanding the minimum lot area set forth in D. above, no
such minimum lot area for a nonresidential use within the AP/CLI Zone shall
be less than that needed to meet the water quality standards of §
175-137D(4), whether or not the lot may be served by a centralized sewer
treatment or collection system.



[Added 6-12-1989 by Ord. No. 19-1989]



§ 175-150. Rural Residential District.



   The following uses are permitted in the RR Zoning District:



   A.   Residential uses; no public sewerage available.



[Amended 10-12-1987 by Ord. No. 13-1987; 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989;
6-12-1989 by Ord. No. 19-1989; 10-9-1989 by Ord. No. 33-1989]



      (1)   No residential dwelling unit shall be located on a
parcel of less than 1.5 acres unless served by a centralized wastewater
treatment plant.



[Amended 11-27-1989 by Ord. No. 40-1989; 6-28-1993 by Ord. No. 13-1993;
6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 30-2002]



      (2)   A residential dwelling unit on a one-acre lot may be
permitted in the RR Zoning District, provided that:



[Amended 11-27-1989 by Ord. No. 40-1989; 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 30-2002]



         (a)   The dwelling unit will be the principle residence
of the property owner or member of the immediate family of the property owner;



         (b)   The individual whose principal residence the
dwelling unit will be has not developed a dwelling unit under this section
within the previous five years;



         (c)   The parcel of land on which the dwelling is to be
located has been in the continuous ownership since February 7, 1979, of the
person whose principle residence the dwelling unit will be, a member of that
person's immediate family, or a partnership or corporation in which the
members of the person's immediate family collectively own more than a
majority interest in such partnership or corporation;



         (d)   The person whose principle residence the dwelling
unit will be has resided in the Pinelands for at least five years, and that
person or one or more members of that person's immediate family has resided
in the Pinelands for a total of at least 20 different years.



      (2.1)   A residential dwelling unit on a one-acre lot may be
permitted in the RR Zoning District provided that the one-acre lot was an
existing lot of record as of June 17, 2002.



[Added 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 30-2002]



      (3)   The following additional bulk requirements shall be
satisfied:



         (a)   Minimum lot width: 150 feet.



         (b)   Minimum front yard setback: 60 feet.



[Amended 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 30-2002]



         (c)   Minimum side yard, each: 25 feet.



[Amended 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 30-2002]



         (d)   Minimum rear yard setback: 60 feet.



[Amended 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 30-2002]



         (e)   Maximum lot coverage: 35%.



[Added 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 30-2002]



   B.   Residential uses; public sewerage available.



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989; 10-9-1989 by Ord. No. 33-1989]



      (1)   Where a major residential development or any commercial
development is proposed on any lot which abuts or is directly across a public
street from an active agricultural use, said development shall incorporate a
fifty-foot buffer or a one-hundred-foot planted buffer where the property
abuts an Agricultural Production (AP) Zone, and shall be established in
accordance with the standards set under § 175-91, which buffer shall be in
addition to the required building setback standards. This buffer shall be
required on the property line(s) of the lot which abuts or is directly across
a public street from the active agricultural use or an Agricultural
Production (AP) Zone. As a condition of preliminary approval of any such
development, the developer shall be required to place on record prior to
securing any final approval for said development a deed creating a perpetual
conservation easement over said buffer, where the property abuts an
Agricultural Production (AP) Zone.



      (2)   Single-family detached dwelling unit, subject to the
following:



[Amended 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 30-2002]



         (a)   Minimum lot size: 43,560 square feet (one acre).



         (b)   Minimum lot width: 120 feet.



         (c)   Minimum front yard setback: 60 feet.



         (d)   Minimum side yard setback, each: 25 feet.



         (e)   Minimum rear yard setback: 60 feet.



         (f)   Maximum lot coverage: 35%.



      (2.1)   Single-family detached dwelling unit may be permitted
in the RR Zoning District with public sewage available on a minimum lot of
22,000 square feet, provided that:



[Added 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 30-2002]



         (a)   The dwelling unit will be the principle residence
of the property owner or member of the immediate family of the property owner;



         (b)   The individual whose principal residence the
dwelling unit will be has not developed a dwelling unit under this section
within the previous five years;



         (c)   The parcel of land on which the dwelling is to be
located has been in the continuous ownership since February 7, 1979, of the
person whose principle residence the dwelling unit will be, a member of that
person's immediate family, or a partnership or corporation in which the
members of the person's immediate family collectively own more than a
majority interest in such partnership or corporation;



         (d)   The person whose principle residence the dwelling
unit will be has resided in the Pinelands for at least five years and that
person or one or more members of that person's immediate family has resided
in the Pinelands for a total of at least 20 different years.



         (e)   Minimum lot width: 120 feet.



         (f)   Minimum front yard setback: 60 feet.



         (g)   Minimum side yard setback, each: 25 feet.



         (h)   Minimum rear yard setback: 60 feet.



         (i)   Maximum lot coverage: 35%.



      (2.2)   Single-family detached dwelling unit may be permitted
in the RR Zoning District with public sewage available on minimum lot of
22,000 square feet, provided that the twenty-two-thousand-square-foot lot was
an existing lot of record as of June 17, 2002.



[Added 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 30-2002]



      (3)   Twin-or two-family dwelling unit, shall not be permitted.



[Amended 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 30-2002]



      (4)   Other uses permitted:



         (a)   Public buildings, but not including correctional
institutions, workshops or warehouses.



         (b)   Public playgrounds, conservation areas and parks.



         (c)   Farms limited to the raising of flowers, fruit or
vegetable crops.



         (d)   Veterinary hospitals, subject to the minimum area
and yard requirements for residential uses, and completely within a building.



         (e)   Churches or other places of worship, including
schools for religious instruction and parish halls.



         (f)   Customary residential accessory uses subject to
the regulations therefor.



         (g)   With the exception of a proposed agricultural use,
the Planning Board shall require a planted buffer in accordance with §
175-91 for any of the above-noted permitted uses where the property abuts an
active agricultural use or abuts an Agricultural Production (AP) Zone. The
buffer requirements shall be as follows:



[Amended 11-27-1989 by Ord. No. 40-1989]



            [1]   If the proposed use is located across the
street or abuts an existing active agricultural use, a fifty-foot buffer
shall be applied.



            [2]   If the proposed use is located across the
street or abuts an Agricultural Production (AP) Zone, a one-hundred-foot
buffer shall be applied.



            [3]   Any development which is subject to the
buffer requirements of Subsection B(4)(g)[2] above shall, as a condition of
preliminary approval and prior to filing for any final approval, place a deed
on record creating a perpetual conservation easement over said buffer area.



      (5)   The following are permitted as conditional uses:



         (a)   Agricultural or horticultural use subject to all
the bulk area limitations of § 175-149C, and provided further that no
building, fenced run or other enclosure for the shelter of fowl or other farm
livestock shall be closer than 200 feet from any street, 100 feet from any
property line or 500 feet from any existing residential dwelling unit,
whichever is greater; nor shall any building or fenced run be erected or used
for the shelter of more than 25 head of fowl or more than 4 head of other
farm livestock in any case.



         (b)   Conversion of an existing single-family dwelling
into no more than two apartment units, provided that:



            [1]   Each resulting apartment unit shall consist
of at least four rooms, two of which shall be a kitchen and a full bathroom;
shall meet all health, safety and building code provisions applicable at the
time of conversion; shall have separate, safe and convenient means of access;
and shall have access to public utilities.



            [2]   The floor area of the original dwelling
shall not be increased in connection with the conversion thereof.



            [3]   The lot containing such dwelling to be
converted shall contain at least 25,000 square feet; shall have a minimum
width of 80 feet; shall provide a minimum front yard setback of 30 feet or
setback of adjacent properties, whichever is lesser; shall provide minimum
side yards of 25 feet; and shall provide a minimum rear yard setback of 60
feet. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(5)(c), regarding cluster
single-family/two-family dwelling units, as amended 11-27-1989 by Ord. No.
40-1989, and which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed
3-25-2002 by Ord. No. 12-2002.



      (6)   Accessory uses permitted in addition to customary
accessory uses:



         (a)   Farmhouse or tenant house as an accessory use to a
farm, provided that such use complies with the area and yard requirements for
other residential uses within the district.



         (b)   Migrant labor housing as part of a farm and
customarily incidental to that principal use.



         (c)   Packing house for agricultural produce and other
buildings customarily incidental to the principal use of a farm.



   C.   Height. No building shall exceed 35 feet in height except as
otherwise noted herein.



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



   D.   No nonresidential use in the RR District shall be located on a
parcel of less than 1.5 acres unless served by a centralized wastewater
treatment plant, in which case the minimum lot size becomes one acre.



[Added 6-28-1993 by Ord. No. 13-1993; amended 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 30-2002]



§ 175-151. Residential-1 District.



   The following uses are permitted in the R-1 Zoning District. All uses
shall have access to public utilities.



   A.   Residential uses.



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



      (1)   Single-family detached dwelling unit, subject to the
following:



         (a)   Minimum lot size: 12,500 square feet.



         (b)   Minimum lot width: 80 feet.



         (c)   Minimum front yard setback: 30 feet.



         (d)   Minimum side yard setback, each: 10 feet.



         (e)   Minimum rear yard setback: 30 feet.



      (2)   Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(2), regarding
single-family attached/multifamily dwelling units, was repealed 12-27-1999 by
Ord. No. 35-1999. Twin- or two-family dwelling units, subject to the
following:



         (a)   Minimum lot size: 18,000 square feet.



         (b)   Minimum lot width: 110 feet.



         (c)   Minimum front yard setback: 30 feet.



         (d)   Minimum side yard setback: 15 feet, with one
common party wall.



         (e)   Minimum rear yard setback: 30 feet.



         (f)   The provision of the appropriate buffer
requirements of § 175-91.



[Added 10-9-1989 by Ord. No. 33-1989]



      (3)   Customary residential accessory uses subject to the
regulations therefor.



   B.   Nonresidential uses.



      (1)   Public playgrounds, conservation areas and parks.



      (2)   Public buildings, limited to libraries, museums and
schools, provided that in the case of schools, such use shall be limited to
either a public or private nonprofit institution of elementary or secondary
education.



      (3)   Farms limited to the raising of flowers, fruits or
vegetable crops.



      (4)   Churches or other places of worship, including schools
for religious instruction and parish halls.



   C.   Conditional uses.



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989; 10-9-1989 by Ord. No. 33-1989;
11-27-1989 by Ord. No. 40-1989; 12-27-1999 by Ord. No. 35-1999]



      (1)   Professional offices subject to § 175-109.



   D.   No nonresidential use in the R-1 District shall be located on a
parcel unless served by a centralized wastewater treatment plant.



[Added 6-28-1993 by Ord. No. 13-1993; amended 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 30-2002]



§ 175-152. Residential-2 District.



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



   The following uses are permitted in the R-2 Zoning District. All uses
shall have access to public utilities.



   A.   Residential uses.



      (1)   Single-family detached dwelling unit, subject to the
following:



         (a)   Minimum lot size: 12,500 square feet.



         (b)   Minimum lot width: 80 feet.



         (c)   Minimum front yard setback: 30 feet.



         (d)   Minimum side yard setback, each: 10 feet.



         (e)   Minimum rear yard setback: 30 feet.



      (2)   Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(2), regarding
single-family attached/multifamily dwelling units, was repealed 12-27-1999 by
Ord. No. 35-1999. Twin or two-family dwelling units, subject to the following:



         (a)   Minimum lot size: 18,000 square feet.



         (b)   Minimum lot width: 110 feet.



         (c)   Minimum front yard setback: 30 feet.



         (d)   Minimum side yard setback: 15 feet, with one
common party wall.



         (e)   Minimum rear yard setback: 30 feet.



      (3)   Customary residential accessory uses subject to the
regulations therefor.



   B.   Nonresidential uses.



      (1)   Public playgrounds, conservation areas and parks.



      (2)   Public buildings, limited to libraries, museums and
schools, provided that, in the case of schools, such use shall be limited to
either a public or private nonprofit institution of elementary or secondary
education.



      (3)   Farms limited to the raising of flowers, fruits or
vegetable crops.



      (4)   Churches or other places of worship, including schools
for religious instruction and parish halls.



   C.   Conditional uses.



      (1)   Professional offices, subject to § 175-109. Editor's
Note: Former Subsection C(2), regarding cluster single- and two-family
dwelling units, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed
12-27-1999 by Ord. No. 35-1999.



   D.   No nonresidential use in the R-2 District shall be located on a
parcel of less than one acre unless served by a centralized wastewater
treatment plant.



[Added 6-28-1993 by Ord. No. 13-1993]



§ 175-153. Residential-3 District.



[Added 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989]



   The following uses are permitted in the R-3 Zoning District:



   A.   Residential uses.



[Amended 10-9-1989 by Ord. No. 33-1989; 11-27-1989 by Ord. No. 40-1989;
6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 30-2002]



      (1)   No residential dwelling unit shall be located on a
parcel of less than 1.5 acres unless served by a centralized wastewater
treatment plant.



      (2)   Single-family detached dwellings, where public sewerage
is available, subject to the following:



         (a)   Minimum lot size: 25,000 square feet.



         (b)   Minimum lot width: 120 feet.



         (c)   Maximum lot coverage: 40%.



      (3)   Twin- or two-family detached dwelling units, but only
where public sewerage is available, subject to the following:



         (a)   Minimum lot size: 37,500 square feet.



         (b)   Maximum lot coverage: 40%.



   B.   Nonresidential uses.



      (1)   Public playgrounds, conservation areas and parks.



      (2)   Public buildings, limited to libraries, museums and
schools, provided that, in the case of schools, such use shall be limited to
either a public or private nonprofit institution of elementary or secondary
education.



      (3)   Farms, limited to the raising of flowers, fruits or
vegetable crops.



      (4)   Churches or other places of worship, including schools
for religious instruction and parish halls.



      (5)   Offices and office buildings.



      (6)   Garden centers engaged in the retail sale of plant
materials, provided that in the case of schools, such use shall be limited to
either a public or private nonprofit institution of elementary or secondary
education.



      (7)   Professional offices limited to doctors, dentists,
architects, engineers, planners, lawyers, real estate agents, insurance
brokers and offices for similarly licensed professionals.



      (8)   Buffers.



[Added 10-9-1989 by Ord. No. 33-1989]



         (a)   The Planning Board shall require a planted buffer
established in accordance with the standards set by § 175-91 for any
permitted use where the property upon which said permitted use is being
developed with the exception of an agricultural use where the property in
question abuts an active agricultural use, abuts an Agricultural Production
(AP) Zone or directly across a public street that abuts an active
agricultural use or an Agricultural Production (AP) Zone, which buffer shall
meet the following requirements:



            [1]   If the proposed use is located across the
street or abuts an existing active agricultural use, a fifty-foot buffer
shall be applied.



            [2]   If the proposed use is located across the
street or abuts an Agricultural Production (AP) Zone, a one-hundred-foot
buffer shall be applied.



         (b)   The applicant, for approval of any development
within this section which is subject to the buffer requirements of Subsection
B(8)(a)[2] above, shall, as a condition of preliminary approval and prior to
filing for any final approval, place a deed on record creating a perpetual
conservation easement over said buffer area.



      (9)   No nonresidential use in the R-3 District shall be
located on a parcel of less than one acre unless served by a centralized
wastewater treatment plant with the exception of those uses which do not
require any sanitary sewer system such as public playgrounds, conservation
areas, farms, parks and other similar uses.



[Added 9-25-2000 by Ord. No. 36-2000]



   C.   Conditional uses.



      (1)   Home occupations subject to § 175-108.



      (2)   Home professional offices subject to § 175-109.



      (3)   Conversion of an existing single-family dwelling into no
more than two apartment units, provided that:



         (a)   Each resulting apartment unit shall consist of at
least four rooms, two of which shall be a kitchen and a full bathroom; shall
meet all health, safety and building code provisions applicable at the time
of conversion; shall have separate, safe and convenient means of access; and
shall have access to public utilities.



         (b)   The floor area of the original dwelling shall not
be increased for the purpose of or in connection with the conversion thereof.



         (c)   The lot containing such dwelling to be converted
shall contain at least 25,000 square feet; shall have a minimum width of 110
feet; shall provide a minimum front yard setback of 50 feet or a setback
equal to the adjacent properties, whichever is the lesser; shall provide
minimum side yards of 20 feet; and shall provide a minimum rear yard setback
of 50 feet.



[Amended 6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 30-2002]



      (4)   Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(4), regarding
single-family attached/multifamily dwelling units, as amended 10-9-1989 by
Ord. No. 33-1989, was repealed 12-27-1999 by Ord. No. 35-1999. Cluster
single-family/two-family dwelling units shall not be permitted.



[Amended 10-9-1989 by Ord. No. 33-1989; 11-27-1989 by Ord. No. 40-1989;
6-17-2002 by Ord. No. 30-2002]



      (5)   Wholesale distribution centers and warehousing, provided
that such activities are conducted entirely within an enclosed structure
under the following conditions:



[Added 10-9-1989 by Ord. No. 33-1989]



         (a)   The hours of operation shall be limited to be
consistent with the neighboring uses so as to reduce any potential for
conflict.



         (b)   A planted perimeter buffer shall be established
along all property lines and be consistent with the following standards:



            [1]   A fifty-foot planted buffer shall be
established along all property lines in accordance with § 175-91.



            [2]   Where the proposed use abuts an Agricultural
Production (AP) Zone, a one-hundred-foot planted buffer in accordance with §
175-91 shall be applied.



            [3]   Any developer with a development that
qualifies under Subsection C(5)(b)[2] shall, as a condition of preliminary
approval and prior to filing for final approval, place a deed on record
creating a perpetual conservation easement over said buffer area, where the
property abuts an Agricultural Production (AP) Zone.



         (c)   Access to the property shall be controlled through
an improved driveway opening. The location, width, type and construction
detail shall be approved by the Planning Board, its engineer and/or traffic
consultant.



   D.   R-3A Zone.



[Added 12-27-1999 by Ord. No. 35-1999 Editor's Note: this article also
repealed former Subsection D, regarding nonresidential uses on parcels of
less than one acre, added 6-28-1993 by Ord. No. 13-1993. ]



      (1)   There shall be created within the Residential-3 District
a zone entitled R-3A which shall be limited to Block 3801, Lots 5, 6 and
6.01, formerly located in the R-3 and B-2 Zones.



[Amended 2-28-2000 by Ord. No. 3-2000]



      (2)   The following uses shall be permitted within the R-3A
Zone:



         (a)   Single-family attached/multifamily dwelling units,
but only if public sewerage and water is available at the site and subject to
the following:



         [1]   Minimum tract size shall be seven acres.



         [2]   Not more than 35% of the lot area shall be covered
by buildings and paving. A minimum of 25% of the tract shall be in common
open space with the appropriate recreational facilities; such open space
shall be in areas not less than one acre.



         [3]   No multifamily unit or single-family attached unit
shall be constructed in any areas where public sewerage facilities and water
are not then available or cannot be made available by the developer.



         [4]   The maximum density for single-family attached
units and multifamily units shall be six per acre subject however to a 20%
set aside of the total units for low- and moderate-income households as
defined by the Council on Affordable Housing (COAH) and further subject to
the rules, regulations and restrictions imposed by COAH.



         [5]   A development may consist of all single-family
attached units, a combination of attached and multifamily units or all
multifamily units. Any type of unit proposed must comprise at least 35% of
the total units.



         [6]   No structure containing multifamily or
single-family attached units shall exceed 21/2 stories in height.



         [7]   Any basement or part thereof in any structure used
for dwelling purposes must meet all appropriate requirements of state and
local building codes.



         [8]   Multifamily and single-family attached development
shall reflect superior features of design and layout and shall conform to the
following building design criteria:



            [a]   Single-family attached units. Each structure
shall contain not more than eight single-family attached units, and in no
case shall any structure exceed 175 feet in length. To mitigate the visual
impact created by long building facades, offsets of at least four feet shall
be provided after every two units.



            [b]   Multifamily units. Each structure shall
contain not more than 16 units, and in no case shall any structure exceed 180
feet in length. To mitigate the visual impact created by long building
facades, offsets of at least four feet shall be provided after every four
entrances.



            [c]   The following minimum building spacing shall
be maintained for all structures containing four or more units:



            [d]   End-wall to end-wall separation shall be
maintained at a minimum distance of 30 feet.



            [e]   The distance of any building face to the
curbline of the street shall be at least 30 feet.



            [f]   Any building face to parking area separation
shall be maintained at a minimum distance equal to ½ the height of the
highest building wall, but in no case less than 20 feet.



            [g]   End-wall to window-wall separations shall be
maintained at a minimum distance equal to 11/2 times the height of the
highest building wall, but in no case less than 40 feet.



            [h]   Window-wall to window-wall separations shall
be maintained at the minimum distance equal to two times the height of the
highest building wall, but in no case, less than 65 feet.



         [9]   A perimeter buffer of at least 50 feet shall be
provided around the entire proposed development. The buffer shall consist of
natural vegetation and/or planted material as stipulated in § 175-91. No
stormwater drainage facilities or active recreation facilities are to be
located in this buffer area.



         [10]   Where the proposed residential development is
proposed on any lot which abuts or is across a public street from an active
agricultural use, the development shall incorporate a fifty-foot planted
buffer or a one-hundred- foot planted buffer where the property abuts an
Agricultural Production (AP) Zone in accordance with § 175-91, in addition
to the required building setback standards. This buffer shall be required on
the property line(s) of the lot which abuts or is across a public street from
the active agricultural use or the Agricultural Production (AP) Zone.



         [11]   Where an applicant for development is required to
establish a buffer under Subsection D(2)(a)[9] or [10] as herein referenced.
Said developer as a condition of preliminary approval shall be required,
prior to filing for major subdivision or site plan approval, to place on
record a deed creating a perpetual conservation easement over the buffer area
as defined in said sections, where the property abuts an Agricultural
Production (AP) Zone.



§ 175-154. (Reserved) 31



31.   Editor's Note: Former § 175-154, Town Business District, as
amended, was repealed by Ord. No. 23-2011, adopted 11-28-2011.



§ 175-154.1.  Gateway District, Avenue.



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   A.   District intent.  The areas proposed for G1 "Gateway Avenue"
are currently located in R-1 and R-2 Zones, along important streets that run
through residential neighborhoods toward the center of Hammonton. They are
made up primarily of detached single-family homes on larger lots. The new
designation will preserve residential character, while allowing for some
additional f1exibility to improve walkability and connections between
downtown and the Gateway.



   B.   Location.  This map indicates where this Zoning District will
be mapped when amending the Zoning Map for the Town of Hammonton located at
§ 175-143. No scale.







 



   C.   Permitted building types.







 



   D.   Minimum lot size.  Minimum lot size in this district is:
12,500 sq. ft.



   E.   Permitted uses.







 



§ 175-154.2.  Gateway District, Boulevard. 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   A.   District intent.  G2 is made up of the parcels that are
currently zoned B-2 "Highway Business" along White Horse Pike between
Fairview and Broadway. Revisions to the B-2 "Highway Business" are proposed
to create a smaller district that would preserve the current commercial
character of the B-2 zone, but with added provisions to reflect specific
community goals for a Gateway.



   B.   Location.  This map indicates where this Zoning District will
be mapped when amending the Zoning Map for the Town of Hammonton located at
§ 175-143. No scale.







 



   C.   Permitted building types:







 



   D.   Minimum lot size.  Minimum lot size in this district is:
50,000 sq. ft. However, no residential dwelling unit or nonresidential use
shall be located on a parcel of less than one acre unless served by a
centralized wastewater treatment plant.



   E.   Permitted uses.







 



   F.   Adjacency to active agricultural uses.  Proposed development
on any lot which abuts or is across a public street from an active
agricultural use, see § 175-155A(13).



§ 175-154.3.  Gateway District, Crossroads. 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   A.   District intent.  Comprising the blocks immediately
surrounding the intersection of White Horse Pike and Bellevue, which are
currently zoned B-2 "Highway Business;" G3 "Gateway Crossroads" would remain
primarily for mid-sized commerce. However, it would also expand Building Type
options to allow for new development that could be arranged in a way that
would signal to those travelling along White Horse Pike that this is an
important area, with another important area (Main Street) nearby.



   B.   Location.  This map indicates where this Zoning District will
be mapped when amending the Zoning Map for the Town of Hammonton located at
§ 175-143. No scale.







 



   C.   Permitted building types.







 



   D.   Minimum lot size.  Minimum lot size in this district is:
20,000 sq. ft.



   E.   Permitted uses.







 



§ 175-154.4.  Downtown District, Near Town. 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   A.   District intent.  Although made up primarily of detached
single-family homes on larger lots, the areas proposed for D1 "Near Town" are
currently located in R-1, R-2, B-1, and MD Zones. The new designation will
simplify this, and will preserve the residential character of the blocks
involved, while allowing for some additional f1exibility. These improvements
are intended to improve walkability and manage the transition between
downtown and adjacent residential neighborhoods.



   B.   Location.  This map indicates where this Zoning District will
be mapped when amending the Zoning Map for the Town of Hammonton located at
§ 175-143. No scale.







 



   C.   Permitted building types.







 



   D.   Minimum lot size.  Minimum lot size in this district is:
10,000 sq. ft.



   E.   Permitted uses.







 



 



§ 175-154.5.  Downtown District, In Town Railway.



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   A.   District intent.  Made up of the parcels currently zoned MD
between 13th and 11th (with the exception of those now in DT4) this district
now includes a mix of residential, light industrial, and other commercial
uses. "In Town Railway" will expand the options for the commercial employment
and light industrial uses that are not appropriate for other Downtown Zones,
but should near the train tracks and center of town.  Despite this
distinction, it will be similar in character to D3 "In Town," and will
include larger buildings that can host low-impact manufacturing,
institutional, and residential uses.



   B.   Location.  This map indicates where this Zoning District will
be mapped when amending the Zoning Map for the Town of Hammonton located at
§ 175-143. No scale.







 



   C.   Permitted building types.







 



   D.   Minimum lot size.  Minimum lot size in this district is: 
10,000 sq. ft.



   E.   Permitted uses.







 



§ 175-154.6.  Downtown District, In Town. 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   A.   District intent.  Made up of the parcels currently zoned R-1,
R-2, and B-1 that surround the Main Street blocks, this district now includes
a mix of residential and commercial uses. The "ln-Town" zone/district will
expand options for retail growth in the center of Hammonton while supporting
Main Street activities and improving options for downtown living.



   B.   Location.  This map indicates where this Zoning District will
be mapped when amending the Zoning Map for the Town of Hammonton located at
§ 175-143. No scale.







 



   C.   Permitted building types. 







 



   D.   Minimum lot size.  Minimum lot size in this district is:



      (1)   2,500 sq. ft. for commercial buildings;



      (2)   10,000 sq. ft. for residential buildings.



   E.   Permitted uses.







 



§ 175-154.7.  Downtown District, Downtown. 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   A.   District intent.  Made up of the parcels currently zoned R-1,
R-2, and B-1 that surround  the Main Street blocks, this district now
includes a mix of residential and commercial uses. The "ln-Town"
zone/district will expand options for retail growth in the center of
Hammonton while supporting Main Street activities and improving options for
downtown living.



   B.   Location.  This map indicates where this Zoning District will
be mapped when amending the Zoning Map for the Town of Hammonton located at
§ 175-143. No scale.







 



   C.   Permitted building types.







 



   D.   Minimum lot size.  Minimum lot size in this district is: 800
sq. ft.



   E.   Permitted uses.







 



§ 175-154.8.  Conditional Uses, Downtown and Gateway Districts. 



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   A.   For areas within the designated Downtown and Gateway Districts,
the Planning Board shall not approve any conditional use application for any
of the following uses under this chapter unless the following enumerated
specific conditions have been met:



      (1)   Accessory Dwelling Unit.



         (a)   Limited to Accessory Building or Structure



         (b)   Not permitted on lots with Bank or Savings
Institution use or Municipal use.



      (2)   Bank or Savings Institution.



         (a)   The bank or savings institution is to be located
on the first floor, unless accessory to retail use where the institution may
be located on an upper floor adjacent to retail use.



         (b)   Bank or savings institution use may not be
accessory to Dwelling Units or Private School uses.



      (3)   Business Office.



         (a)   Business office uses may be located on any floor
where permitted.



         (b)   For all districts, storage of Business Office
waste materials and garbage shall be an enclosed container; such container
shall be stored inside the main building or in a separately enclosed
structure that will completely confine odors.



         (c)   Apron Shopfront, Special Industry and Strip
Commerce buildings may have Business Offices as accessory uses to principal
permitted uses.



      (4)   Commercial Parking (as Primary Use).



         (a)   Parking may be a primary use only if facility
(surface lot or structure) is publicly owned.



         (b)   Commercial Parking anywhere will only be permitted
if facility (surface lot or structure) is publicly owned.



      (5)   Day care (Downtown Zoning Districts).



         (a)   When conducted within a building type defined as
Residential Structure, the use must:



            i.   Be accessory use to a principal residential
use;



            ii.   Allow no more arrivals than permitted under
New Jersey's Manual of Requirements For Child Care Centers 10:122-4.1-4
(permitted number of attendees related to staff requirements.)



         (b)   (Reserved)



         (c)   Have no more than one employee or associate who
does not reside at the home.



         (d)   Provide a play area either at the home or at a
suitable play area (public or owned by a homeowners association to which the
residence belongs) located within 1,000 feet of the home that shall:



            i.   Be enclosed by a fence which allows air and
light to penetrate it and be capable of containing each child using the area.



            ii.   Not be within a required building setback.



            iii.   Not be closer than 20 feet of any property
line.



            iv.   Not be within a parking area.



            v.   Not conduct outdoor play activities before 8
a.m. or after 8 p.m.



         (e)   Parking areas and vehicular circulation patterns
shall:



            i.   Enhance the safety of children as they arrive
at and leave the facility.



            ii.   Include a designated pickup and delivery
area, which may be a marked area within the public right of way, providing at
a minimum one stacking space per 20 children, and located adjacent to the
school structure in such a way that visitors may avoid walking across
vehicular travel ways to enter or exit the center.



         (f)   Day care may not be an accessory use where
Restaurant is the principal use.



         (g)   Where Day care is an accessory use, it must be
compatible with the principal use in terms of hours of operation, noise,
lighting, parking and similar considerations.



         (h)   The screening requirements for commercial
properties shall be met.



      (6)   Funeral Parlors.



         (a)   Existing Funeral Parlors shall be permitted. All
other Funeral Parlors shall be conditional.



         (b)   Funeral Parlors shall be on lots of no less than
four acres.



         (c)   Storage and parking of funeral-related vehicles
shall be an enclosed garage; garage can be located inside of and to the rear
of the main building or in a separately enclosed structure.



         (d)   Parking shall be buffered from all adjacent
properties by a 30-foot planted strip and adequate screening.



         (e)   Parking shall be located at the side or rear of
the main building.



      (f )   Parking shall be provided at a rate of one space per 25
square feet of floor area.



         (g)   Setbacks shall be no less than 50 feet in any
direction for Funeral Homes in all building types.



      (7)   Gasoline Filling Station.



         (a)   Gasoline Filling Stations permitted in GW-2 only,
subject to § 175-124.



      (8)   Home Occupations.



         (a)   Home  occupations are only permitted as accessory
uses to a principal residential use ("Owner Occupied").



         (b)   Off-street parking areas shall be provided, and
shall preserve the character of the neighborhood by being located behind the
principal structure.



         (c)   Additional conditions subject to § 175-108.



      (9)   Home Professional Office.



         (a)   A home professional office is only permitted as an
accessory use to a principal residential use.



         (b)   Home professional offices are not permitted in
GW-1 District



         (c)   Home professional office subject to § 175-109.



      (10)   Local Retail.



         (a)   If located in a Cottage House building, the
residential character of the building type and the lot is to be maintained.



         (b)   Retail uses on ground floor; retail uses on upper
floors permitted only with retail use directly underneath on next lower floor
with exception of basement.



      (11)   Local Service.



         (a)   Local service uses on ground floor only.



         (b)   Storage of waste materials and garbage shall be an
enclosed container; such container shall be stored inside the main building
or in a separately enclosed structure that will completely confine odors.



         (c)   For activities involving odors a system to vent
exhausts and odors shall be provided so that the exhaust and odor shall not
offend or disturb nearby commercial or residential uses or intrude on any
street, sidewalk or walkway. This shall include the requirement of filters or
other technologically adequate means of eliminating odors from the exhaust.
Such vents shall be interior and exit through the roof.



      (12)   Private School.



         (a)   School activities shall:



            i.   Be separated (including the restrooms) by a
physical barrier from the remaining portion of the building in which it is
located.



            ii.   If an accessory use, be compatible with
principal use in terms of hours of operation, noise, lighting, parking and
similar considerations.



         (b)   Parking areas and vehicular circulation patterns
shall:



            i.   Enhance the safety of children as they arrive
at and leave the facility.



            ii.   Include a designated pickup and delivery
area, which may be a marked area within the public right of way, providing at
a minimum  one stacking space per 20 children, and located adjacent to the
school structure in such a way that visitors may avoid walking across
vehicular travel ways to enter or exit the center.



         (c)   The screening requirements for commercial
properties shall be met.



         (d)   If an outdoor recreation area is provided, it must:



            i.   Be enclosed by a fence which allows air and
light to penetrate it and be capable of containing each child using the area;



            ii.   Not be within a required building setback.



            iii.   Not be closer than 20 feet of any property
line.



            iv.   Not be within a parking area.



            v.   Not conduct outdoor play activities before 8
a.m. or after 8 p.m.



         (e)   If food service is provided, it must:



            i.   Unless accessory to a restaurant (i.e.
cooking school), be limited to food preparation for students and staff and
cooking facilities will not be provided.



            ii.   (Reserved)



            iii.   Store waste materials and garbage in an
enclosed container; such container shall be stored inside the main building
or in a separately enclosed structure that will completely confine odors.



      (13)   Professional Office.



         (a)   Parking shall be buffered from adjacent
residential uses by a ten-foot planted strip and adequate screening, and from
adjacent residential office uses by a five-foot planted strip and screening.



         (b)   For professional offices that are accessory to
Dwelling Units in Residential Structures, the residential character of the
building type and the lot is to be maintained.



         (c)   Professional office use may not be accessory to
Restaurant use.



      (14)   Restaurant.



         (a)   Storage of waste materials and garbage shall be an
enclosed container; such container shall be stored inside the main building
or in a separately enclosed structure that will completely confine odors.



         (b)   All cooking and food preparation shall be confined
to the ground floor of any structure, except that storage may be in the
basement.



         (c)   Restaurant services including dining, catering and
office support may occur on any floor.



         (d)   No restaurant shall have in excess of 5,000 square
feet of total floor area, exclusive of storage area.



         (e)   A system to vent cooking exhausts and odors shall
be provided so that the exhaust and odor shall not offend or disturb nearby
commercial or residential uses or intrude on any street, sidewalk or walkway.
This shall include  the requirement of filters or other technologically
adequate means of eliminating oils, grease and odors from the exhaust. Such
vents shall be interior and exit through the roof.



         (f)   Restaurant use is to be considered the principal
use of any structure and not an accessory use.



      (15)   Single Family Residence.



         (a)   Single Family Residence in an Accessory Building
shall follow Conditional Use requirements for Accessory Dwelling Units.



      (16)   Take-Out Restaurant.



         (a)   Storage of waste materials and garbage shall be an
enclosed container; such container shall be stored inside the main building
or in a separately enclosed structure that will completely confine odors.



         (b)   All cooking and food preparation shall be confined
to the ground floor of any structure, except that storage may be in the
basement.



         (c)   Restaurant services including dining, catering and
office support may occur on any floor.



         (d)   No restaurant shall have in excess of 5,000 square
feet of total floor area, exclusive of storage area.



         (e)   A system to vent cooking exhausts and odors shall
be provided so that the exhaust and odor shall not offend or disturb nearby
commercial or residential uses or intrude on any street, sidewalk or walkway.
This shall include the requirement of filters or other technologically
adequate means of eliminating oils, grease and odors from the exhaust. Such
vents shall be interior and exit through the roof.



         (f)   Take-Out Restaurant use is to be considered the
principal use of any structure and not an accessory use.



§ 175-154.9.  Downtown Improvement District. 



[Added 2-22-2016 by Ord. No. 003-2016]



   A.   Establishment of the District and Zone.  The Town of Hammonton
Downtown Improvement District (the "District") is hereby established,
consisting of the properties designated and listed on Schedule A to Ord. No.
003-2016 annexed hereto by tax block and lot numbers. The District shall be
managed by a District Management Corporation. A Downtown Business Improvement
Zone is hereby created and designated and shall be co-extensive with the
Improvement District.



   B.   Assessment. All costs of improvements and maintenance, other
than the costs of improvements and maintenance ordinarily incurred by Town of
Hammonton out of general funds, shall be determined and approved pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:56-80 or N.J.S.A. 40:56-85 as determined by the District
Management Corporation.  A special assessment shall be assessed against the
properties within the Downtown Improvement District for the purpose of
promoting the economic and general welfare of the District, to be spent on
those purposes permitted by N.J.S.A. 40:56-65 et seq.  The foregoing special
assessment shall not exceed one dollar ($1.00) per property.



   C.   Annual Report and Budgets.  The District Management
Corporation shall submit an annual report to the Town of Hammonton governing
body pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56-80 within 30 days of the close of the fiscal
year.  This report shall consist of a narrative covering the previous year's
operation and detailed financial statements.



      (1)   The District Management Corporation shall submit a
detailed business plan and budget for the upcoming year no later than July 1
of the current fiscal year, for the approval by resolution of the Town
Committee, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:56-84.  The budget
shall be submitted with a report that explains how the budget contributes to
the goals and objectives for the Downtown Improvement District.



      (2)   The fiscal year of the district and the management
corporation shall be January 1st to December 31st, except that the first year
of operation will commence upon adoption of this ordinance, and appointment
and installation of the District Management Corporation.



      (3)   The District Management Corporation shall also cause an
audit of its books, accounts and financial transactions to be made and filed
with this governing body.  This audit shall be completed and filed with Town
of Hammonton within four months after the close of the fiscal year of the
corporation.  A certified duplicate copy of the audit shall be filed with
the Director of the Division of Local Government Services in the State of New
Jersey Department of Community Affairs within five days of the filing of the
audit with this governing body.



   D.   District Management Corporation.  The governing body of Town
of Hammonton hereby designates the Hammonton Revitalization
Corporation/MainStreet Hammonton Program ("District Management Corporation"),
a non-profit corporation, as the District Management Corporation for the
District and the Zone.



      (1)   The District Management Corporation shall be composed of
the members in good standing of the board of directors of the Hammonton
Revitalization Corporation/MainStreet Hammonton Program, plus one elected
member of the Town of Hammonton Council.



      (2)   The District Management Corporation, in addition to
acting as an advisory board to this governing body, shall have the following
powers necessary and requisite to effectuate the purposes of this ordinance:



         (a)   Adopting by-laws for the regulation of its affairs
and the conduct of its business, and prescribing rules, regulations, and
policies for the performance of its functions and duties;



         (b)   Employing such persons as may be required,
including an Executive Director to implement the day-to-day operational
activities of the Corporation, and fixing and paying employee compensation
from funds available to the corporation;



         (c)   Applying for, accepting, and administering and
complying with the requirements respecting an appropriation of funds, or
gifts, grants, or donations of property or money;



         (d)   Making and executing agreements which may be
necessary or convenient to the exercise of the powers and functions of the
corporation, including but not limited to, contracts such as loans or any
other agreements with any persons, firms, corporations, governmental
agencies, or entities;



         (e)   Administering and managing its funds and accounts
and paying its own obligations;



         (f)   Borrowing money from private lenders and entities
for periods not to exceed 180 days and from governmental agencies for that or
longer periods;



         (g)   Providing security, sanitation, maintenance and
other services in the district, supplemental to those normally supplied by
Town of Hammonton;



         (h)   Undertaking improvements designed to increase
safety and attractiveness of the district to businesses which may locate
there or visitors to the district, including but not limited to litter
clean-up and control, landscaping, façade, signage, and those improvements
generally permitted for pedestrian malls under N.J.S.A. 40:56-66 pursuant to
pertinent regulations of the governing body; and



         (i)   Publicizing the district and the businesses
included within the district's boundaries.



         (j)   Application for and acceptance of funds or loans
from the State of New Jersey, Department of Community Affairs, for Public
Improvements and other Improvements as contemplated and defined by N.J.S.A.
40:56-71.1, et seq.



   E.   Municipal Powers Retained.  Notwithstanding the creation of
the Downtown Improvement District, Town of Hammonton expressly retains all of
its powers and authority over the areas designated as within the District.



   F.   Debt Obligations.  This ordinance obligates the Town of
Hammonton Downtown Improvement District to satisfy all debts, loans, and
financial liabilities incurred by the corporation.  The District and the
District Management Corporation may not borrow an amount that exceeds the
ability of the approved budget for that fiscal year to pay the amount
required by the instruments executed at the time the debt is incurred.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Town of Hammonton Council may choose to
supplement the revenue of the Downtown Improvement District in order to
enable the District to perform necessary activities, or to incur debt to
carry out those activities.



§ 175-155. Highway Business District.



   A.   The following uses are permitted in the H-B Zoning District: 



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989; 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



      (1)   Local retail activities, including but not limited to
grocery stores, meat markets, supermarkets, delicatessens, bakeries,
drugstores, furniture stores, sporting good shops, gift shops, hardware
stores, package liquor stores, pet shops, stationery stores, fabric stores,
florists and jewelry stores, but excluding automobile sales.



      (2)   Local service activities, including but not limited to
barber- and beauty shops, tailors, photographer's studios, retail
dry-cleaning and laundering operations, appliance repair shops, shoe repair
shops, upholsterers, newspaper and/or job print shops and customer service
centers.



      (3)   Restaurants, Take-Out Restaurants, bars, taverns and
indoor theaters.



      (4)   Banks, including drive-in facilities.



      (5)   Professional offices limited to doctors, dentists,
architects, engineers, planners, lawyers, real estate agents, insurance
brokers or similar licensed professional uses.



      (6)   Offices and office buildings.



      (7)   Automobile sales, travel trailer and camper sales.



      (8)   Indoor theaters and bowling alleys.



      (9)   Garden centers engaged in the retail sale of plant
material, provided that outside storage, sale or display shall not exceed
four times the building coverage.



      (10)   Shopping centers comprised of the preceding uses.



      (11)   Laboratories of an experimental, research or testing
nature which carry on processes within completely enclosed buildings and
which do not produce noticeable noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat or
glare outside the buildings.



      (12)   Wholesale distribution centers and warehousing,
provided that such activities are conducted entirely within an enclosed
structure.



      (13)   Where the proposed development is proposed on any lot
which abuts or is across a public street from an active agricultural use, the
development shall incorporate a fifty-foot planted buffer or a
one-hundred-foot planted buffer where the property abuts an Agricultural
Production (AP) Zone in accordance with § 175-91 in addition to the required
building setback standards. This buffer shall be required on the property
line(s) of the lot which abuts or is across a public street from the active
agricultural use or the Agricultural Production (AP) Zone. The applicant
shall, as a condition of preliminary approval and prior to filing an
application for final approval, place on record a deed creating a perpetual
conservation easement over the buffer area as defined in this section, where
said lot abuts an Agricultural Production (AP) Zone. This subsection applies
to all permitted and conditional uses other than single-family residential
uses on existing lots. 



[Added 10-9-1989 by Ord. No. 33-1989; amended 11-27-1989 by Ord. No. 40-1989]



      (14)   Hospitals, as defined in § 175-10, which may include:



         (a)   Emergency departments, outpatient medical offices,
diagnostic services including imaging centers, surgical centers, cancer
treatment, physical therapy, pharmacies, and such educational, clinical, and
research facilities as are integral to the operation of the hospital; and



         (b)   Ancillary and accessory uses such as helipads,
employee daycare, gift shops, cafeteria, coffee shops, administrative and
staff offices and offices for either affiliated or nonaffiliated
professionals which are integrated with the hospital facilities or complex. 



[Added 11-15-2004 by Ord. No. 28-2004; amended 3-22-2010 by Ord. No. 3-2010;
6-19-2017 by Ord. No. 10-2017]



   B.   The following are conditional uses in the H-B Zoning District: 



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989; 10-9-1989 by Ord. No. 33-1989;
11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



      (1)   Automotive service stations, subject to § 175-124.



      (2)   Funeral parlors.



      (3)   Commercial parking lots.



      (4)   Apartments on the second and third floors of a building
used primarily for nonresidential purposes.



      (5)   Car washes, subject to § 175-124.



      (6)   Hotels and motels, subject to § 175-111.



      (7)    32   Assisted living facilities subject to the
following conditions, provided, however, that the conditional use specified
in this subsection shall pertain only to the following parcels: Block 4601,
Lots 22, 22.01, 26, 26.01 and 27; Block 4602, Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 4.01, 5 and 6;
Block 4603, Lots 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5. 



[Added 5-21-2007 by Ord. No. 13-2007]



         (a)   Minimum lot size: 75,000 square feet;



         (b)   Minimum lot frontage: 200 feet;



         (c)   Minimum side yard setback: 40 feet;



         (d)   Minimum front yard setback: 65 feet;



         (e)   Minimum rear yard setback: 50 feet;



         (f)   Maximum lot coverage: 75%;



         (g)   Maximum building height for principal structure
only: 35 feet and no more than two stories;



         (h)   Maximum density (number of units/acre): 18 units
per acre; and



         (i)   Minimum facility size: 30 units.



   C.   The following are permitted accessory uses in the H-B Zoning
District: 



[Amended 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



      (1)   Off-street parking, subject to § 175-118.



      (2)   Signs, subject to § 175-161.



      (3)   Fences and walls.



      (4)   Garages to house delivery trucks or other commercial
vehicles.



      (5)   Temporary construction trailers and one sign not
exceeding 100 square feet advertising the prime contractor, subcontractor,
architect, financing institution or similar data for the period of
construction beginning with the issuance of a construction permit and
concluding with the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or one year,
whichever is less, provided that said trailer and sign are on the site where
construction is taking place and set back at least 15 feet from street and
lot lines.



   D.   The following bulk standards shall apply to all uses in the H-B
Zoning District: 



[Amended 10-12-1987 by Ord. No. 13-1987; 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



      (1)   Minimum lot size: 50,000 square feet.



      (2)   Minimum lot frontage: 200 feet.



      (3)   Minimum side yard: 40 feet.



      (4)   Minimum front yard setback: 65 feet.



      (5)   Minimum rear yard setback: 50 feet.



      (6)   Maximum coverage: 75%.



      (7)   Maximum building height for principal structure only: 42
feet.



§ 175-156. General requirements for business districts.



   A.   One building may contain more than one use, provided that the
total building coverage of the combined uses and paving does not exceed the
maximum coverage specified for the district, and further that each use
occupies a minimum gross floor area of 500 square feet.



   B.   A shopping center within the H-B Highway Business District may
contain more than one principal building, provided that the total coverage
specified for the district is not exceeded and the following building
separation requirements are met: 



[Amended 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



      (1)   All principal buildings shall be separated by a minimum
of 25 feet, provided that such separation is to be used solely for pedestrian
circulation. (NOTE: The separation requirements should not be construed to
prohibit covered pedestrian walkways when the roof or covering of such
walkway extends between the principal buildings.)



      (2)   All principal buildings shall be separated by a minimum
of 50 feet when such separation is to be used for parking or vehicular
circulation. (NOTE: The separation requirements should not be construed to
prohibit covered pedestrian walkways when the roof or covering of such
walkway extends between the principal buildings.)



   C.   At least the first 40 feet adjacent to any street and rear
property line and 15 feet adjacent to any side property line in the H-B
District shall not be used for parking or a drive aisle, except for the
entrance drive, and shall be planted and maintained as a buffer area as
stipulated in § 175-91 and separated from the parking area by poured
concrete or Belgian block or other suitable curbing as determined by the
Planning Board during site plan review. This buffer area shall not contain
stormwater drainage facilities but may, if approved by the Planning Board, be
swaled to accept a portion of the site's stormwater runoff. 



[Amended 10-12-1987 by Ord. No. 13-1987; 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   D.   No merchandise, products or similar material or objects shall
be displayed or stored outside so as to reasonably obstruct pedestrian access
on any sidewalk. Any use resulting in the storage of vehicles outside shall
have such area entirely enclosed by a fence, wall, plant material or
combination thereof in order to provide a visual barrier between the storage
areas and any street, residential zoning district or existing residential
use. Such outside storage area shall not exceed 30% of the lot area and shall
be located in the rear yard only.



   E.   All buildings shall be compatibly designed, whether constructed
all at one time or in stages over a period of time. All building walls facing
any street or residential district line shall be suitably finished for
aesthetic purposes.



   F.   All areas not utilized for building, parking, loading, access
aisles and driveways or pedestrian walkways shall be suitably landscaped with
shrubs, ground cover, seeding or similar plantings and maintained in good
condition. A buffer area of a minimum width of 50 feet shall be provided in
addition to the building setback requirements within the H-B Highway Business
District along any common property line with a residential district or an
existing residential use which buffer shall be planted according to the
standards as set forth in § 175-91. 



[Amended 10-12-1987 by Ord. No. 13-1987; 10-9-1989 by Ord. No. 33-1989;
11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   G.   Where the commercial development in question is more than 1,000
feet in depth as measured from the right-of-way line of the roadway upon
which it fronts and where a buffer is required pursuant to Subsection F, the
buffer as set forth in Subsection F shall be of a minimum width of 100 feet
in addition to the building setback requirements for a H-B Zone and shall be
planted as set forth in § 175-91. 



[Added 10-9-1989 by Ord. No. 33-1989; 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   H.   All applications for development which fall within the
provisions of Subsections F and G as to required buffer areas shall have as a
condition of preliminary approval a requirement that the applicant shall
place on record prior to applying for final approval a deed creating a
perpetual conservation easement over the required buffer area. 



[Added 10-9-1989 by Ord. No. 33-1989]



   I.   Minimum off-street loading in the H-B Highway Business
District. 



[Amended 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



      (1)   Each non-shopping-center activity shall provide for
off-street loading and unloading with adequate ingress and egress from
streets and shall provide such area(s) at the side or rear of the building.
There shall be no loading or unloading from the street, except during
designated business hours. Loading area requirements may be met by combining
the floor areas of several activities taking place under one roof and
applying the above ratios.



      (2)   Shopping centers shall provide sufficient loading areas
to adequately service the activities within the shopping center.



      (3)   There shall be at least one trash and garbage pickup
location provided by each building or in a pickup location outside the
building. The trash and/or garbage shall be stored in a steel-like, totally
enclosed container located in a manner to be obscured from view from parking
areas, streets and adjacent residential uses or zoning districts by a fence,
wall, planting or combination of the three. If located within the building,
the doorway may serve both the loading and trash/garbage functions. If a
container is used for trash/garbage functions and is located outside the
building, it may be located adjacent to or within the general loading
area(s), provided that the container in no way interferes with or restricts
loading and unloading functions.



      (4)   All off-street loading areas shall be lighted.



   J.   No nonresidential use in the Downtown Districts or H-B Highway
Business District shall be located on a parcel of less than one acre unless
served by a centralized wastewater treatment plant. 



[Added 6-28-1993 by Ord. No. 13-1993; 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   K.   Individual lots within the H-B Highway Business District may
contain more than one principal use and more than one principal building or
structure, provided that the total lot coverage specified for the district is
not exceeded. Notwithstanding this subsection, shopping centers shall abide
by the building separation requirements set forth in § 175-156B. Any entity
that proposes to develop a lot in accordance with this subsection (§
175-156K), as revised, shall submit a site plan to the Town of Hammonton
Planning Board for review and approval. 



[Amended 3-22-2010 by Ord. No. 3-2010; 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



§ 175-157. Industrial Park District.



   A.   The following uses are permitted in the M-1 Zoning District
subject to § 175-120:



      (1)   Manufacturing plants of a type which carry on processes
within completely enclosed buildings, including the manufacture, assembly or
treatment of products from previously prepared materials.



      (2)   Wholesale distribution centers for wholesale sales,
storage and distribution, including building material sales.



      (3)   Laboratories of an experimental, research or testing
nature which carry on processes within completely enclosed buildings.



      (4)   Needle products manufacturing, including cutting,
tailoring, weaving, knitting and yard finishing uses.



      (5)   Wholesale fuel distribution centers, including
facilities for bulk storage.



      (6)   Commercial bakeries and commercial laundries.



      (7)   Offices and office buildings.



      (8)   Banks and banking services and financial institutions. 



[Added 11-15-2004 by Ord. No. 27-2004]



   B.   Accessory uses permitted in addition to customary accessory
uses.



      (1)   Temporary construction trailers and one sign not
exceeding 100 square feet, each advertising the prime contractor,
subcontractors, architect, financing institution and similar data for the
period of construction beginning with the issuance of a construction permit
and concluding with the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or one year,
whichever is less, provided that said trailer(s) and sign are on the site
where construction is taking place and are set back at least 15 feet from any
street right-of-way line or property line.



      (2)   Employee cafeterias as part of a principal building or
as the entire use of a principal building, provided that the cafeteria is
limited in service to the employees of the principal use designated on the
site plan as appropriated by the Planning Board.



   C.   Bulk requirements for individual uses. 



[Amended 10-12-1987 by Ord. No. 13-1987]



      (1)   Minimum lot area: 80,000 square feet.



      (2)   Minimum lot frontage: 300 feet.



      (3)   Minimum front setback: 100 feet.



      (4)   Minimum side yard: 50 feet.



      (5)   Minimum rear yard: 75 feet.



      (6)   Maximum coverage: 70%.



      (7)   Maximum building height for principal structure only: 42
feet.



   D.   Bulk requirements for industrial parks.



      (1)   Minimum tract size: six acres.



      (2)   Minimum lot size: 65,000 square feet.



      (3)   Minimum lot frontage: 200 feet.



      (4)   Minimum setback: 75 feet; internal: 50 feet.



      (5)   Minimum side yard: 50 feet; internal: 35 feet.



      (6)   Minimum rear yard: 75 feet; internal: 35 feet.



      (7)   Maximum coverage (tract): 75%.



   E.   General requirements.



      (1)   Any principal building may contain more than one use or
organization. Any lot may contain more than one principal building, provided
that the total building coverage specified for the district is not exceeded
and that the following building separation requirements are met:



         (a)   All principal buildings shall be separated by a
minimum of 25 feet, provided that such separation is to be used solely for
pedestrian circulation.



         (b)   All principal buildings shall be separated by a
minimum of 50 feet when such separation is to be used for parking or
vehicular circulation.



      (2)   At least 50 feet adjacent to any exterior street line
and 30 feet adjacent to any exterior lot line shall not be used for parking
and shall be planted and maintained in lawn area, ground cover or landscaped
with evergreen shrubbery and shall be separated from the parking area by
poured concrete, Belgian block or suitable curbing as determined by the Town
Engineer and Planning Board during site plan review.



      (3)   No merchandise, products, waste equipment or similar
material or objects shall be displayed or stored outside except for outdoor
storage of mobile equipment.



      (4)   All portions of the property not utilized by buildings
or paved surfaces shall be landscaped utilizing combinations such as
landscaped fencing, shrubbery, lawn area, ground cover, rock formations,
contours, existing foliage and the planting of conifers and/or deciduous
trees native to the area in order to either maintain or reestablish the tone
of the vegetation in the area and lessen the visual impact of the structures
and paved areas. The established grades on any site shall be planted for both
aesthetic and drainage purposes. The grading plan, drainage facilities and
landscaping shall be coordinated to prevent erosion and silting as well as
assuring that the capacity of any natural or manmade drainage system is
sufficient to handle the water generated and anticipated both from the site
and contributing upstream areas.



      (5)   All buildings shall be compatibly designed, whether
constructed all at one time or in stages over a period of time. All building
walls facing any street or residential district line shall be suitably
finished for aesthetic purposes.



      (6)   A minimum buffer area of 100 feet in width shall be
provided along any common property line within a residential district and
shall be planted as stipulated in § 175-91. In those cases where a portion
of a lot abuts a public street, a distance equivalent to the footage between
the street center line and the edge of the street right-of-way shall be
deducted from the required buffer width along that portion. 



[Amended 10-12-1987 by Ord. No. 13-1987]



      (7)   Minimum off-street loading.



         (a)   Each activity shall provide for off-street loading
and unloading with adequate ingress and egress from streets and provide such
areas at the side or rear of the building. Each space shall be at least 15
feet by 40 feet, and one space shall be provided for every 8,000 square feet
of gross floor area or fraction thereof in each building. There shall be no
loading or unloading from the street.



         (b)   Loading area requirements may be met by combining
the floor areas of several activities taking place under one roof and
applying the above ratios.



         (c)   There shall be at least one trash and garbage
pickup location provided by each building which shall be separated from the
parking spaces by either a location within the building or in a pickup
location outside the building. The trash and/or garbage shall be stored in a
steel-like, totally enclosed container located in a manner to be obscured
from view from parking areas, streets and adjacent residential uses or zoning
districts by a fence, wall, planting or combination of the three. If located
within the building the doorway may serve both the loading and trash/garbage
functions. If a container is used for trash/garbage functions and is located
outside the building, it may be located adjacent to or within the general
loading area(s), provided that the container in no way interferes with or
restricts loading and unloading functions.



         (d)   All off-street loading areas shall be lighted.



      (8)   Where the proposed development is proposed on any lot
which abuts or is across a public street from an active agricultural use, the
development shall incorporate a fifty-foot planted buffer or a
one-hundred-foot planted buffer where the property abuts an Agricultural
Production (AP) Zone in accordance with § 175-91 in addition to the required
building setback standards. This buffer shall be required on the property
line(s) of the lot which abuts or is across a public street from the active
agricultural use or the AP Zone. The applicant shall, as a condition of
preliminary approval and prior to filing an application for final approval,
place on record a deed creating a perpetual conservation easement over the
buffer area as defined in this section, where said lot abuts an AP Zone. 



[Added 11-27-1989 by Ord. No. 40-1989]



      (9)   No nonresidential use in the M-1 District shall be
located on a parcel of less than one acre unless served by a centralized
wastewater treatment plant. 



[Added 6-28-1993 by Ord. No. 13-1993]



§ 175-158. Multi-Use District.



[Amended 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   A.   The following uses are permitted in the M-2 Zoning District:



      (1)   Single-family detached/two-family dwellings and
nonresidential uses as permitted in the R-1 Zoning District. 



[Amended 9-28-2009 by Ord. No. 15-2009]



      (2)    33 Offices, office buildings and retail and service
uses, subject to the following: 



[Amended 10-12-1987 by Ord. No. 13-1987]



         (a)   Minimum lot size: 10,000 square feet.



         (b)   Minimum lot width: 75 feet.



         (c)   Minimum front yard setback: 20 feet.



         (d)   Minimum side yard: 10 feet.



         (e)   Minimum rear yard: 20 feet.



         (f)   Maximum coverage: 75%.



         (g)   Maximum height: 30 feet.



         (h)   A planted twenty-foot buffer, as stipulated in §
175-91, shall be provided in addition to the required building setbacks when
the site abuts a residential use.



      (3)   Light industrial uses permitted in the AP/CLI Zoning
District subject to the bulk requirements for individual uses for District
M-1. 



[Amended 10-12-1987 by Ord. No. 13-1987]



   B.   The following are conditional uses in the M-2 District:



      (1)   Mixed use projects consisting of certain residential,
i.e., single-family attached and multifamily units, commercial and office
uses, subject to the following:



         (a)   Bulk requirements. 



[Amended 10-12-1987 by Ord. No. 13-1987]



            [1]   Minimum tract size: three acres.



            [2]   Minimum frontage: 150 feet.



            [3]   Minimum building setback from tract
perimeter: 25 feet, planted as stipulated in § 175-91.



            [4]   Maximum coverage: 60%.



            [5]   Maximum height: 35 feet.



         (b)   Distance requirements. 



[Amended 10-12-1987 by Ord. No. 13-1987]



            [1]   Residential buildings shall conform to the
distance requirements for similar uses in the RR Zoning Districts.



            [2]   A nonresidential or mixed use building shall
in no case be located closer to another building than 30 feet or the height
of the building, whichever is greater.



         (c)   Maximum density shall be four units per acre for
single-family attached units and multifamily units. In no event may any of
the units contain more than two bedrooms. 



[Amended 10-12-1987 by Ord. No. 13-1987; 12-27-1999 by Ord. No. 35-1999]



         (d)   Nonresidential use may comprise 25% of the total
floor area of the project with no reduction in total units required.
Nonresidential use may be increased to 50% of the total floor area only
through a reduction in units as follows: 1 dwelling unit shall be eliminated
for every 1,000 square feet of nonresidential use over the
twenty-five-percent base. (A three-acre parcel may include 36 attached
dwellings at 1,200 square feet each and, therefore, 10,800 square feet of
nonresidential use. The maximum nonresidential use would be 21,600 square
feet with 26 dwellings.)



         (e)   All open areas shall be suitably landscaped and
shall include appropriate recreational facilities, both active and passive.



         (f)   The design of the development shall include safe,
convenient and attractive pedestrian access as follows:



            [1]   Between the tract's residential uses and the
tract's nonresidential uses.



            [2]   Between the tract's uses and off-site
commercial opportunities.



            [3]   Between the tract's uses and off-site
existing or proposed mass transit opportunities and community facilities.



         (g)   This section has been designed to permit maximum
flexibility to applicants in the design of a unique type of development. The
Board shall review all plans with the view to providing the Town of Hammonton
with the best feasible project in terms of economic, social and aesthetic
impacts. All elements in §§ 175-62, 175-63, 175-91, 175-92 and 175-150B(4)
and other relevant sections shall be part of such evaluation. 



[Amended 10-12-1987 by Ord. No. 13-1987]



   C.   No nonresidential use in the M-2 District shall be located on a
parcel of less than one acre unless served by a centralized wastewater
treatment plant. 



[Added 6-28-1993 by Ord. No. 13-1993]



   D.   Additional permitted use. Within the M-2 District,
age-restricted affordable housing pursuant to and in compliance with N.J.A.C.
5:93-1 et seq. shall be a permitted use. A density of 10 residential
age-restricted units per acre shall be permitted, provided that the property
is served by a centralized wastewater treatment plan. With the exception of
specific units made available to on-site building superintendents, all
residential units built pursuant to this subsection shall be age-restricted
and affordable. 



[Added 11-15-1999 by Ord. No. 24-1999 34 ]



   E.   The M2A District is hereby designated as Lot 1 in Block 2605.
The M2A District shall exclusively permit age-restricted affordable housing
pursuant to and in compliance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-1 et seq. A density of 10
residential age-restricted units per acre shall be permitted, provided that
the property is served by a centralized wastewater treatment plant. With the
exception of specific units made available to on-site building
superintendents, all residential units built pursuant to this subsection
shall be age-restricted and affordable. 



[Added 11-15-1999 by Ord. No. 24-1999 35 ]



   F.   Age-restricted affordable housing in the M-2 zone shall be
subject to the following bulk requirements: 



[Added 11-15-1999 by Ord. No. 24-1999 36 ]



      (1)   Minimum tract size: two acres.



      (2)   Minimum frontage: 150 feet.



      (3)   Minimum building setback from tract perimeter:  feet. 37



      (4)   Maximum coverage: 60%.



      (5)   Maximum height: 35 feet.



§ 175-158.1.  Inclusionary Development Zone. 



[Added 12-19-2016 by Ord. No. 012-2016]



   A.   Purpose and intent.



      1.   The Town of Hammonton recognizes the need for affordable
housing that can be offered as rentals for the target population who require
smaller, more reasonably priced accommodations such as one-, two- and
three-bedroom living facilities.  It is the intent of this section to create
a realistic opportunity for the construction of a portion of the low- and
moderate-income housing obligation of the Town of Hammonton under New
Jersey's Fair Housing Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.; the rules of the New
Jersey Council on Affordable Housing, N.J.A.C. 5:93-1 et seq. (the "Rules");
and the Mount Laurel Doctrine.



      2.   This section shall apply specifically to the existing
rental development along 12th Street (Route 54) on Block 1201, Lots 5 & 5.01
(the "Property"), as shown on the concept plan prepared by Duffy Dolcy
McManus & Roesch, dated October 15, 2015 ("Concept Plan"), attached as
Exhibit "A". 



      3.   This section acknowledges that 52 apartments currently
exist on the property, and that it is the intent of this section to control
development on the property for an additional 84 rental units (as defined
herein) for a total no greater than 136 rental units. This section creates a
IDZ implementing the Concept Plan referenced above, designed to increase an
existing rental development to a total of up to 136 rental units, with a 15%
set-aside of any new units that are constructed to be designated as
affordable rentals that will be governed by controls on affordability that
will terminate in accordance with the applicable Uniform Housing
Affordability Controls, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq. ("UHAC") requirements and
the Rules.



   B.   General provisions.  Because this section provides specialized
regulations for housing types, land use, improvements, site planning, and
building design within the IDZ, the standards and requirements of this
section supersede and replace all conflicting provisions in the Town of
Hammonton Developmental Ordinance and Zoning Ordinance, except for the
stormwater management regulations found in Article XVII, the air quality,
fire management, fish and wildlife, historic and cultural preservation, water
quality, and wetlands regulations found in Article XII and Pinelands
Development Credit regulations found in Article XIII of the Town of Hammonton
Land Development Ordinance.  Specifically, the following provisions of the
Town of Hammonton Development Ordinances are applicable to the IDZ Zone:  1)
Article XVII; 2) § 175-89(B)(1); 3) § 175-107(A); and 4) §
175-145(E)(12)(a).  All ordinances of the Town of Hammonton that are
inconsistent with the provisions of this section are superseded by the
provisions of this section.



   C.   Permitted uses.  The following uses are permitted in the IDZ
Zoning District.



      1.   All uses permitted in the H-B Highway Business Zoning
District.



      2.   Dwelling Unit/Apartment, Multiple -Family.



   D.   Accessory uses.  The following accessory uses are permitted in
the IDZ Zoning District.



      1.   All accessory uses permitted in the H-B Highway Business
Zoning District.



      2.   In multi-family development, accessory uses may include:



         a.   Private, passive or active recreational facilities,
including, but not limited to, a community building.



         b.   Stormwater facilities.



         c.   Signage subject to § 175-161(D)(4).



         d.   Fences and hedges subject to §§ 175-98 and
175-137.



         e.   Parking subject to the New Jersey Residential Site
Improvements Standards ("RSIS").



         f.   Other accessory uses and structures normally
considered incidental to apartment and/or multifamily buildings, i.e., refuse
enclosures, sheds for maintenance equipment and HVAC units.



         g.   Except as set forth herein, all accessory uses and
structures shall be permitted within the setback areas for principal
buildings and comply with § 175-87.



   E.   Signs. Signs for the multi-family residential development shall
conform to § 175-161D(4), except that sign setbacks shall be no less than 15
feet from a right of way.



   F.   Bulk standards related to non-residential development shall be
the same as those established in the H-B Highway Business Zoning District.



   G.   Bulk standards related to multi-family residential development:



      1.   Maximum residential density. 12 dwelling units per gross
acre.  This section acknowledges that there are currently 52 existing
apartment units on the property.  The maximum number of new units
permissible in the zone is 84 units.  The total maximum number of all units
shall be no greater than 136 units.



      2.   Maximum impervious coverage:  75%



      3.   Minimum front yard setback for principal buildings:  65
feet



      4.   Minimum side yard setback for principal buildings:  40
feet



      5.   Minimum rear yard setback for principal buildings:  20
feet



      6.   Minimum parking setback:  10 feet (between buildings and
parking areas)



      7.   Maximum building height:  45 feet or 3 stories



      8.   Minimum space between buildings:  No building shall be
closer than 50 feet to any other building.



      9.   Common open space.  15% of the gross tract area.  All
common open space shall be set aside as permanent common open space to be
owned and/or maintained by the property owners or the management entity of
the multifamily buildings.



      10.   Recreation area.  A clubhouse or community building
with a minimum size of 2,800 sf. and a tot lot shall be provided. 
Additional recreational activities may be provided.  All recreational
activities shall be subordinated to the residential character of the
development, and no advertising shall be permitted.  Architectural
elevations and floor plans shall be provided at the time of application for
site plan review for the clubhouse or community building.



      11.   On-site parking and site access. 



         a.   Parking shall be regulated by New Jersey
Residential Site Improvement Standards (RSIS).



         b.   On-site parking facilities shall be limited to
passenger vehicles of permanent residents and their guests.  Storage of
trucks, boats, trailers, etc., shall be prohibited.



         c.   Design controls applicable for on-site parking
facilities are set forth in the site plan and subdivision regulations found
in § 175-118 except that in order to maintain the character of the existing
community curbing is not required.



         d.   Sidewalks shall be provided to reasonably connect
the residential units to the parking area and shall be consistent with the
Concept Plan.



         e.   A secondary ingress/egress shall be provided on
Commence Way.



         f.   Community Building.  Parking spaces shall be no
closer than five feet to the building.  The drive aisle shall be no closer
than 15 feet to the street line except for the access driveway.



      12.   Landscaping.  Landscaping shall conform to § 175-136.



      13.   Lighting.  Lighting shall conform to § 175-112, which
includes the requirement to design lighting to prevent glare upon surrounding
properties.



      14.   Refuse storage.  The refuse storage areas shall be
suitably located and screened and arranged for access and ease of collection
and shall not be part of, restrict or occupy any parking aisle. Refuse
storage structures may be erected in the side and rear yard areas only, and
the required setback shall be 1/2 that required for principal buildings.



      15.   Buffer.  The buffer area shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements of § 175-91, except that storm drainage
facilities may be located within the buffer area.  The buffers shall be
located along all side and rear lot lines.  The width of the buffer shall be
a minimum of 20 feet.



      16.   Building Design.  The design of the new buildings and
units shall be similar in appearance and style as the rendering attached as
Exhibit "B".



      17.   Affordable Housing Requirements.



         a.   Fifteen percent (15%) of all new units constructed
shall be provided as affordable housing units.  The affordable housing units
shall be constructed as rentals.



         b.   Affordable units shall comply with the New Jersey
Barrier-Free Subcode accessibility requirements, N.J.A.C. 5:23.7, as required
by the New Jersey Fair Housing Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301, et seq.



         c.   The affordable housing units shall be developed and
rented in accordance with the applicable UHAC and COAH regulations adopted as
of the date of the adoption of this section.



         d.   The affordable housing units shall be dispersed in
various buildings throughout the multi-family development.  The affordable
units shall be phased consistent with N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.6(d).



         e.   Consistent with UHAC, the developer (or its agent)
may act as the administrative agent to be responsible for the administering
of the affordable housing program and reporting to the Municipal Housing
Liaison or the Town's designated affordable housing entity.



         f.   Controls on affordability shall expire in
accordance with the applicable UHAC and COAH regulations adopted as of the
date of the adoption of this section.



   H.   Rehabilitation requirements for existing five buildings. 



      1.   In conjunction with the new construction of the
multi-family residential development contemplated under this section
provision, the five existing multi-family residential buildings shall be
rehabilitated to conform as much as practicable in light of the requirement
for the elimination of cost-generative features.  The rehabilitation of the
existing buildings shall be phased with the new construction.  For purposes
of this section, rehabilitation shall mean cosmetic and architectural design
features to the existing buildings exterior that complement the new
construction style.  The five existing buildings after rehabilitation shall
look substantially similar to the elevation attached hereto as Exhibit "C".



      2.   The existing five buildings on the property shall be
rehabilitated in accordance with the following phasing schedule:



 

New Building Certificate of Occupancy (CO) Issued
 
Required Completion of Rehabilitation of Existing Five Buildings


Building #1
 
0


Building #2
 
1 of the existing buildings completed


Building #3
 
3 of the existing buildings completed


Building #4
 
5 of the existing buildings completed



 



      A Certificate of Occupancy shall not be issued for any of the new
buildings constructed unless and until the corresponding number of existing
buildings, in accordance with the chart above, have been completely
rehabilitated.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, deviations from the phasing
schedule shall be permitted upon application to the Planning Board for good
cause, so long as the rehabilitation of the existing buildings is completed
before the last Certificate of Occupancy is issued for the new construction.



   I.   Cost-Generation and Development Review Process.  The Planning
Board shall conduct its review of any multi-family residential development
application in the IDZ Zoning District in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-10 et
seq.



§ 175-159. Recreation Zone.



[Added 12-14-1998 by Ord. No. 30-1998]



   A.   The following uses are permitted in the REC Recreation Zoning
District:



      (1)   Active and passive public recreation facilities,
including but not limited to athletic fields, tennis courts, basketball
courts, swimming pools, bike trails, street hockey rinks, skating facilities
and nature trails, and associated community centers.



      (2)   Public playgrounds, conservation areas and parks.



      (3)   Golf courses, miniature golf and golf driving ranges.



   B.   The following are permitted accessory uses in the REC
Recreation Zoning District:



      (1)   Fences and walls.



      (2)   Signs, subject to § 175-161.



      (3)   Off-street parking, subject to § 175-118.



   C.   The following bulk standards shall apply to all uses in the REC
Recreation Zoning District:



      (1)   Minimum lot size: 10 acres.



      (2)   Maximum height: 35 feet.



§ 175-160.  Building Types.



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   A.   General standards for any new construction or building addition
in each Downtown District:



      (1)   Bulk.



         (a)   New structures shall be designed in sections
between 15 feet and 35 feet in width along the street frontage. Sections can
be expressed through architecturally articulated bays, variations in setback
, window patterns, changes in material, and other similarly effective
techniques. Minor variations may be considered to adjust for lot frontage and
lot geometry.



         (b)   Eave lines and roof lines shall vary between
building sections in height or setback from the street.



         (c)   The maximum length of a horizontal facade or side
wall without relief shall be 100 feet in Downtown Districts. Relief can be
expressed as setbacks, open space passages between buildings, recessed
courtyards or similarly significant architectural breaks to reduce the length
of continuous horizontal facades or side walls.



         (d)   The maximum length of any roofline in Downtown
Districts shall be 60 feet. In cases where individual buildings are longer
than 60 feet, the roofline shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet for 15 to
35 feet of the facade length beyond the 60- foot roofline.



         (e)   Three-story structures shall differentiate between
the ground level and upper levels, in addition to the third floor setback,
using setbacks, changes in materials, bands or other linear ornamentation.



         (f)   Connected assemblages of multiple buildings, such
as townhomes, shall be no greater than 175 feet without a break for a side
yard setback as required by that building type.







 



      (2)   Building heights.



         (a)   Building heights shall be measured in both stories
and feet.



         (b)   The ground story of a building is the first floor
of a building that is level to or elevated above grade. The upper stories of
a building begin at the first floor above the ground story. Building types
constructed with pitched roofs with dormers have regulations that allow an
additional story, if located within the roof structure.



         (c)   When measuring by feet, building heights shall be
measured to both the eave line and roof line, for buildings with pitched
roofs, and to the roof line for all other buildings.



         (d)   For sloped sites, the grade level shall be
measured from the average point of the slope on any side of the building
perimeter that includes an entrance to the structure.



         (e)   Ornamental tower elements associated with
religious institutions are exempt from maximum building height requirements.



      (3)   Doors and windows.



         (a)   All buildings shall include front doors and
windows facing the street: no blank walls are permitted facing the street at
the ground story.



         (b)   The minimum area of window and door openings on
any wall shall be 30% of the area of the wall.  For commercial uses or walls
facing streets, the glazed area must be greater than 70% with a maximum sill
height of 2' 6" above sidewalk grade.



         (c)   Side walls that face public ways, or which are set
back a minimum of five feet from a lot line, must have windows and may have
doors.



         (d)   Every street-facing ground-level business and
residence must have a separate entry.  Live-work buildings must have one
total entrance. Buildings located on the corner parcel of any block are
encouraged to place primary entrances on secondary streets or at the corner.



      (4)   Driveways.



         (a)   Parking shall be accessed by rear alleys or rear
lanes where available. Parking pads and garages that must be accessed from
the front of a lot should be located at the rear of the lot.



         (b)   Driveway width at the access point shall be a
minimum of 12 feet between the front lot line and the front facade of the
building. The maximum width shall be 15 feet for one lane and 25 feet for a
two lane driveway. In the case of state highways, the provisions of the
current New Jersey State Highway Access Code shall apply.



         (c)   Shared driveways between two properties, which
minimize curb cuts and impervious surfaces, are permitted.  This shall be
accomplished by initiating an irrevocable offer of cross-easement between the
abutting properties.  The owners of the involved properties shall submit,
with their application for special exception, a site plan showing joint use
and location of the shared driveway.



      (5)   Porches, stoops, and other encroachments.



         (a)   Porches shall be no less than six feet deep. Front
porches, not including steps from the porch to a walkway at grade, may extend
up to 10 feet into front yards, provided they are no closer than four feet to
any property line.



         (b)   These dimensions also apply to porches facing
corner lot lines.



         (c)   Stoops may encroach into the front setback area of
cottage houses, single houses, townhouses, and twins if their highest point
is not higher than 42 inches above sidewalk level.



         (d)   Other encroachments, such as bay windows,
balconies, or colonades shall provide a minimum of eight feet of clearance
over a public sidewalk or right of way. Encroachments shall also be no
greater than 16 feet in width and two feet in depth.



         (e)   Overhanging encroachments may go beyond the
property line only into the public right-of-way, not into an adjoining
property.  Easements are required for any encroachment into public
right-of-way.



      (6)   Frontage.



         (a)   In downtown zones, at least 50% of the building's
front facade at ground level must be located along the front setback line. 
Buildings in D4 must have a frontage percentage of at least 75%.



      (7)   Entrances.



         (a)   The main entrance of every building must directly
face a street or a civic space.  The residential or office component of a
downtown building with ground-floor retail frontage may be located to the
rear or side of the building if all setback requirements are followed.



         (b)   Every street-facing ground-level business and
residence should have a separate entry.



      (8)   Ground floor elevation.



         (a)   For buildings with retail uses, the ground floor
should be at sidewalk level.  If the ground floor use is not retail, the
floor level may be elevated if access is not restricted according to ADA
requirements.



      (9)   Story heights.



         (a)   The ground floor floor-to-floor height of any
building with commercial or mixed uses shall be no more than 18 feet tall.
Buildings that are primarily residential or live-work shall have a ground
floor floor-to-floor height of no more than 14 feet tall.



         (b)   Each story above the ground story must have a
floor-to-floor height of eight to 12 feet.  Top stories must have a
floor-to-floor height of eight to 12 feet tall as measured from the finished
floor level to the bottom of the structure above.



      (10)   Single-story buildings.



         (a)   Ground-story residential use in one-story
buildings is limited to the single family detached house and cottage house
types, as well as accessory buildings or structures where residential use is
permitted.



      (11)   HVAC.



         (a)   HVAC equipment shall not be visible from streets
or public parks.



      (12)   Parking.



         (a)   Parking as a sole primary use shall not be
permitted unless the facility (lot or structure) is publicly owned.



         (b)   All parking for residential development shall be
in accordance with Residential Site Improvement Standards ("RSIS").



         (c)   All non-residential parking shall be in accordance
with the Town of Hammonton Land Development Code, Institute of Transportation
Engineers Parking Generation Manual or alternative documented sources.



         (d)   The parking spaces required may be reduced when
two or more establishments share the same parking area, whether on the same
lot or abutting lots.  Shared parking or offsite parking strategies are
described in § 175-118.



      (13)   Agricultural buffers.



         (a)   Where the proposed building type is proposed on
any lot which abuts or is across a public street from an active agricultural
use, the development shall incorporate a 50-foot planted buffer or a 100-foot
planted buffer where the property abuts an Agricultural Production (AP) Zone
in accordance with § 175-91 in addition to the required building setback
standards. This buffer shall be required on the property line(s) of the lot
which abuts or is across a public street from the active agricultural use or
the Agricultural Production (AP) Zone. The applicant shall, as a condition of
preliminary approval and prior to filing an application for final approval,
place on record a deed creating a perpetual conservation easement over the
buffer area as defined in this section, where said lot abuts an Agricultural
Production (AP) Zone. This subsection applies to all permitted and
conditional uses other than single-family residential uses on existing lots.



      (14)   Upper floor residence.



         (a)   Dwelling units on the second and third floors of
buildings used primarily for non-residential purposes. No more than six upper
floor residences shall be allowed in one building.



   B.   Permitted building types for Downtown Districts and Gateway
Districts.



      (1)   General.  Allowable building types are defined for each
Downtown District and Gateway District in § 175-160. A single building may
host more than one use.



      (2)   Allowable building types.  The allowable building types
for Downtown Districts and Gateway Districts are:



         •   Apron Shopfront (see § 175-160.B.(5))



         •   Box Building (see § 175-160.B.(6))



         •   Civic Building (see § 175-160.B.(7))



         •   Cottage House (see § 175-160.B.(8))



         •   Downtown Building (see § 175-160.B.(9))



         •   Liner Building (see § 175-160.B.(10))



         •   Live/Work Building (see § 175-160.B.(11))



         •   Loft Building (see § 175-160.B.(12))



         •   Pad Commerce (see § 175-160.B.(13))



         •   Podium Building (see § 175-160.B.(14))



         •   Single House (see § 175-160.B.(15))



         •   Special Industry (see § 175-160.B.(16))



         •   Strip Commerce (see § 175-160.B.(17))



         •   Townhouse (see § 175-160.B.(18))



         •   Twin House (see § 175-160.B.(19))



         •   Accessory Structure (see § 175-160.B.(20))



      (3)   Building types across zone boundaries.  Building types
should be selected so that buildings of compatible scale and arrangement
relate front-to-front across streets and district boundaries or side-to-side
across lot lines.  Building types of contrasting scale and arrangement are
best placed back-to-back, with alleys or rear lot lines acting as transitions.



      (4)   Permitted building types by district.  The permitted
building types for each Downtown District and Gateway District are summarized
in Figure 160B below.  For allowable uses in each building type, by
district, see "Permitted Uses" charts in § 175-154.1 through § 175-154.7.







 



      (5)   Apron shopfront. Apron shopfront buildings are typically
commercial properties which have been converted from existing single family
homes. The "apron" is created when commercial design elements are added to
the ground floor space between the original structure and sidewalk. This
evolution allows a property owner to add or increase commercial floor area
and street presence without demolishing an existing structure.  Some ground
floor area can remain as residential space or as access to residential space
above, as long as commercial and residential uses have separate, dedicated
entrances.







 



 







 







 



      (6)   Box building.  A large, free-standing building type,
generally with a flat roof covering a single floor of one single use.  Box
buildings can be completely or partially circumnavigated by automobile within
their own lot.







 







 



      (7)   Civic building.  A building that contains public or
civic uses of special significance to residents, employees, or visitors.
Civic buildings are used for the following purposes: community services, day
care, education, government, places of worship, or social services. Civic
buildings do not include retail buildings, residential buildings, or
buildings with private offices.







 







 



      (8)   Cottage house.  A variant of the single family detached
house, with a lower allowable height and smaller side and front setbacks. It
is intended  for smaller lots and to be occupied by residential use,
although some may be converted to small shops or galleries.







 







 



      (9)   Downtown building.  A multi-story building with
multiple dwellings or offices in upper stories and retail or office uses on
the ground floor.  Residential uses may not be placed on the ground floor.
Often, these buildings have common walls on one or both side lot lines.







 







      (10)   Liner building.  Liner buildings are new buildings
constructed between parking garages (or other large structures with blank
walls) and the street. They add walkable urban character to the street and
are typically mixed in use.







 







      (11)   Live/work building.  A building type variant that
combines elements of a downtown building and townhouse, in that living space
is joined with work space, retail space and/or professional space that is
related to the livelihood of the building's occupants. All of these uses may
occupy any story of the building. A live/work building may include one unit
or multiple units, and may be an attached or detached building.







 







      (12)   Loft building.  A detached building type that was
formerly used as, or has been built to resemble, an industrial factory or
mill.  Loft buildings contain multiple dwellings above and beside each
other, multiple offices above and beside each other, and sometimes both. This
building type occupies most of its lot width and is placed close to the
sidewalk with parking hidden behind it.







 







      (13)   Pad commerce.  A self-contained, single-use lot with a
commercial building designed to serve automobile-based uses and services, and
which can be completely or partially circumnavigated by automobile.  Pad
commerce is not a preferred building type, so new pad commerce buildings are
to be limited and should only be allowed in lower-density Character Districts
with adequate lot dimensions.







 







      (14)   Podium building.  Podium buildings are buildings with
a small footprint on the ground level, with the rest of the lot devoted to
parking spaces and auto circulation; and larger floors on the second floor
(and higher floors if applicable) above all or some of the parking spaces.
This option would be accessed from the front of the lot, with a maximum 42
feet of ground floor facade frontage not enclosed and occupied.







 







      (15)   Single house.  A residential-scale building physically
detached from other buildings or portions of buildings.  However, it does
not have to be used exclusively for single family residential occupation and
can host commercial or multi-family users.







 







      (16)   Special industry.  A low-rise, detached building type
with single or multiple industrial tenants on the ground floor.  Related
office uses may be placed on any floor. Typically, these buildings have
limited "work yard" and parking areas between them and their side or rear
property lines. Special industry buildings should only be allowed in lower-
density Character Districts with adequate lot dimensions and access to
transportation infrastructure.







 







      (17)   Strip commerce.  A low-rise building with single or
multiple retail or office tenants side-by-side on the ground floor. 
Residential uses may not be placed on the ground floor. Typically, these
buildings have limited parking area between the facade and the
right-of-way.  Parking can be accessed directly from the highway, but a
preferred strategy of shared access with neighboring parcels is preferred. 
New strip commerce buildings are to be limited and should only be allowed in
lower-density Character Districts with adequate lot dimensions.







 







      (18)   Townhouse.  A dwelling unit that is one of a series of
dwelling units in a short row, which is attached by a common fireproof and
sound-resistant wall to one or more similar adjacent dwelling units.  Homes
that occupy the corner lot, or which are located at the end of any row of
similar dwelling units, have two front yards and may have a private rear yard.







 







 



      (19)   Twin house.  A semi-detached building that consists of
two dwelling units that abut along a property line. A twin building type is a
variant of a townhouse building type, but has one small side yard per each of
the two dwelling units and a large front yard.







 







 



      (20)   Accessory structure.  A building or structure that
requires a footing and is customarily associated with and is subordinate and
incidental to a principal building or structure, and that is located on the
same tax lot. This includes but is not limited to accessory dwelling units,
garages, carports, doghouses, sheds, free-standing air-conditioning units,
non-portable swimming pools, tennis courts and other similar structures. Any
accessory building or structure attached to the principal building or
structure shall be considered a part of that principal building or structure,
and may be accessed by an alley if the principal building has frontage along
an accepted street.







 



         (c)   Permitted locations.  Building types that can be
occupied by one or more dwelling units are permitted one accessory structure
on the lot in addition to the main building.  This shall include live-work,
townhouse, cottage house, and single house building types.  Twins may share
an accessory structure party wall.



         (d)   Bulk standards.  Additional bulk standards are as
follows:



         1.   Footprint - The building coverage for a detached
accessory structure may not be larger than the building coverage of the
principal structure.



         2.   Height - The maximum height for a detached
accessory structure containing dwelling units in a Downtown or Gateway
District is 18 feet or the cornice line of the main building, whichever is
lower.  For those that do not contain dwelling units, see § 175-87C.



         3.   Setbacks - See § 175-87D.



         (e)   Location of entrances.  One main entrance may be
placed on the alley or access road that the accessory structure is located
on. If the size, orientation, or design of the structure does not allow this,
the entrance to the dwelling unit may be located on an alternate facade. 
This would apply to units that do not have occupied space on the ground, and
are accessed by an entrance from a balcony or deck.



         (f)   Parking.  Any accessory building or structure
attached to the principal building or structure shall be considered part of
that principal building or structure for the calculation of all parking
requirements.



         (g)   Special regulatory standards.  Where an accessory
structure is created and the principal use is residential, the construction
shall comply fully with the requirements of the New Jersey Residential Site
Improvement Standards (RSIS, N.J.A.C. 5:21-3 et seq.).  All standards of
that code will apply to the creation of an accessory structure in a new
building or an addition.



§ 175-161. Signs.



[Amended 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



   A.   No sign may be placed on or attached to a building or erected
independently for any purpose other than to advertise a permitted business or
use conducted on the same premises. No billboards shall be erected or
replaced.



   B.   No sign shall be erected, altered or replaced which is not in
accordance with the standards established in this chapter. The erection of
any sign shall require a construction permit. No sign of any type shall be
permitted to obstruct driving vision, traffic signals, traffic direction and
identification signs, other places of business or other signs or windows of
the building on which they are located. No sign shall be attached to trees,
fence posts, stumps, utility poles or other signs, but shall be freestanding
or attached to buildings in an approved manner.



      (1)   Animated, flashing and illusionary signs, except for
warning or safety, signs using mechanical or electrical devices to revolve,
flash or display movement or the illusion of movement or which change
physical position by any movement or rotation or give the visual impression
of such movement or rotation are prohibited.



      (2)   Except as provided in Subsection B(13) below, no
outdoor, off-site commercial advertising sign shall be permitted.



[Amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989; 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997;
11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



      (3)   Freestanding signs. Signs shall be supported by one or
more columns or uprights which are firmly embedded in the ground. Exposed guy
wires, chains or other connections shall not be made in permanent support of
the freestanding signs.



      (4)   Height. No freestanding or attached sign shall be higher
at any point than the roofline of the building, except that no sign shall
exceed any lesser height if particularly specified in Article XIII. In
addition, no attached sign shall project into or hang over a street
right-of-way, and no sign shall project beyond a building in a manner placing
it above an area traversed by motor vehicles, such as but not limited to
driveways and parking areas. Where signs project beyond a building facade or
wall over a pedestrian way, the lowest portion of the sign shall be at least
eight feet above the walkway.



      (5)   Illuminated signs shall be so arranged as to reflect the
light and glare away from adjoining premises and away from adjoining
highways. No sign with red, green or blue illumination in a beam, beacon or
flashing form resembling an emergency light shall be erected in any location.
Illuminated signs shall comply with the appropriate state uniform
construction codes.



      (6)   Information and direction signs. Street number
designations, postal boxes, on-site directional and parking signs, warning
signs and signs posting property as "private property," "no hunting" or
similar signs are permitted in all zones but are not to be considered in
calculating sign area. No such sign shall exceed two square feet in area.



      (7)   Maintenance. Signs shall be constructed of durable
materials, maintained in good condition and not allowed to become dilapidated.



      (8)   Real estate signs. Two signs temporarily advertising the
sale, rental or lease of the premises or portion thereof shall be permitted.
Such sign shall not exceed nine square feet on each of two sides and shall be
removed at the expense of the advertiser within 15 days after the termination
or completion of the matter or business being advertised. "Sold" signs shall
be permitted between the signing of the contract of sale and 15 days after
the legal closing. All such signs do not require a construction permit.



      (9)   Sign area. Sign area shall be measured around the
outside edges of a framed or enclosed sign or by the area utilized by
isolated words and/or symbols, including the background, whether open or
enclosed, but said area shall not include any supporting framework and
bracing incidental to the display itself.



      (10)   Signs and sign structures. Signs and sign structure of
all types shall be located to allow a clear, unobstructed line of sight for
300 feet from the stop line of any intersection of streets and/or driveways.



      (11)   Signs with two exposures. Signs with two exposures
shall be measured for area by using the surface areas of one side of the sign
only. Both sides may be used.



      (12)   Wall fascia or attached signs. Wall fascia or attached
signs shall be firmly attached to the exterior wall of a building and shall
not project more than 15 inches from the building.



      (13)   Any existing sign which does not conform to Subsection
B(1) above shall be removed immediately. Any existing sign which does not
conform to Subsection B(2) above shall be removed no later than December 5,
1996.



[Amended 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997]



   C.   Permitted signs. The following signs are permitted for uses as
specified in Article XIII of this chapter for the various zoning districts.



   D.   Zoning Districts.



      (1)   The following signs are permitted in the Preservation
Area District:



         (a)   Official public safety and information signs
displaying road names, numbers and safety directions.



         (b)   On-site signs advertising the sale or rental of
the premises, provided that:



            [1]   The area on one side of any such sign shall
not exceed 12 square feet.



            [2]   No more than one sign is located on any
parcel of land held in common ownership.



         (c)   On-site identification signs for schools,
churches, hospitals or similar public service institutions, provided that:



            [1]   The size of any such sign shall not exceed
12 square feet. [2] No more than one sign is placed on any single property.



         (d)   Trespassing signs or signs indicating the private
nature of a road, driveway or premises, and signs prohibiting or otherwise
controlling fishing or hunting, provided that the size of such signs does not
exceed 12 square feet.



         (e)   On-site professional, home occupation or name
signs indicating the profession and/or activity and/or name of the occupant
of the dwelling, provided that:



            [1]   The size of any such sign shall not exceed
12 square feet.



            [2]   No more than one sign is permitted for any
individual parcel of land.



         (f)   On-site business or advertising signs, provided
that:



            [1]   No more than two signs are located on any
one premises or on the premises leased or utilized by any one business
establishment.



            [2]   The total area of such signs shall not
exceed 20 square feet per side, with the maximum height to the top of the
sign not to exceed 15 feet from ground level.



         (g)   Temporary signs advertising political parties or
candidates for election, provided that the size of any such sign does not
exceed four square feet.



         (h)   Temporary on- and off-site signs advertising
civil, social or political gatherings and activities, provided that the size
of such signs does not exceed four square feet.



         (i)   All other temporary on-site signs, provided that
the size of any such sign does not exceed 32 square feet, it is set back at
least 20 feet from the street line or property line, at the discretion of the
Building Inspector, and said sign is removed, at the owner's expense, within
30 days after it is erected. No more than two such signs shall be erected on
any parcel of property within a calendar year (January 1 to December 31).
Should one sign be erected for more than 30 days, this shall be considered
the second sign for the purpose of this subsection. 



[Added 9-9-1985 by Ord. No. 13-1985]



      (2)   All residential districts.



         (a)   Home professions: one professional sign or
nameplate not more than one square foot in area. One such sign shall be
allowed for each permitted use or dwelling unit.



         (b)   Development sign advertising residential
construction. Such signs shall be not larger than 128 square feet in area,
shall be limited in number to one for each street frontage and shall be
located on the subject premises. Development signs shall be removed within 20
days after occupation of the last house in the subdivision.



         (c)   Contractor's or mechanic's sign, not greater than
six square feet in area. One such sign shall be allowed for each street
frontage and shall be removed promptly upon completion of work.



         (d)   Temporary sign limited to signs advertising
activities of civic, political or religious organizations. Such signs shall
be limited to 12 square feet in area and shall require a permit. Such permit
shall run for 30 days and may be renewed once for another period of 30 days.
Six months shall elapse between permits issued to any one organization.



         (e)   In residence districts where townhouses and garden
apartments are permitted, one identification sign indicating the name and
rental information for an apartment house or group of apartments. Such signs
shall be not greater than 35 square feet in area and a maximum of 12 feet on
any side.



      (3)   (Reserved).



      (4)   H-B Highway Business District.



         (a)   Attached signs: one unlighted or lighted sign on
each principal building facade with at least 200 feet of street frontage. The
total area on the sign shall not exceed 10% of the area of the face of the
wall upon which such sign is attached or 75 square feet, whichever is
smaller. Where the building(s) is (are) designed for rear or side entrances,
one unlighted sign may be attached flat against the building at the rear and
side entrances, each sign not to exceed an area equivalent to 1/2 that of the
front of the building. Where more than one use occupies a building, a sign
not exceeding eight square feet identifying the name of the use may also be
attached at the entrance.



         (b)   Freestanding signs: one unlighted or lighted
freestanding sign for each principal building or shopping center.



         (c)   Height: 35 feet or the height of the principal
building, whichever is shorter.



         (d)   Setback: at least 30 feet from any street or lot
line.



         (e)   Area: 100 square feet.



         (f)   Temporary on-site signs, provided that the size of
any such sign does not exceed 32 square feet, it is set back at least 10 feet
from the street line or property line, at the discretion of the Building
Inspector, and said sign is removed, at the owner's expense, within 30 days
after it is erected. No more than two such signs shall be erected on any
parcel of property within a calendar year (January 1 to December 31). Should
one sign be erected for more than 30 days, this shall be considered the
second sign for the purpose of this subsection. 



[Added 9-9-1985 by Ord. No. 13-1985]



      (5)   M-1 Industrial District. Each principal building may
have one lighted or unlighted sign, either freestanding or attached.



         (a)   If freestanding:



            [1]   Height: 15 feet.



            [2]   Setback: at least 50 feet from all street
lines and lot lines.



            [3]   Area: 50 square feet.



         (b)   If attached to the building:



            [1]   Height: no higher than the roofline.



            [2]   Area: 10% of the front wall or 75 square
feet, whichever is smaller.



         (c)   Temporary on-site signs, provided that the size of
any such sign does not exceed 32 square feet, it is set back at least 20 feet
from the street line or property line, at the discretion of the Building
Inspector, and said sign is removed, at the owner's expense within 30 days
after it is erected. No more than two such signs shall be erected on any
parcel of property within a calendar year (January 1 to December 31). Should
one sign be erected for more than 30 days, this shall be considered the
second sign for the purpose of this subsection. 



[Added 9-9-1985 by Ord. No. 13-1985]



      (6)   M2 Multi-Use District.



         (a)   Attached signs: one unlighted or lighted sign on
each principal building major facade. The total area of the sign shall not
exceed 10% of the wall to which it is attached or 50 square feet, whichever
is less.



         (b)   Freestanding signs: one unlighted or lighted
freestanding sign for each principal building.



         (c)   Height: 15 feet maximum.



         (d)   Setback: at least 20 feet from any street or
property line.



         (e)   Area: 50 square feet.



         (f)   Temporary on-site signs, provided that the size of
any such sign does not exceed 32 square feet when associated with an office,
office building, retail or service use; does not exceed eight square feet
when associated with a residential use; is set back at least 20 feet from the
street line or property line, at the discretion of the Building Inspector;
and said sign is removed, at the owner's expense, within 30 days after it is
erected. No more than two such signs shall be erected on any parcel of
property within a calendar year (January 1 to December 31). Should one sign
be erected for more than 30 days, this shall be considered the second sign
for the purpose of this subsection. 



[Added 9-9-1985 by Ord. No. 1985-13; amended 2-24-1986 by Ord. No. 4-1986]



      (7)   Downtown Districts or Gateway Districts.



[Added 11-28-2011 by Ord. No. 23-2011]



         (a)   General sign provisions in these districts.



            [1]   Where the building(s) is (are) designed for
rear or side entrances, one unlighted sign not to exceed an area equivalent
to 1/2 that of the sign on the front of the building.



         (b)   Address sign.



            [1]   Intent.  The intent of regulating address
signs is to protect public safety by ensuring the visibility of street
addresses from the street. Their sizes, colors, and materials are also
regulated to preserve or improve the aesthetic quality of the place in which
they are located.



            [2]   Diagram.







            [3]   Specifications.







            [4]   Zone application.







            [5]   Components.



               [a]   Address signs typically consist of
either a panel or individual numbers and letters applied to a building wall.



            [6]   General provisions.



               [a]   Address sign numerals applied to
commercial, multifamily residential buildings, institutional, office, or
industrial buildings  shall be between four and ten inches tall. Address
sign numerals applied to individual dwelling units shall be at least two
inches tall.



               [b]   Address signs shall be easily visible
by using colors or materials that contrast with their background.



               [c]   Address signs shall not be
incorporated into other signs except in the case of address numerals placed
on the valance of awning signs.



               [d]   Address signs shall be constructed of
durable materials. Tape and paper shall not be used to create address signs.



            [7]   Placement.



               [a]   Address signs must be placed in a
conspicuous  location on the front of the building, preferably on the
primary entrance or above it.



            [8]   Permitted quantities and dimensions.



               [a]   Refer to table [3] for permitted
quantities and dimensions and diagram [2] for an illustration of dimension
features.



               [b]   In the event of conflict or
inconsistency, specifications in [6] General Provisions shall apply.



            [9]   Conditions.



               [a]   Reserved.



         (c)   Awning sign.



            [1]   Intent.  The intent of regulating awning
signs is to ensure proper dimensioning and placement on the building – with
respect to existing architectural features – to maintain or improve public
safety as well as the aesthetic qualities of the place in which they are
located. Awning signs are also regulated to ensure that they are made of
durable materials and are fixed or replaced if damaged.



            [2]   Diagram.







 



            [3]   Specifications.







 



            [4]   Zone application.







 



            [5]   Permitted components.



               [a]   Awning sign types with the following
components are permitted:



                  i.   Shed and patio awnings with or
without signbands



                  ii.   Long dome awnings with or
without signbands



                  iii.   Dome awnings with or without
signbands or marquee



                  iv.   Marquee awnings



                  v.   Gable awnings







 



               [b]   The following awning sign type
components are prohibited:



                  i.   Box awnings



                  ii.   Waterfall and multilevel
waterfall awnings







 



            [6]   General provisions.



               [a]   Awning signs shall contain the
business name, logo, and street address. Awning signs shall not contain a
list of services or products, promotional messages, slogans, address
information, operating hours, or contact information.



               [b]   The height of the valance of an awning
sign shall not exceed 12 inches.



               [c]   Letters, numbers, and graphics may be
printed only on the valance portion of the awning sign and must be between 
five to ten inches in height and cover no more than 70% of the valance area.
A logo may be printed on the flat surfaces of a shed awning sign. The size of
the logo shall not exceed more than 50% of the area of the flat surface.



               [d]   Awning signs shall be made of a
high-quality canvas, woven acrylic, or similar material. Vinyl, plastic,
mylar, and other shiny or glossy materials are prohibited. "Egg crate"
undersides to awning signs are prohibited.



               [e]   Awning signs shall not be internally
illuminated or backlit.



               [f]   Awning signs shall be colored or
patterned so as to match or complement the architecture or the brand of the
business.



               [g]   Where multiple awning signs are
present on a single building (i.e. for multiple retail tenants in a shopping
center), awning signs shall be coordinated in terms of scale, colors,
materials, and placement.



               [h]   Torn or damaged awning signs shall be
repaired or replaced immediately.



            [7]   Placement.



               [a]   Awning signs shall not obscure
architectural features such as pilasters, friezes, roof eaves, roofs, etc.
Where possible, they shall be contained within a storefront window bay.
Awning signs that span continuously across the entire face of the building's
facade are discouraged.



               [b]   Awning signs shall not extend beyond
the width of the building or tenant space. Awning signs shall not project
above the roof line or extend into the floor above.



               [c]   No portion of an awning sign shall be
less than seven feet above the surface over which it projects or project more
than four feet into a public right-of-way.



            [8]   Permitted quantities and dimensions.



               [a]   Refer to table [3] for permitted
quantities and dimensions and diagram [2] for an illustration of dimension
features.



               [b]   In the event of conflict or
inconsistency, specifications in (6) General provisions shall apply.



            [9]   Conditions.



               [a]   Reserved.



         (d)   Entrance canopy.



            [1]   Intent.  The intent of regulating 
entrance canopies is to ensure durability and to prevent any risk to public
health and safety. Furthermore, entrance canopies are regulated to permit
adequate clearance above the public right- of-way and to ensure proper
dimensioning and placement on the building with respect to existing
architectural features.



            [2]   Diagram.







 



            [3]   Specifications.







 



            [4]   Zone application.







 



            [5]   Components.



               [a]   Entrance canopies consist of a canopy
of canvas, cloth, or other materials whose shape is supported by a framework
of rods and held up by posts secured to the ground. The canopy may consist of
a flat front and valances.



            [6]   General provisions. 



               [a]   Entrance canopies shall be made of
canvas, cloth, or other similar materials and of fiberglass, plastic or
non-ferrous metals. In no case shall entrance canopies include wood or wood
products, masonite, or similar materials.



            [7]   Placement.



               [a]   In all cases where an entrance canopy
is placed upon, attached to, or forming any part of any building and such
awning, entrance canopy or shelter canopy projects over a sidewalk, or
similar place where the public is accustomed to walk, the rigid or metal
parts for any such awning entrance canopy or shelter canopy shall have a
clearance of not less than seven feet from the sidewalk elevations, and any
non-rigid valance of any such awning, entrance canopy or shelter canopy shall
have a clearance of not less than six and one-half feet from sidewalk
elevation.



               [b]   All entrance canopies shall be
attached to a building. No supports shall exist beyond the setback line
between the canopy and the sidewalk or ground below.



               [c]   Entrance canopies shall not extend
more than eight feet from the face of the building on which it is attached.



               [d]   The name, logo, and street address of
the establishment shall be placed on face or sides of canopy in letters no
taller than eight inches. Entrance canopies shall not contain a list of
services or products, promotional messages, slogans, address information,
operating hours, or contact information.



               [e]   Entrance canopies installed with
sidewalk illumination systems shall direct light downward.



            [8]   Permitted quantities and dimensions.



               [a]   Refer to table [3] for permitted
quantities and dimensions and diagram [2] for an illustration of dimension
features.



               [b]   In the event of conflict or
inconsistency, specifications in (6) General provisions shall apply.



            [9]   Conditions.



               [a]   Reserved.



         (e)   Marquee.



            [1]   Intent.  The intent of regulating 
marquees is to prevent any risk to public health and safety. Furthermore,
marquees are regulated to permit adequate clearance above the public
right-of-way and to ensure proper dimensioning and placement on the building
with respect to existing architectural features.



            [2]   Diagram.







 



            [3]   Specifications.







 



            [4]   Zone application.







 



            [5]   Components.



               [a]   Marquees are typically structural
features of buildings. Their components and materials can vary considerably.
Anchors, bolts, and supporting rods are part of the interior of marquees.
Signs, typically in the form of channel letters, are affixed to marquees.



            [6]   General provisions.



               [a]   All marquees, including anchors,
bolts, supporting rods and braces thereof, shall be constructed of
incombustible materials and shall be designed by a structural engineer and
approved by the Building Inspector.



               [b]   No portion of a marquee shall be less
than ten feet above the sidewalk.



               [c]   No marquee shall be permitted to
extend closer to the curb line than three feet.



               [d]   No marquee shall be wider than the
entrance of the building plus two feet on each side thereof.



               [e]   Where an entrance consists of multiple
adjacent doors, the multiple  doors shall be treated as one single entrance.



               [f]   Marquees shall be supported solely by
the building to which they are attached and no columns or posts shall be used
as supports in the required front yard or street right-of-way.



               [g]   Message boards are permitted as part
of marquees.



               [h]   A projecting sign may be placed above
a marquee.



            [7]   Placement.



               [a]   Marquees shall only be located above
the main entrance of a building.



            [8]   Permitted quantities and dimensions.



               [a]   Refer to table [3] for permitted
quantities and dimensions and diagram [2] for an illustration of dimension
features.



               [b]   In the event of conflict or
inconsistency, specifications in (6) General Provisions shall apply.



            [9]   Conditions.



               [a]   Reserved.



         (f)   Message board.



            [1]   Intent.  The intent of regulating message
boards is to prevent any nuisance or risk to public safety and health from
illuminated messages. Furthermore, the dimensions of message boards are
regulated so that they are proportionate with the sign framework in which
they are installed.



            [2]   Diagram.







 



            [3]   Specifications.







 



            [4]   Zone application.







 



            [5]   Components.



               [a]   Message board signs are classified
into the following construction types:



                  i.   Non-electronic message boards.
Letters are individually attached to a surface within a transparent display
case.



                  ii.   Electronic message boards. A
sign with a fixed or changing message composed of a series of lights that may
be changed through electronic means.  Electronic message boards shall be
prohibited.



            [6]   General provisions.



               [a]   One message board is permitted for
each business or institution.



               [b]   Message boards shall be permitted on
monument signs and pylon signs. The area of message boards shall not exceed
80% of the area of the monument sign, pylon sign, or marquee on which it is
installed.



               [c]   Non-electronic message boards are
permitted to be internally- illuminated or illuminated by ground mounted
lights.  No lighting shall be oriented to create glare or distraction to the
motoring public or residential uses.



               [d]   Maximum of four lines of copy; letter
heights one inch for each 50 feet of visibility; letter width to height ratio
0.7.



               [e]   No imitation of traffic signs, no use
of the words "STOP," "YIELD,""TURN" or "WARNING."



            [7]   Placement.



               [a]   Message boards shall be placed at 90
degrees to traffic flow, to maximize their visibility to passing traffic.



            [8]   Permitted quantities and dimensions.



               [a]   Refer to table [3] for permitted
quantities and dimensions and diagram [2] for an illustration of dimension
features.



               [b]   In the event of conflict or
inconsistency, specifications located in [6] General provisions shall apply.



            [9]   Conditions.



               [a]   When located within 150 feet of a
residentially-used lot in a residential zone, any part of a message board
shall be oriented so that no portion of the sign face is visible from an
existing or permitted principal structure on that lot.



               [b]   The message board shall be turned off
between the hours of 10 p.m. and 6 a.m.



               [c]   Message boards may not be located
within the sight triangle of any street or driveway.



         (g)   Monument sign.



            [1]   Intent.  The intent of regulating the
dimensions and appearance of monument signs is to preserve or improve public
safety as well as the aesthetic qualities of the places in which they exist.
Regulations also ensure that the messages on monument signs are clear and not
cluttered by excessive information.



            [2]   Diagram.







 



            [3]   Specifications.







 



            [4]   Zone application.







 



            [5]   Permitted components.



               [a]   Monument signs typically consist of a
solid structural base with a framework of the same material. Monument signs
have a message area that consists of an illuminated cabinet, if the sign is
internally- illuminated, or individual letters that are internally- or
externally- illuminated.



               [b]   Primary tenant or development name.
Usually the largest name or logo appearing on a freestanding sign, and placed
at the very top.



               [c]   Secondary tenants. Smaller signs
located below the primary tenant.



               [d]   Street address. Number and street name
required for all monument signs.



            [6]   General provisions.



               [a]   Monument signs for businesses or
shopping centers shall be permitted where the primary street frontage is
greater than 50 feet and where the setback to the main building includes a
driveway or surface parking lot. One monument sign is permitted per street
frontage, with the exception that no monument sign is permitted on the same
frontage as a pylon sign.



               [b]   Nonresidential uses in residential
zones are permitted one monument sign per street frontage.



               [c]   The base of the sign shall be
landscaped. Landscaping shall not obscure text. Landscaping shall not block
sight lines of the driveway or circulation aisles.



               [d]   Monument signs shall be limited to the
name of the business and street address, with an optional logo and/ or
message board. Other messages, including but not limited to list of services
or products, phone numbers, sales or promotions, and slogans, are prohibited
unless included within the message board.



               [e]   Monument signs for shopping centers
with more than one tenant shall be limited to a maximum of five business
names, including the name of the retail center, if it has one.



               [f]   Monument signs shall use between five
to ten percent of its area for address identification. Letters and numbers
shall be at least six inches high and be legible from the street.



               [g]   Monument signs shall be internally
illuminated with letter cutouts on an opaque background, or with directed
external lighting shielded to prevent glare.



               [h]   Monument signs shall be designed to
match or complement the colors and architectural features of the adjacent
building. Incorporate similar architectural elements at top, sides or base to
frame the sign. Monument signs shall include a cap.



               [i]   If a monument sign contains listings
for multiple tenants, the information shall be presented in a clear and
consistent manner. Color, font size, and style should be coordinated across a
monument sign.



               [j]   If a monument sign is intended to be
seen primarily by motorists, letter size shall be such that a motorist would
not need to slow down drastically to read the contents of the sign.



               [k]   Message boards are permitted as part
of monument signs.



            [7]   Placement.



               [a]   Monument signs shall be placed at the
entrance to parking lots or driveways, perpendicular to the street. Monument
signs shall not block sight lines at the driveway or circulation aisles.



               [b]   No portion of the monument sign shall
be located within the public right-of-way. All parts of monument signs shall
be located at least five feet from any property line.



               [c]   No portion of the monument sign shall
be located within sight triangle encroachment areas as defined in § 175-127.



            [8]   Permitted quantities and dimensions.



               [a]   Refer to table [3] for permitted
quantities and dimensions and diagram [2] for an illustration of dimension
features.



               [b]   In the event of conflict or
inconsistency, specifications in (6) General provisions shall apply.



            [9]   Conditions.



               [a]   Reserved.



         (h)   Nameplate.



            [1]   Intent.  The intent of regulating the
sizes, colors, and materials of nameplates is to preserve or improve public
safety, as well as the aesthetic quality of the place in which they are
located.



            [2]   Diagram.







 



            [3]   Specifications.







 



            [4]   Zone application.







 



            [5]   Components.



               [a]   Nameplates typically consist of either
a panel or individual letters applied to a building wall.



            [6]   General provisions.



               [a]   One nameplate shall be permitted per
address.



               [b]   Nameplates shall not exceed three
square feet in display area.



               [c]   Nameplates shall be constructed of
durable materials. Tape and paper shall not be used to create nameplates.



               [d]   Nameplates shall include the address
number and street in letters at least six inches in height if a separate
address sign is not provided.



            [7]   Placement.



               [a]   Nameplates shall be attached to the
wall within ten feet of an entrance to the building.



            [8]   Permitted quantities and dimensions.



               [a]   Refer to table [3] for permitted
quantities and dimensions and diagram [2] for an illustration of dimension
features.



               [b]   In the event of conflict or
inconsistency, specifications in (6) General provisions shall apply.



            [9]   Conditions.



               [a]   Reserved.



         (i)   Outdoor display case.



            [1]   Intent.  The intent of regulating outdoor
display cases is to protect public health and safety by ensuring that their
content is maintained and kept current. Furthermore, the dimensions of
outdoor display cases are regulated so that they do not clutter the facades
of the buildings on which they are mounted.



            [2]   Diagram.







 



            [3]   Specifications.







 



            [4]   Zone application.







 



            [5]   Components.



               [a]   Outdoor display cases consist of
lockable metal or wood framed cabinet with transparent windows mounted onto a
building wall.



            [6]   General provisions.



               [a]   One outdoor display case is permitted
per every 20 feet of frontage.



               [b]   Each outdoor display case shall not
exceed a total area of six square feet.



               [c]   Outdoor display cases are permitted to
be illuminated in order for their contents to be visible in the dark.



               [d]   The contents of outdoor display cases
shall be maintained and kept current. Faded, torn, and outdated contacts
shall be removed and replaced immediately.



               [e]   Theaters are permitted to have greater
quantities and dimensions of outdoor display cases at the discretion of the
Planning Board.



            [7]   Placement.



               [a]   Outdoor display cases shall be
attached to the building walls nearest to the main entrance.



               [b]   Outdoor display cases shall not be
attached to storefront windows.



            [8]   Permitted quantities and dimensions.



               [a]   Refer to table [3] for permitted
quantities and dimensions and diagram [2] for an illustration of dimension
features.



               [b]   In the event of conflict or
inconsistency, specifications in (6) General provisions shall apply.



            [9]   Conditions.



               [a]   Reserved.



         (j)   Projecting/blade sign.



            [1]   Intent.  The intent of regulating the
dimensions and lighting of projecting signs is to preserve or improve public
safety as well as the aesthetic qualities of the place in which they are
located and to ensure adequate clearance above the public right-of-way.



            [2]   Diagram.







 



            [3]   Specifications.







 



            [4]   Zone application.







 



            [5]   Permitted components.



               [a]   Components of projecting signs include
the letters, background, lighting, and an optional logo. The simplest
projecting signs consist of letters only, mounted directly on a panel.
Projecting signs are classified into the following construction types:



                  i.   Cut out letters. Letters are
individually attached on a panel. Shall be externally lit.



                  ii.   Flat panel. The letters are
printed or etched on same surface as the background, which is then affixed to
the wall. Must be lit externally.



                  iii.   Box or cabinet. The letters are
printed or etched on a box, deep enough to house internal lighting. The box
shall be translucent, and the letters are silhouetted; or the box shall be
opaque and only the letters are translucent.



            [6]   General provisions.



               [a]   Businesses shall be permitted one
projecting sign where its primary frontage is no more than five feet from the
front setback line. Businesses that have a secondary frontage on another
street that is no more than two feet from the side setback line shall be
permitted to have one additional projecting sign on that facade.



               [b]   Projecting signs shall be on a single
plane and project at a 90 degree angle from the face of the building. Signs
may be double-sided.



               [c]   Projecting signs shall be permitted
only for businesses that have a primary entrance on the ground floor.



               [d]   Text and graphics on the projecting
sign shall be limited to the name and logo of the business only. Slogans or
text advertising products or services are permitted if letters are not more
than three inches in height and take up no more than 25% of the area of the
sign. Address labels, operating hours and contact information are prohibited.



               [e]   Internally illuminated projecting
signs shall be prohibited unless the cabinet has an opaque background with
letter cut outs. Lighting elements shall not be visible and shall be
contained within the maximum depth of six inches.



               [f]   Mounting hardware, such as supports
and brackets, may be simple and unobtrusive or be highly decorative, but must
complement the design of the sign, the building, or both.



               [g]   For buildings with multiple signs
(e.g., for multiple retail tenants in a shopping center), mounting hardware
or sign shapes, sizes and colors shall be coordinated.



            [7]   Placement.



               [a]   Projecting signs shall not extend
beyond the top of the roof line.



               [b]   On multi-story buildings, projecting
signs shall not extend above the bottom of the second floor window sills,
unless placed above a marquee sign.



               [c]   No portion of a projecting sign shall
be less than eight feet above the surface over which it projects or project
more than four feet from the wall on which it is attached into a public
right-of-way.



            [8]   Permitted quantities and dimensions.



               [a]   Refer to table [3] for permitted
quantities and dimensions and diagram [2] for an illustration of dimension
features.



               [b]   In the event of conflict or
inconsistency, specifications in (6) General provisions shall apply.



            [9]   Conditions.



               [a]   Reserved.



         (k)   Pylon sign.



            [1]   Intent.  The intent of regulating the
dimensions and appearance of pylon signs is to preserve or improve public
safety as well as the aesthetic qualities of the place in which they are
located. Regulations also ensure that the messages on pylon signs are clear
and not cluttered by excessive information.



            [2]   Diagram.







 



            [3]   Specifications.







 



            [4]   Zone application.







 



            [5]   Permitted components.



               [a]   Primary tenant or development name.
Usually the largest name or logo appearing on a freestanding  sign, and
placed at the very top.



               [b]   Secondary tenants. Smaller signs
located below the primary tenant.



               [c]   Street address. Number and street name
required for all pylon signs.



               [d]   Message board. Some uses may employ a
message board with electronic or manual changeable letters to advertise
events, sales, or attractions that occur for a limited time.



            [6]   General provisions.



               [a]   Pylon signs supported by a single pole
or three or more supporting poles are not permitted. Only pylon signs
supported by two supporting pylons are permitted.



               [b]   Pylon signs shall be permitted only
for businesses or shopping centers where the primary street frontage is
greater than 50 feet and permits on- street parking, and where the main
building setback includes a driveway or surface parking lot. One pylon sign
is permitted per lot. Where a development has a secondary street frontage, a
monument sign shall be used on that frontage.



               [c]   The base of the sign shall be
landscaped. Landscaping shall not block sight lines of the driveway or
circulation aisles.



               [d]   No portion of the pylon sign shall be
located on or above the public right-of-way.



               [e]   Pylon signs shall maintain a minimum
seven feet clearance from the bottom of the sign (not including supports) to
the ground, unless enough landscaping is provided to prevent people from
walking underneath it.



               [f]   To ease in visibility, pylon signs
shall be limited only to the name and street address of the business, with an
optional logo and/or message board. Other messages, including but not limited
to list of services or products, phone numbers, sales or promotions, and
slogans, are prohibited unless included within the message board.



               [g]   Pylon signs for retail centers with
more than one tenant shall be limited to a maximum of five business names,
including the name of the retail center, if it has one.



               [h]   Pylon signs shall use between five to
ten percent of its area for address identification.  Letters and numbers
shall be at least six inches high and be legible from the street.



               [i]   Pylon signs are permitted to be
internally illuminated with letter cutouts on an opaque background.



               [j]   Pylon signs are permitted to be
externally illuminated provided that the light is directed toward the sign.



               [k]   Pylon signs shall be designed to match
or complement the colors and architectural features of the adjacent building.
Incorporate similar architectural elements at top, sides or base to frame the
sign.



               [l]   If a pylon sign contains listings for
multiple tenants, the information shall be presented in a clear and
consistent manner. Color, font size, and style should be coordinated across a
pylon sign.



               [m]   Message boards are permitted as part
of pylon signs.



            [7]   Placement.



               [a]   Pylon signs shall be placed at the
entrance to parking lots or driveways, perpendicular to the street. Pylon
signs shall not block sight lines at the driveway or circulation aisles.



               [b]   Landscaping shall not block sight
lines of the driveway or circulation aisles.



               [c]   No portion of pylon signs shall be
located on or above the public right- of-way. All parts of pylon signs shall
be located at least five feet from any property line.



            [8]   Permitted quantities and dimensions.



               [a]   Refer to table [3] for permitted
quantities and dimensions and diagram [2] for an illustration of dimension
features.



               [b]   In the event of conflict or
inconsistency, specifications in (6) General provisions shall apply.



            [9]   Conditions.



               [a]   Reserved.



         (l)   Roof sign.



            [1]   Intent.  The intent of regulating roof
signs is to prohibit them.



            [2]   Diagram.







 



            [3]   Specifications.







 



            [4]   Zone application.







 



            [5]   Components.



               [a]   Roof-mounted signs are any signs
mounted above the roofline of any structure, and typically feature:



                  i.   externally illuminated flat panel;



                  ii.   internally illuminated letters
or images.



               [b]   Any component above a building's roof
line is prohibited.



            [6]   General provisions.



               [a]   Roof signs are prohibited.



            [7]   Placement.



               [a]   Roof signs are prohibited.



            [8]   Permitted quantities and dimensions.



               [a]   Refer to table [3] for permitted
quantities and dimensions and diagram [2] for an illustration of dimension
features.



               [b]   In the event of conflict or
inconsistency, specifications in (6) General provisions shall apply.



            [9]   Conditions.



               [a]   Reserved.



         (m)   Temporary sign, banner.



            [1]   Intent.  The intent of regulating temporary
banner signs is to protect public safety by ensuring that they are removed
after a specified time period. Furthermore, the dimensions of temporary
banner signs are regulated to prevent the signs from cluttering or obscuring
the building facade.



            [2]   Diagram.







 



            [3]   Specifications.







 



            [4]   Zone application.







 



            [5]   Components.



               [a]   Banners typically consist of a large
printed sign, usually on a weather durable material like vinyl, to achieve
the same kind of visibility as most wall-mounted signs. Because of its light
weight it can be attached to nearly any surface where a more permanent wall
sign would be difficult or impossible to mount, such as on highly decorated
or ornate surfaces or on fences.



            [6]   General provisions.



               [a]   Banners must be temporary, and shall
not be used in place of or in addition to other forms of permanent signage.



               [b]   Banners shall only be permitted to
announce events of limited occurrence or duration such as sales, grand
openings, or change of tenant; or for public functions or fundraising events
for charitable, educational, civic, religious, or similar purposes.



               [c]   Banners may be in place no longer than
30 days in a calendar year. Days do not necessarily need to be consecutive.



               [d]   Banner signs shall not exceed six feet
in height or 16 feet in width, with a maximum area of 32 square feet. Banners
shall not be wider than the building on which it is applied.



               [e]   Only one banner is permitted to be
displayed at a time.



               [f]   "For sale" or "for lease" signs for
buildings or space within buildings are exempt from the time limit, but shall
be removed before or upon sale or lease.



               [g]   Banners shall be constructed of
durable materials that can sustain winds and inclement weather.



            [7]   Placement.



               [a]   Banners for commercial and industrial
uses shall be located on the building. Banners for public and institutional
uses may be located on the building or on premises.



            [8]   Permitted quantities and dimensions.



               [a]   Refer to table [3] for permitted
quantities and dimensions and diagram [2] for an illustration of dimension
features.



               [b]   In the event of conflict or
inconsistency, specifications in (6) General provisions shall apply.



            [9]   Conditions.



               [a]   Reserved.



         (n)   Temporary sign, freestanding.



            [1]   Intent.  The intent of regulating temporary
freestanding signs is to protect public safety by ensuring that they are
removed after a specified time period. The dimensions of temporary
freestanding signs are regulated to ensure adequate clearance from other
pedestrian obstructions along the public right- of-way.



            [2]   Diagram.







 



            [3]   Specifications.







 



            [4]   Zone application.







 



            [5]   Components.



               [a]   A freestanding, double-sided temporary
sign placed at the entrance to a business in a primarily pedestrian
environment. They are convenient to move and store and be placed outside on a
day-to-day basis, and removed at the close of business each day.



            [6]   General provisions.



               [a]   One A-Frame sign (also known as
sandwich board) shall be permitted for each business. A-Frame signs should be
made of high quality materials and be weather durable. A-Frame signs shall
not exceed 42 inches in height or 26 inches in width.



            [7]   Placement.



               [a]   Freestanding temporary signs shall be
placed in front of business property only.



               [b]   Freestanding temporary signs shall not
be placed more than five feet from other pedestrian obstructions.



               [c]   Freestanding temporary signs shall be
stored inside when the business is not open or when the sign is not in use.
A-Frame signs shall also be stored inside during high winds or other weather
conditions that might pose a hazard to public safety.



               [d]   No portion of the temporary sign shall
be located within site triangle encroachment areas as defined in § 175-127.



            [8]   Permitted quantities and dimensions.



               [a]   Refer to table [3] for permitted
quantities and dimensions and diagram [2] for an illustration of dimension
features.



               [b]   In the event of conflict or
inconsistency, specifications in (6) General provisions shall apply.



            [9]   Conditions.



               [a]   Reserved.



         (o)   Temporary sign, window.



            [1]   Intent.  The intent of regulating temporary
window signs is to protect public safety by ensuring that they are removed
after a limited time period. The dimensions of temporary window signs are
regulated to prevent cluttering the storefront window.



            [2]   Diagram.







 



            [3]   Specifications.







 



            [4]   Zone application.







 



            [5]   Components.



               [a]   Temporary window signs typically are
affixed to windows.



            [6]   General provisions.



               [a]   Temporary window signs shall be
limited to no more than 20% of the area of the glass panel on which they are
displayed, such that the aggregate area of permanent and temporary window
signs does not exceed 33 1/3 % of the glass panel on which they are
displayed. The area of temporary window signs shall not be included in the
calculations of the areas of permanent window signs.



               [b]   Temporary window signs may be
displayed for a maximum of 30 days in a calendar year. The days do not need
to be consecutive. A "day" shall mean any part of the day for any duration.



               [c]   "For sale" or "for lease" signs are
exempt from this time limit, but shall be removed before or upon sale or
lease.



               [d]   Temporary window signs may not be
illuminated.



            [7]   Placement.



               [a]   Temporary window signs shall be
affixed to the interior of the window.



            [8]   Permitted quantities and dimensions.



               [a]   Refer to table [3] for permitted
quantities and dimensions and diagram [2] for an illustration of dimension
features.



               [b]   In the event of conflict or
inconsistency, specifications in (6) General provisions shall apply.



            [9]   Conditions.



               [a]   Reserved.



         (p)   Wall-mounted sign.



            [1]   Intent.  The intent of regulating
wall-mounted signs is to ensure proper dimensioning and placement on the
building – with respect to existing architectural features – to maintain
or improve public safety as well as the aesthetic qualities of the place in
which they are located. Lighting of wall- mounted signs is also regulated to
reduce glare.



            [2]   Diagram.







 



            [3]   Specifications.







 



            [4]   Zone application.







 



            [5]   Permitted components.



               [a]   Components of wall-mounted signs
include the letters, background, lighting, and an optional logo. The simplest
wall-mounted signs consist of letters only, mounted directly on the wall.
Wall-mounted signs are classified into the following construction types:



                  i.   Cut out letters. Letters are
individually attached to the wall or on a separate background panel, and
shall be externally illuminated.



                  ii.   Channel letters. Each letter has
its own internal lighting element, individually attached to the wall or onto
a separate background panel. The letter shall be translucent, or solid to
create a backlit "halo" effect.



                  iii.   Flat panel. The letters are
printed or etched on same surface as the background, which is then affixed to
the wall and shall be lit externally.



                  iv.   Box or cabinet. The letters are
printed or etched on a box, deep enough to house internal lighting. The box
shall be translucent, and the letters are silhouetted; or the box shall be
opaque and only the letters are translucent.



            [6]   General provisions.



               [a]   All businesses are permitted one
wall-mounted sign. Businesses may have one additional wall sign where it has
a secondary street frontage, but in no case shall a business have more than
two wall-mounted signs in total. Where a business is allowed more than one
wall-mounted sign, each sign shall be on a separate façade.



               [b]   Wall-mounted signs shall consist of
the name and logo of the business. Wall-mounted signs shall not list
products, sales, or other promotional messages. Wall signs shall not contain
address information, phone number, or other contact information.



               [c]   Height and width shall be measured
using smallest rectangle that fully encompasses the entire extent of letters,
logo and background.



               [d]   Wall-mounted signs shall not be wider
than building face or tenant space.



               [e]   Wall-mounted signs shall not project
vertically above the roof line.



               [f]   Where multiple wall-mounted signs are
present on a single building (i.e. for retail tenants in a shopping center),
signage shall be coordinated in terms of scale, placement, colors and
materials.



               [g]   Wall-mounted signs shall be
illuminated at least from dusk to dawn. External lights shall be shielded
from direct view to reduce glare.



               [h]   Electrical raceways, conduits and
wiring shall not be exposed. Internal lighting elements shall be contained
completely within the sign assembly or inside the wall.



            [7]   Placement.



               [a]   Wall-mounted signs shall be placed
where the architectural features suggest the best placement for signage. They
shall be vertically aligned with the center of an architectural feature such
as a storefront window, entry portal, or width of a bay or overall retail
space.



               [b]   Placement of wall-mounted signs shall
be compatible with existing architectural features such as bays, openings,
pilasters, etc. They shall not interrupt or obscure these features or cause
visual disharmony.



               [c]   Wall-mounted signs are not permitted
above the ground floor of buildings.



            [8]   Permitted quantities and dimensions.



               [a]   Refer to table [3] for permitted
quantities and dimensions and diagram [2] for an illustration of dimension
features.



               [b]   In the event of conflict or
inconsistency, specifications in (6) General provisions shall apply.



            [9]   Conditions.



               [a]   Reserved.



         (q)   Window sign.



            [1]   Intent.  The intent of regulating the
dimensions of window signs is to protect public safety by preventing
cluttering of storefront windows and maintaining visibility through
storefront windows.



            [2]   Diagram.







 



            [3]   Specifications.







 



            [4]   Zone application.







 



            [5]   Permitted components.



               [a]   Window signs are classified into the
following construction types.



                  i.   Poster or placard. A sign printed
on paper, cardstock or other material, which is affixed to the window or
placed against it.



                  ii.   Label applique letters. A
sticker that is applied to the window. Label appliques shall consist of
individual letters or graphics with no background.



                  iii.   Painted letters. Painted
directly on the window.



                  iv.   Hanging sign. Signs that are
hanging from the ceiling behind the window. Usually these signs require
electricity for illumination.  Examples include neon signs or an internally
illuminated box or cabinet sign.



                  v.   Video display sign. Signs
consisting of electronically generated text and images displayed on a
computer monitor, television screen, LCD photo frame, or similar device.



                  vi.   Door sign. Signs applied to the
glass portion of an entrance doorway.



                  vii.   Neon sign.



            [6]   General provisions.



               [a]   Window signs shall not interfere with
the primary function of windows, which is to enable passersby and public
safety personnel to see through windows into premises and product displays.



               [b]   Window signs shall be no larger than
25% of the total area of the glass panel onto which they are applied.
Commercial, office, or institutional establishments on the second floor of a
two-story building are permitted to have window signs that shall be no larger
than 25% of the total area of the glass panel onto which they are applied.



               [c]   Window signs shall be allowed to list
services and/ or products sold on the premises, or provide phone numbers,
operating hours or other messages, provided that the total aggregate area of
these messages not exceed the area utilized for the business identification.



               [d]   Merchandise or other objects that are
located inside within three feet of the window and that are not part of a
commercial window display shall be considered window signs, subject to the
provisions in this section.



               [e]   Door signs shall be no larger than 25%
of the area of the door onto which it is applied.



               [f]   Neon signs shall be no larger than two
square feet. The dimensions of neon signs shall be included in calculations
of window sign areas.



               [g]   Neon lights outlining windows are
prohibited.



               [h]   Letters on window signs, including
neon signs and door signs, shall not be taller than eight inches.



               [i]   Video display signs are permitted only
behind, and facing the inside of, ground-floor windows.



               [j]   Video display signs shall be no larger
than 2.5 square feet. The dimensions of video displays shall be included in
the calculations of window sign areas.



               [k]   Video display signs shall present a
static display, and shall not change more frequently than 20 seconds, and
shall not flash or include animations other than fades, dissolves or wipes
through black.



               [l]   Audio speakers or any form of sound
emanating from video display devices are prohibited.



               [m]   Except for neon signs and video
display signs, where permitted – and ambient lighting – window signs
shall not be illuminated.



            [7]   Placement.



               [a]   Window signs shall be applied to, or
placed facing, the interior side of the window.



            [8]   Permitted quantities and dimensions.



               [a]   Refer to table [3] for permitted
quantities and dimensions and diagram [2] for an illustration of dimension
features.



               [b]   In the event of conflict or
inconsistency, specifications in (6) General provisions shall apply.



            [9]   Conditions.



               [a]   Reserved.



§ 175-162  (Reserved).



ARTICLE XIV Penalties; Enforcement; Duration of Variances



§ 175-163. Violations and penalties.



   A.   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $500 and/or
imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each and
every violation of this chapter and each day that a violation of this chapter
continues shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct violation thereof.



   B.   Any corporation or partnership which conceals the names of the
stockholders owning 10% or more of its stock, or of the individual partners
owning a ten-percent-or-greater interest in the partnership, as the case may
be, shall be subject to a fine of $1,000 to $10,000 which shall be recovered
in the name of the town in any court of record in the state in a summary
manner pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement Law (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1 et seq.).



   C.   If before final subdivision approval has been granted, any
person transfers or sells or agrees to transfer or sell, except pursuant to
an agreement expressly conditioned on final subdivision approval, as owner or
agent, any land which forms a part of a subdivision for which town approval
is required by ordinance pursuant to this act, such person shall be subject
to a penalty not to exceed $1,000, and each lot disposition so made may be
deemed a separate violation.



§ 175-164. Enforcement.



   A.   The penalties set forth in § 175-163 shall not be the
exclusive remedy available and nothing in this chapter shall prevent the
application for and obtaining of injunctive relief as set forth below.



   B.   In case any building or structure is erected, constructed,
altered, repaired, converted or maintained or any building, structure or land
is used in violation of this chapter or of any other ordinance or other
regulation made under authority conferred hereby, the proper local
authorities of the town or an interested party, in addition to other
remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such
unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair,
conversion, maintenance or use, to restrain, correct or abate such violation,
to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land, to prevent any
illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises.



   C.   Civil actions.



      (1)   In addition to the foregoing, the town may institute and
maintain a civil action:



         (a)   For injunctive relief.



         (b)   To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made
pursuant to a contract of sale and before final subdivision approval has been
granted if a certificate of compliance has not been issued in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56.



      (2)   In any action, the transferee, purchaser or grantee
shall be entitled to a lien upon the portion of the land from which the
subdivision was made that remains in the possession of the developer or his
assigns or successors to secure the return of any deposits made or purchase
price paid and, also, a reasonable search fee, survey expense and title
closing expense, if any. Any such action must be brought within two years
after the date of the recording of the instrument of transfer, sale or
conveyance of said land or within six years if unrecorded.



   D.   Neither the Planning Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment nor the
Town Council shall approve the application of any corporation or partnership
which does not comply with this chapter.



   E.   The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case
may be, may by resolution rescind a prior resolution approving a subdivision
or site plan if the applicant fails to comply with the conditions of said
approving resolution or if another referring authority imposes conditions
contrary to the original resolution.



§ 175-165. Duration of variances.



   A.   Any variance granted under this chapter by the Planning Board
or Zoning Board of Adjustment if not commenced shall be automatically null
and void upon the expiration of the time period set forth hereunder, unless
the Board granting such variance specifically restricts or allows a length of
time varying from that mandated by this section, by expressly stating same in
the resolution thereof.



   B.   When a variance is granted by the Zoning Board of Adjustment
pursuant to § 175-28C and D and such application is not in conjunction with
a subdivision, site plan or conditional use approval in accordance with §
175-28B, then the successful applicant must, within one year from the date of
such favorable determination, commence development as approved. If the
successful applicant has not commenced development within the above-mentioned
year, said variance is automatically null and void unless said applicant
shall receive from the Zoning Board of Adjustment a renewal not to exceed one
year of the determination. If at the end of the extension an applicant has
not commenced development, that variance is automatically null and void and
may not be further renewed.



   C.   When a variance is granted by the Zoning Board of Adjustment in
conjunction with subdivision, site plan or conditional use approval pursuant
to § 175-28B, or when the Planning Board grants a variance in conjunction
with subdivision, site plan or conditional use approval pursuant to §
175-19G(1)(a), then the duration of any variance so granted shall be the time
period, including any period of extension or suspension set forth in §§
175-81 through 175-85 for the protection of subdivision and site plan
approval, and in § 175-59 for conditional use approval. If the successful
applicant does not commence development within the time limits set forth for
the protection of such approvals, then any variance so granted in conjunction
therewith shall be automatically null and void unless said applicant shall
receive from the Board reviewing the application a renewal not to exceed one
year of the determination. If at the end of the extension the applicant has
not commenced development, the variance is automatically null and void and
may not be further renewed.



ARTICLE XV Outstanding Permits, Approvals and Variances



§ 175-166. Effect on outstanding permits, approvals and variances.



   Nothing in this chapter shall require any change in a building permit,
site plan or zoning variance which was approved before the enactment of this
chapter but is in violation of this chapter, provided that construction based
on such a building permit shall have been started within the effective period
of the permit but not to exceed one year from the effective date of this
chapter and, in the case of a site plan or variance, a building permit shall
have been issued within 90 days following the effective date of this chapter.
In all instances, the project shall be continuously pursued to completion,
otherwise said approvals and permits shall be void.



ARTICLE XVI Repealer; Severability; When Effective



§ 175-167. Repealer.



   All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such
inconsistency. Upon the adopting of this chapter according to law, all
previously adopted subdivision, site plan and zoning ordinances and their
amendments are repealed.



§ 175-168. Severability.



   Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared by the
courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the chapter as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so
declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.



§ 175-169. When effective; filing with county; amendments.



   A.   This chapter shall take effect 20 days after the first
publication thereof after final passage as provided by law.



   B.   The zoning, subdivision and site plan review powers of this
chapter or any revision or amendment thereto shall not take effect until a
copy thereof shall be filed with the County Planning Board. The Secretary of
the County Planning Board shall, within 10 days of the date of receipt of a
written request for copies of any such ordinance, make such available to any
party so requesting the same with said Secretary's certification that said
copies are true copies and that all filed amendments are included. A
reasonable charge may be made by the County Planning Board for said copies.



   C.   In amending this order, the Town Master Plan or any other
ordinance regulating the use of land, the town shall comply with all the
regulations of N.J.A.C. 7:50-3.45.



ARTICLE XVII Stormwater Management



[Added 5-21-2007 by Ord. No. 14-2007]



§ 175-170. Scope and purpose.



   A.   Purpose.



      (1)   It is hereby determined that:



         (a)   Land development projects and associated
disturbance of vegetation and soil and changes in land cover, including
increases in impervious cover, alter the hydrologic response of local
watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes. If inadequately
or improperly managed, this stormwater runoff can deplete groundwater
resources and increase flooding, stream channel erosion, and sediment
transport and deposition.



         (b)   This stormwater runoff contributes to increased
quantities of waterborne pollutants.



         (c)   Increases of stormwater runoff, soil erosion and
nonpoint source pollutants have occurred in the past as a result of land
development and contribute to the degradation of the water resources of the
Town of Hammonton.



         (d)   All lands of the Town of Hammonton lie within the
Pinelands Area, and, therefore, development in the Town of Hammonton is
subject to the requirements of the Pinelands Protection Act (N.J.S.A.
13:18A-1 et seq.) and the implementing of regulations and minimum standards
contained in the Pinelands Comprehensive Management Plan (N.J.A.C. 7:50-1.1
et seq.) (CMP). The purpose and intent of these regulations and standards is
to promote orderly development of the Pinelands so as to preserve and protect
the significant and unique natural, ecological, agricultural, archaeological,
historical, scenic, cultural and recreational resources of the Pinelands.



         (e)   Pinelands Area resources are to be protected in
accordance with the Pinelands Comprehensive Management Plan at N.J.A.C. 7:50
et seq., New Jersey's Stormwater Management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.1 et seq.
and New Jersey's surface water quality antidegradation policies contained in
the New Jersey Surface Water Quality Standards at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.1 et seq.
Permitted uses shall maintain the ecological character and quality of the
Pinelands, including good water quality and natural rates and volumes of flow.



         (f)   Increased stormwater rates and volumes and the
sediments and pollutants associated with stormwater runoff from future
development projects within the Pinelands Area have the potential to
adversely affect the Town of Hammonton's streams and water resources and the
streams and water resources of downstream municipalities.



         (g)   Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint
source pollution can be controlled and minimized through the regulation of
stormwater runoff from development sites.



         (h)   It is in the public interest to regulate the
discharge of stormwater runoff from major development projects, as defined in
§ 175-176 of this article, conducted within the Pinelands Area, as provided
in this article, in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater
runoff rates and volumes, to maintain groundwater recharge, and to control
and minimize soil erosion, stream channel erosion and nonpoint source
pollution associated with stormwater runoff.



      (2)   Therefore, it is the purpose of this article to
establish minimum stormwater management requirements and controls for major
development, consistent with the statewide stormwater requirements at
N.J.A.C. 7:8, the regulations and standards contained in the Pinelands CMP,
and the provisions of the adopted Master Plan and land use ordinances of the
Town of Hammonton.



   B.   Goals and techniques.



      (1)   Through this article, the Town of Hammonton has
established the following goals for stormwater control:



         (a)   To reduce flood damage, including damage to life
and property;



         (b)   To minimize any increase in stormwater runoff from
new development;



         (c)   To reduce soil erosion from any development or
construction project;



         (d)   To assure the adequacy of existing and proposed
culverts and bridges, and other in-stream structures;



         (e)   To maintain groundwater recharge;



         (f)   To minimize any increase in nonpoint pollution;



         (g)   To maintain the integrity of stream channels for
their biological functions, as well as for drainage;



         (h)   To restore, protect, maintain and enhance the
quality of the streams and water resources of the Town of Hammonton and the
ecological character and quality of the Pinelands Area;



         (i)   To minimize pollutants in stormwater runoff from
new and existing development in order to restore, protect, enhance and
maintain the chemical, physical and biological integrity of the surface and
ground waters of the Town of Hammonton, to protect public health and to
enhance the domestic, municipal, recreational, industrial and other uses of
water; and



         (j)   To protect public safety through the proper design
and operation of stormwater management basins.



      (2)   In order to achieve the goals for stormwater control set
forth in this article, the Town of Hammonton has identified the following
management techniques:



         (a)   Implementation of multiple stormwater management
best management practices (BMPs) may be necessary to achieve the performance
standards for stormwater runoff quantity and rate, groundwater recharge,
erosion control, and stormwater runoff quality established through this
article.



         (b)   Compliance with the stormwater runoff quantity and
rate, groundwater recharge, erosion control, and stormwater runoff quality
standards established through N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.1 et seq., and this article,
shall be accomplished to the maximum extent practicable through the use of
nonstructural BMPs before relying on structural BMPs. Nonstructural BMPs are
also known as low-impact development (LID) techniques.



         (c)   Nonstructural BMPs shall include both
environmentally sensitive site design and source controls that prevent
pollutants from being placed on the site or from being exposed to stormwater.



         (d)   Source control plans shall be developed based upon
physical site conditions and the origin, nature and the anticipated quantity
or amount of potential pollutants.



         (e)   Structural BMPs, where necessary, shall be
integrated with nonstructural stormwater management strategies and proper
maintenance plans.



         (f)   When using structural BMPs, multiple stormwater
management measures, smaller in size and distributed spatially throughout the
land development site, shall be used wherever possible to achieve the
performance standards for water quality, quantity and groundwater recharge
established through this article before relying on a single, larger
stormwater management measure to achieve these performance standards.



   C.   Applicability. This article shall apply to:



      (1)   All site plans and subdivisions for major developments
occurring within the Pinelands Area that require preliminary or final site
plan or subdivision review; and



      (2)   All major development projects undertaken by the Town of
Hammonton shall comply with this article. [NOTE: This clause is intended to
provide consistency with DEP's stormwater management requirements. As per
normal practice, all development within the Pinelands Area which is
undertaken by a Pinelands Area municipality shall comply with all of the
requirements of the CMP.]



   D.   Procedures. In addition to other development review procedures
set forth in the Code of the Town of Hammonton, major developments located
within the Pinelands Area shall comply with the stormwater management
requirements and specifications set forth in this article. New agricultural
development that meets the definition of major development in § 175-176 of
this article shall be submitted to the appropriate Soil Conservation District
for review and approval in accordance with the requirements of N.J.A.C.
5.4(b)7:8.



   E.   Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.



      (1)   Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site
plans pursuant to this article are to be considered an integral part of
development approvals under the subdivision and site plan review process and
do not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits
or approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable ordinance,
code, rule, regulation, statute, act or other provision of law.



      (2)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this article shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. this article is
not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinances, rule
or regulation, statute, or other provision of law except that, where any
provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed
by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, the
more restrictive or stringent provisions or higher standards shall control.



      (3)   In the event that a regional stormwater management
plan(s) is prepared and formally adopted pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.1 et seq.
for any drainage area(s) or watershed(s) of which the Town of Hammonton is a
part, the stormwater provisions of such a plan(s) shall be adopted by the
Town of Hammonton within one year of the adoption of a regional stormwater
management plan (RSWMP) as an amendment to an area wide water quality
management plan. Local ordinances proposed to implement the RSWMP shall be
submitted to the Commission for certification within six months of the
adoption of the RSWMP per N.J.A.C. 7:8 and the Pinelands CMP (N.J.A.C. 7:50).



§ 175-171. Requirements for site development stormwater plan.



   A.   Submission of site development stormwater plan.



      (1)   Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a site
development that is subject to this article, the applicant shall submit all
of the required components of the checklist for the site development
stormwater plan at Subsection C below as part of the applicant's application
for subdivision or site plan approval. These required components are in
addition to any other information required under any provisions of the Town
of Hammonton's Land Use Ordinance or by the Pinelands Commission pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 7:50-1.1 et seq.



      (2)   The applicant shall demonstrate that the site
development project meets the standards set forth in this article.



      (3)   The applicant shall submit three copies of the materials
listed in the checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance
with Subsection C of this article.



   B.   Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site
development stormwater plan shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the municipal board or official from which
municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official shall consult
the engineer retained by the Planning and/or Zoning Board (as appropriate) to
determine if all of the checklist requirements have been satisfied and to
determine if the project meets the standards set forth in this article.



   C.   Checklist requirements. Any application for approval of a major
development shall include at least the following information. All required
engineering plans shall be submitted to the Town of Hammonton and the
Pinelands Commission in CAD Format 15 or higher, registered and rectified to
NJ State Plane Feet NAD 83 or Shape Format NJ State Plan Feet NAD 83, and all
other documents shall be submitted in both paper and commonly used electronic
file formats such as pdf., word processing, database or spreadsheet files.
Three copies of each item shall be submitted.



      (1)   Topographic base map. The applicant shall submit a
topographic base map of the site which extends a minimum of 300 feet beyond
the limits of the proposed development, at a scale of one inch equals 200
feet or greater, showing one-foot contour intervals. The map shall indicate
the following: existing surface water drainage, shorelines, steep slopes,
soils, highly erodible soils, perennial or intermittent streams that drain
into or upstream of any Category One or Pinelands waters, wetlands and
floodplains along with their appropriate buffer strips, marshlands and other
wetlands, pervious or vegetative surfaces, existing surface and subsurface
human-made structures, roads, bearing and distances of property lines, and
significant natural and man-made features not otherwise shown. The map shall
also depict the pathway of positive overflow from each proposed stormwater
management facility to the nearest downstream collection point in order to
demonstrate to where such facilities will overflow. The Town of Hammonton or
the Pinelands Commission may require upstream tributary drainage system
information as necessary.



      (2)   Environmental site analysis. The applicant shall submit
a written description along with the drawings of the natural and human-made
features of the site and its environs. This description should include:



         (a)   A discussion of environmentally critical areas,
soil conditions, slopes, wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site.
Particular attention should be given to unique, unusual or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular opportunities for or
constraints on development; and



         (b)   Detailed soil and other environmental conditions
on the portion of the site proposed for installation of any stormwater BMPs,
including, at a minimum, soils report based on on-site soil tests; locations
and spot elevations in plan view of test pits and permeability tests;
permeability test data and calculations and any other required soil data
(e.g., mounding analyses results) correlated with location and elevation of
each test site; cross section of proposed stormwater BMP with side-by-side
depiction of soil profile drawn to scale and seasonal high water table
elevation identified; and any other information necessary to demonstrate the
suitability of the specific proposed structural and nonstructural stormwater
management measures relative to the environmental conditions on the
portion(s) of the site proposed for implementation of those measures.



      (3)   Project description and site plan(s). The applicant
shall submit a map (or maps) at the scale of the topographical base map
indicating the location of existing and proposed buildings, roads, parking
areas, utilities, structural facilities for stormwater management and
sediment control, and other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also
clearly show areas where alterations will occur in the natural terrain and
cover, including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high groundwater
elevations. A written description of the site plan and justification for
proposed changes in natural conditions shall also be provided.



      (4)   Land use planning and source control plan.



         (a)   The applicant shall submit a detailed land use
planning and source control plan which provides a description of how the site
will be developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge and
stormwater runoff quantity and quality standards at § 175-173 through use of
nonstructural or low-impact development techniques and source controls to the
maximum extent practicable before relying on structural BMPs. The land use
planning and source control plan shall include a detailed narrative and
associated illustrative maps and/or plans that specifically address how each
of the following nine nonstructural strategies identified in Subchapter 5 of
the NJDEP Stormwater Management Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:8-5) and set forth below
(Subsection C(4)(a)[1] through [9]) will be implemented to the maximum extent
practicable to meet the standards at § 175-173 of this article on the site.
If one or more of the nine nonstructural strategies will not be implemented
on the site, the applicant shall provide a detailed rationale establishing a
basis for the contention that use of the strategy is not practicable on the
site.



            [1]   Protect areas that provide water quality
benefits or areas particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;



            [2]   Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or
disconnect the flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;



            [3]   Maximize the protection of natural drainage
features and vegetation;



            [4]   Minimize the decrease in the predevelopment
time of concentration;



            [5]   Minimize land disturbance including clearing
and grading;



            [6]   Minimize soil compaction and all other soil
disturbance;



            [7]   Provide low-maintenance landscaping that
provides for the retention and planting of native plants and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides, in accordance with N.J.A.C.
7:50-6.24;



            [8]   Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance
systems discharging into and through stable vegetated areas; and



            [9]   Provide other source controls to prevent or
minimize the use or exposure of pollutants at the site in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater runoff. These source
controls shall include, but are not limited to:



               [a]   Site design features that help to
prevent accumulation of trash and debris in drainage systems;



               [b]   Site design features that help to
prevent discharge of trash and debris from drainage systems;



               [c]   Site design features that help to
prevent and/or contain spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and



               [d]   Applying fertilizer in accordance with
the requirements established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act,
N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules, when establishing
vegetation after land disturbance.



         (b)   For sites where stormwater will be generated from
high pollutant loading areas or where stormwater will be exposed to source
material, as defined in § 175-176 of this article, the applicant shall also
demonstrate in the land use planning and source control plan that the
requirements of have been met.



         (c)   The use of nonstructural strategies to meet the
performance standards in § 175-173 of this article is not required for
development sites creating less than one acre of disturbance. However, each
application for major development and any other application where the Town of
Hammonton otherwise requires a landscaping plan shall contain a landscaping
or revegetation plan in accordance with the CMP standards at N.J.A.C.
7:50-6.24(c). In addition, the applicant shall demonstrate that, at a
minimum, existing trees and vegetation on the development site will be
preserved and protected according to the minimum standards established by
provisions of the Town of Hammonton Land Use Ordinance, Zoning Ordinance or
by conditions of zoning or variance approval.



      (5)   Stormwater management facilities map. The applicant
shall submit a map, at the same scale as the topographic base map, depicting
the following information:



         (a)   The total area to be disturbed, paved and/or built
upon, proposed surface contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, and details of the
proposed plan to manage and dispose of stormwater; and



         (b)   Details of all stormwater management facility
designs, during and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of detention (if
applicable) and emergency spillway provisions with maximum discharge capacity
of each spillway.



      (6)   Calculations (groundwater recharge and stormwater runoff
rate, volume and quality). The applicant shall submit comprehensive
hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations for the predevelopment and post
development conditions for the design storms specified in § 175-172. The
standards for groundwater recharge and stormwater runoff rate, volume and
quality required by § 175-173 shall be met using the methods, calculations
and assumptions provided in § 175-172.



      (7)   Inspection, maintenance and repair plan. The applicant
shall submit a detailed plan describing how the proposed stormwater
management measure(s) shall meet the maintenance and repair requirements of
§ 175-175 of this article. Said plan shall include, at a minimum, the
following elements:



         (a)   The frequency with which inspections will be made;



         (b)   The specific maintenance tasks and requirements
for each proposed structural and nonstructural BMP;



         (c)   The name, address and telephone number for the
entity responsible for implementation of the maintenance plan;



         (d)   The reporting requirements; and



         (e)   Copies of the inspection and maintenance reporting
sheets.



      (8)   Exception from submission requirements. An exception may
be granted from submission of any of these required components [except
Subsection C(7) above, inspection, maintenance and repair plan] if its
absence will not materially affect the review process. However, items
required pursuant to the application requirements in the Pinelands CMP
[N.J.A.C. 7:50-4.2(b)] shall be submitted to the New Jersey Pinelands
Commission unless the Executive Director waives or modifies the application
requirements.



§ 175-172. Methodologies for calculation of stormwater runoff rate and
volume, stormwater runoff quality and groundwater recharge.



   A.   Method of calculating stormwater runoff rate and volume.



      (1)   In complying with the stormwater runoff quantity and,
rate standards in § 175-173B, the design engineer shall calculate the
stormwater runoff rate and volume using the USDA Natural Resources
Conservation Service (NRCS) Runoff Equation, Runoff Curve Numbers, and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS National Engineering
Handbook Part 630 - Hydrology and Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for
Small Watersheds, incorporated herein by reference, as amended and
supplemented. Alternative methods of calculation may be utilized, provided
such alternative methods are at least as protective as the NRCS methodology
when considered on a regional stormwater management basis.



      (2)   In calculating stormwater runoff using the NRCS
methodology, the design engineer shall separately calculate and then combine
the runoff volumes from pervious and directly connected impervious surfaces
within each drainage area within the parcel.



      (3)   Calculation of stormwater runoff from unconnected
impervious surfaces shall be based, as applicable, upon the two-step method
described in the current New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices
Manual or the NRCS methodology.



      (4)   In calculating stormwater runoff using the NRCS
methodology, the design engineer shall use appropriate twenty-four-hour
rainfall depths as developed for the project site by the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, available online at
http:/hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/index.html.



      (5)   When calculating stormwater runoff for predeveloped site
conditions, the design engineer shall use the following criteria:



         (a)   When selecting or calculating runoff curve numbers
(CNs) for predeveloped project site conditions, the project site's land cover
shall be assumed to be woods in good condition. However, another land cover
may be used to calculate runoff coefficients if:



            [1]   Such land cover has existed at the site or
portion thereof without interruption for at least five years immediately
prior to the time of application; and



            [2]   The design engineer can document the
character and extent of such land cover through the use of photographs,
affidavits, and/or other acceptable land use records.



         (b)   If more than one land cover has existed on the
site during the five years immediately prior to the time of application, the
land cover with the lowest runoff potential shall be used for the
computations.



         (c)   All predeveloped land covers shall be assumed to
be in good hydrologic condition and, if cultivated, shall be assumed to have
conservation treatment.



         (d)   In calculating predeveloped site stormwater
runoff, the design engineer shall include the effects of all and features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, and culverts
that affect predeveloped site stormwater runoff rates and/or volumes.



         (e)   Where tail water will affect the hydraulic
performance of a stormwater management measure, the design engineer shall
include such effects in the measure's design.



   B.   Method of calculating stormwater runoff quality.



      (1)   In complying with the stormwater runoff quality
standards in § 175-173E, the design engineer shall calculate the stormwater
runoff rate and volume using the USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service
(NRCS) Runoff Equation, Runoff Curve Numbers, and Dimensionless Unit
Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS National Engineering Handbook Part 630 -
Hydrology and Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, as
amended and supplemented.



      (2)   The design engineer shall also use the NJDEP water
quality design storm, which is 1.25 inches of rainfall falling in a nonlinear
pattern in two hours. Details of the water quality design storm are shown in
Table 1.



      (3)   Calculation of runoff volumes, peak rates, and
hydrographs for the water quality design storm may take into account the
implementation of nonstructural and structural stormwater management measures.



Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution 2



 

Time (minutes)
 
Cumulative Rainfall  (inches)
 
Time (minutes)
 
Cumulative Rainfall
(inches)




0
 
0.0000
 
65
 
0.8917


5
 
0.0083
 
70
 
0.9917


10
 
0.0166
 
75
 
1.0500


15
 
0.0250
 
80
 
1.0840


20
 
0.0500
 
85
 
1.1170


25
 
0.0750
 
90
 
1.1500


30
 
0.1000
 
95
 
1.1750


35
 
0.1330
 
100
 
1.2000


40
 
0.1660
 
105
 
1.2250


45
 
0.2000
 
110
 
1.2334


50
 
0.2583
 
115
 
1.2417


55
 
0.3583
 
120
 
1.2500


60
 
0.6250
 

 





 



      (4)   Total suspended solids (TSS) reduction calculations.



         (a)   If more than one stormwater BMP in series is
necessary to achieve the required eighty-percent TSS reduction for a site,
the applicant shall utilize the following formula to calculate TSS reduction:



   R = A + B - (A x B)/100, where:



   R   =   Total TSS percent load removal from application of both
BMPs;



   A   =   The TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP;
and



   B   =   The TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second BMP.



         (b)   If there is more than one on-site drainage area,
the eighty-percent TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless
the runoff from the subareas converge on site, in which case the removal rate
can be demonstrated through a calculation using a weighted average.



      (5)   TSS removal rates for stormwater BMPs.



         (a)   For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table
2 presents the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in accordance
with the New Jersey BMP Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 175-180A or found on the NJDEP's website at
www.njstormwater.org. TSS reduction shall be calculated based on the removal
rates for the BMPs In Table 2.



 



Table 2: Pollutant Removal Rates for BMPs 3


Best Management Practice
 
TSS Percent Removal Rate
 
Total Phosphorus Percent Removal Rate
 
Total Nitrogen Percent Removal Rate


Bioretention systems
 
90
 
60
 
30


Constructed stormwater wetland
 
90
 
50
 
30


Extended detention basin
 
40 to 60 (final rate based upon detention time; see New Jersey BMP Manual,
Chap. 9)
 
20
 
20


Infiltration basin
 
80
 
60
 
50


Manufactured treatment device
 
Pollutant removal rates as certified by NJDEP; see § 175-172.
 
Pollutant removal rates as certified by NJDEP; see § 175-172.
 
Pollutant removal rates as certified by NJDEP; see § 175-172.


Pervious paving systems
 
80 (permeable pavers with storage bed)
 
60
 
50



 
0 - volume reduction only (permeable pavers without storage bed)
 
0 - volume reduction only (permeable pavers without storage bed)
 
0 - volume reduction only (permeable pavers without storage bed)




 



 

Table 2: Pollutant Removal Rates for BMPs 3


Best Management Practice
 
TSS Percent Removal Rate
 
Total Phosphorus Percent Removal Rate
 
Total Nitrogen Percent Removal Rate


Sand filter
 
80
 
50
 
35


Vegetative filter strip (For filter strips with multiple vegetated covers,
the final TSS removal rate should be based upon a weighted average of the
adopted rates shown in Table 2, based upon the relative flow lengths through
each cover type.)
 
60 (turf grass)
 
30
 
30



 
70 (native grasses, meadow and planted woods)
 

 




 
80 (indigenous woods)
 

 



Wet pond/retention basin
 
50 to 90 (final rate based upon pool volume and detention time; see NJ BMP
Manual)
 
50
 
30



 



         (b)   Alternative stormwater management measures,
removal rates and methods of calculating removal rates may be used if the
design engineer provides documentation demonstrating the capability of these
alternative rates and methods to the Town of Hammonton. Any alternative
stormwater management measure, removal rate or method of calculating the
removal rate shall be subject to approval by the Town of Hammonton and a copy
shall be provided to the following:



            [1]   The Division of Watershed Management, New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, P.O. Box 418, Trenton, New
Jersey 08625-0418; and



            [2]   The New Jersey Pinelands Commission, P.O.
Box 7, New Lisbon, NJ 08064.



      (6)   Nutrient removal rates for stormwater BMPs. For purposes
of post development nutrient load reduction calculations, Table 2 presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in accordance with the
New Jersey BMP Manual. If alternative stormwater BMPs are proposed, the
applicant shall demonstrate that the selected BMPs will achieve the nutrient
removal standard required § 175-173F.



   C.   Methods of calculating groundwater recharge.



      (1)   If complying with the groundwater recharge standards
contained in § 175-173C(1)(a), the design engineer may calculate groundwater
recharge in accordance with the New Jersey Groundwater Recharge Spreadsheet
(NJGRS) computer program incorporated herein by reference as amended and
supplemented. Information regarding the methodology is available in §
175-179A or from the New Jersey BMP Manual.



      (2)   Alternative groundwater recharge calculation methods to
meet these requirements may be used upon approval by the municipal engineer.



      (3)   If complying with the groundwater recharge standards
contained in § 175-173(c)(1)(b), the design engineer shall:



         (a)   Calculate stormwater runoff volumes in accordance
with the USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) methodology,
including the NRCS Runoff Equation and Runoff Curve Numbers, as described in
the NRCS National Engineering Handbook Part 630 - Hydrology and Technical
Releases 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, as amended and
supplemented; and



         (b)   Use appropriate two-year, twenty-four-hour
rainfall depths as developed for the project site by the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, available online at
http://hsdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/index.html.



      (4)   When calculating groundwater recharge or stormwater
runoff for predeveloped site conditions, the design engineer shall use the
following criteria:



         (a)   When selecting land covers or calculating runoff
curve numbers (CNs) for predeveloped project site conditions, the project
site's land cover shall be assumed to be woods. However, another land cover
may be used to calculate runoff coefficients if:



            [1]   Such land cover has existed at the site or
portion thereof without interruption for at least five years immediately
prior to the time of application; and



            [2]   The design engineer can document the
character and extend of such land cover through the use of photographs,
affidavits and/or other acceptable land use records.



         (b)   If more than one land cover, other than woods, has
existed on the site during the five years immediately prior to the time of
application, the land cover with the lowest runoff potential (including
woods) shall be used for the computations.



         (c)   All predeveloped land covers shall be assumed to
be in good hydrologic condition and, if cultivated, shall be assumed to have
conservation treatment.



§ 175-173. Stormwater management performance standards for major development.



   A.   Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.



      (1)   To the maximum extent practicable, the performance
standards in § 175-173 for major development shall be met by incorporating
the nine nonstructural strategies identified in Subchapter 5 of the New
Jersey Stormwater Management Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:8-5), and set forth in §
175-171C(4)(a), into the design. The applicant shall identify within the land
use planning and source control plan required by § 175-171C(4) of this
article how each of the nine nonstructural measures will be incorporated into
the design of the project to the maximum extent practicable.



      (2)   If the applicant contends that it is not practical for
engineering, environmental or safety reasons to incorporate any of the nine
nonstructural strategies into the design of a particular project, the
applicant shall provide a detailed rationale establishing a basis for the
contention that use of the strategy is not practical on the site. This
rationale shall be submitted in accordance with the checklist requirements
established by § 175-171 to the Town of Hammonton. A determination by the
Town of Hammonton that this rationale is inadequate or without merit shall
result in a denial of the application unless one of the following conditions
are met:



         (a)   The land use planning and source control plan is
amended to include a description of how all nine nonstructural measures will
be implemented on the development site, and the amended plan is approved by
the Town of Hammonton;



         (b)   The land use planning and source control plan is
amended to provide an alternative nonstructural strategy or measure that is
not included in the list of nine nonstructural measures, but still meets the
performance standards in § 175-173, and the amended plan is approved by the
Town of Hammonton; or



         (c)   The land use planning and source control plan is
amended to provide an adequate rationale for the contention that use of the
particular strategy is not practical on the site, and the amended plan is
approved by the Town of Hammonton.



      (3)   In addition to all other requirements of this section,
each applicant shall demonstrate that, at a minimum, existing trees and
vegetation on the development site will be preserved, protected and
maintained according to the minimum standards established by provisions of
the Town of Hammonton Land Use Ordinance, Zoning Ordinance or by conditions
of zoning or variance approval. Existing trees and vegetation shall be
protected during construction activities in accordance with the Standard for
Tree Protection During Construction provided in the New Jersey State Soil
Conservation Committee Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey, which is incorporated herein by reference as amended and supplemented.



      (4)   In addition to all other requirements of this section,
each application for major development, and any other application where the
Town of Hammonton otherwise requires a landscaping plan, shall contain a
landscaping or revegetation plan in accordance with the Pinelands CMP
standards at N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.24(c).



      (5)   Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater
management measure to meet the performance standards in § 175-173 shall be
dedicated to a government entity; shall be subjected to a conservation
easement filed with the appropriate county clerk's office; or shall be
subjected to an equivalent form of restriction approved by the Town of
Hammonton that ensures that that measure, or equivalent stormwater management
measure, is maintained in perpetuity, as detailed in § 175-175 of this
article.



      (6)   Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management
strategies is available in the New Jersey BMP Manual, which may be obtained
from the address identified in § 175-180A or found on the NJDEP's website at
www.njstormwater.org.



      (7)   Exception for major development sites creating less than
one acre of disturbance. The use of nonstructural strategies to meet the
performance standards in § 175-173 of this article is not required for major
development creating less than one acre of disturbance. However, the
following requirements shall be met:



         (a)   Each application for major development and any
other application where the Town of Hammonton otherwise requires a
landscaping plan shall contain a landscaping or revegetation plan prepared in
accordance with the Pinelands CMP standards [N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.24(c)];



         (b)   Each applicant shall demonstrate that, at a
minimum, existing trees and vegetation on the development site will be
preserved and protected according to the minimum standards established by
provisions of the Town of Hammonton Land Use Ordinance, Zoning Ordinance or
by conditions of zoning or variance approval; and



         (c)   Existing trees and vegetation shall be protected
during construction activities in accordance with the Standard for Tree
Protection During Construction provided in the New Jersey State Soil
Conservation Committee Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey, which is incorporated herein by reference as amended and supplemented.



   B.   Stormwater runoff quantity and rate standards.



      (1)   There shall be no direct discharge of stormwater runoff
from any point or nonpoint source to any wetland, wetlands transition area or
surface water body. In addition, stormwater runoff shall not be directed in
such a way as to increase the volume and/or rate of discharge into any
surface water body from that which existed prior to development of the site.



      (2)   To the maximum extent practical, there shall be no
direct discharge of stormwater runoff onto farm fields so as to protect farm
crops from damage due to flooding, erosion and long-term saturation of
cultivated crops and cropland.



      (3)   For all major developments, the total runoff volume
generated from the net Increase in impervious surfaces by a ten-year,
twenty-four-hour storm shall be retained and infiltrated on site.



      (4)   In addition, the design engineer, using the assumptions
and factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge calculations
contained in § 175-172, shall either:



         (a)   Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the post developed stormwater runoff hydrographs from the
project site for the two-, ten-, and one-hundred-year storms do not exceed,
at any point in time, the site's predeveloped runoff hydrographs for the same
storms;



         (b)   Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that under post developed site conditions:



            [1]   There is no increase in predeveloped
stormwater runoff rates from the project site for the two-, ten-, and
one-hundred-year storms; and



            [2]   Any increased stormwater runoff volume or
change in stormwater runoff timing for the two-, ten-, and one-hundred-year
storms will not increase flood damage at or downstream of the project site.
When performing this analysis for predeveloped site conditions, all off-site
development levels shall reflect existing conditions. When performing this
analysis for post developed site conditions, all off-site development levels
shall reflect full development in accordance with current zoning and land use
ordinances; or



         (c)   Demonstrate that the peak post developed
stormwater runoff rates from the project site for the two-, ten-, and
one-hundred-year storms are 50%, 75% and 80%, respectively, of the site's
peak predeveloped stormwater runoff rates for the same storms. Peak outflow
rates from on-site stormwater measures for these storms shall be adjusted
where necessary to account for the discharge of increased stormwater runoff
rates and/or volumes from project site areas not controlled by the on-site
measures. These percentages do not have to be applied to those portions of
the project site that are not proposed for development at the time of
application, provided that such areas are:



            [1]   Protected from future development by
imposition of a conservation easement, deed restriction, or other acceptable
legal measures; or



            [2]   Would be subject to review under these
standards if they are proposed for any degree of development in the future.



      (5)   In tidal flood hazard areas, a stormwater runoff
quantity analysis in accordance with Subsection B(4)(a), (b) and (c) above
shall only be applied if the increased volume of stormwater runoff could
increase flood damages below the point of discharge.



      (6)   The standards for stormwater runoff quantity and rate
required by this section shall be met using the methods, calculations and
assumptions provided § 175-172.



   C.   Groundwater recharge standards.



      (1)   For all major developments, with the exception of those
described in Subsection C(4) below, the design engineer, using the
assumptions and factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations contained in § 175-172, shall either:



         (a)   Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the post developed project site maintains 100% of the site's
predeveloped average annual groundwater recharge volume; or



         (b)   Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that any increase in the project site's stormwater runoff volume for
the two-year, twenty-four-hour storm from predeveloped to post developed
conditions is infiltrated on site.



      (2)   The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the project site and all site groundwater
recharge measures so as to avoid adverse hydraulic impacts. Adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to: raising the groundwater table so as
to cause surface ponding; flooding of basements and other subsurface
structures and areas; preventing a stormwater infiltration basin from
completely draining via infiltration within 72 hours of a design storm event;
and interference with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other surface and subsurface facilities in the vicinity of the
groundwater recharge measure.



      (3)   The standards for groundwater recharge required by this
section shall be met using the methods, calculations and assumptions provided
in § 175-172.



      (4)   Exceptions.



         (a)   The preceding groundwater recharge standards shall
not apply to sites that create less than one acre of disturbance.



         (b)   The following types of stormwater shall not be
recharged:



            [1]   Stormwater from areas of high pollutant
loading. High pollutant loading areas in industrial and commercial
developments where solvents and/or petroleum products are loaded/unloaded,
stored or applied; areas where hazardous materials are expected to be present
in greater than "reportable quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR 302.4; areas where recharge
would be inconsistent with Department-approved remedial action work plan or
landfill closure plan and areas with high risks for spills of toxic
materials, such as gas stations and vehicle maintenance facilities; and



            [2]   Industrial stormwater exposed to source
material. "Source material" means any material(s) or machinery located at an
industrial facility that is directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which could be a source of
pollutants in any industrial stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw materials; intermediate
products; final products; waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery,
fuels, and lubricants; solvents and detergents that are related to process,
manufacturing, or other industrial activities that are exposed to stormwater.



   D.   Erosion control standards. The minimum design and performance
standards for erosion control are those established under the Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and its implementing
regulations, N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.1 through 2:90-1.4.



   E.   Stormwater runoff quality standards.



      (1)   There shall be no direct discharge of stormwater runoff
from any point or nonpoint source to any wetland, wetland transition area or
surface water body.



      (2)   Stormwater management measures shall be designed to
reduce the total suspended solids (TSS) load in the stormwater runoff from
the post developed site by 80%, expressed as an annual average.



      (3)   Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce the nutrient load in the stormwater runoff from the post developed
site by the maximum extent practicable. In achieving this reduction, the
design of the development site shall include nonstructural and structural
stormwater management measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the groundwater recharge, runoff quantity and rate, and TSS removal
standards in this section.



      (4)   The standards for stormwater runoff quality required by
this section shall be met using the methods, calculations, assumptions is and
pollutant removal rates provided in § 175-172.



      (5)   Exceptions.



         (a)   The preceding stormwater runoff quality standards
shall not apply to the following major development sites:



            [1]   Major development sites where less than 0.25
acre of additional impervious surface is proposed; or



            [2]   Major residential development sites that
create less than one acre of disturbance.



         (b)   The TSS reduction requirement in § 175-173F(2)
shall not apply to any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated under a
numeric effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the NJPDES rules (N.J.A.C.
7:14A) or in a discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit from this
requirement.



         (c)   The stormwater runoff quantity and rate standards
in § 175-173B shall still be met for all major development sites.



   F.   Additional stormwater quality standards for high pollutant
loading areas and areas where stormwater runoff is exposed to source material.



      (1)   This subsection applies to the following areas of a
major development as defined in § 175-176 of this article:



         (a)   High pollutant loading areas (HPLAs); and



         (b)   Areas where stormwater is exposed to source
material.



      (2)   For a major development in areas described in Subsection
F(1)(a) or (b) above, in addition to the infiltration requirements specified
in § 175-173B(2) and the groundwater recharge requirements specified in §
175-173C, the applicant shall demonstrate in the land use planning and source
control plan required in § 175-171C(4) that the following requirements have
been met:



         (a)   The extent of the areas described in Subsection
F(1)(a) and (b) above have been minimized on the development site to the
maximum extent practicable;



         (b)   The stormwater runoff from the areas described in
Subsection F(1)(a) and (b) above is segregated to the maximum extent
practicable from the stormwater runoff generated from the remainder of the
site such that co-mingling of the stormwater runoff from the areas described
in Subsection F(1)(a) and (b) above and the remainder of the site will be
minimized;



         (c)   The amount of precipitation falling directly on
the areas described in Subsection F(1)(a) and (b) above is minimized to the
maximum extent practicable by means of a canopy, roof or other similar
structure that reduces the generation of stormwater runoff; and



         (d)   The stormwater runoff from or co-mingled with the
areas described in Subsection F(1)(a) and (b) above for the water quality
design storm, defined in § 175-172B, Table 1, shall be subject to
pretreatment by one or more of the following stormwater BMPs, designed in
accordance with the New Jersey BMP Manual to provide 90% TSS removal:



            [1]   Bioretention system;



            [2]   Sand filter;



            [3]   Wet ponds which shall be hydraulically
disconnected by a minimum of three feet of vertical separation from the
seasonal high water table and shall be designed to achieve a minimum
eighty-percent TSS removal rate;



            [4]   Constructed stormwater wetlands; and/or



            [5]   Media filtration system manufactured
treatment device with a minimum eighty-percent TSS removal as verified by the
New Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and as certified by NJDEP.



         (e)   If the potential for contamination of stormwater
runoff by petroleum products exists on site, prior to being conveyed to the
pretreatment BMP required in Subsection F(2)(d) above, the stormwater runoff
from the areas described in Subsection F(1)(a) and (b) above shall be
conveyed through an oil/grease separator or other equivalent manufactured
filtering device to remove the petroleum hydrocarbons. The applicant shall
provide the reviewing agency with sufficient data to demonstrate acceptable
performance of the device.



   G.   Threatened and endangered species and associated habitat
standards. Stormwater management measures shall address the impacts of the
development on habitats for threatened and endangered species, in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.2(c), 7:50-6.27 and 7:50-6.33 and 34.



   H.   Exceptions and mitigation requirements.



      (1)   Exceptions from strict compliance from the groundwater
recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements established by this article may be granted, at the discretion of
the Town of Hammonton, and subject to approval by the Pinelands Commission,
provided that all of the following conditions are met:



         (a)   The exception is consistent with that allowed by
the Town of Hammonton.



         (b)   The Town of Hammonton has an adopted an effective
municipal stormwater management plan in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:8-4.4,
which includes a mitigation plan in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:8-4.2(c)11,
and is also certified by the Pinelands Commission. The mitigation plan shall
identify what measures are necessary to offset the deficit created by
granting the exception and the municipality shall submit a written report to
the county review agency and the NJDEP describing the exception and the
required mitigation. Guidance for developing municipal stormwater management
plans, including mitigation plans, is available from the NJDEP, Division of
Watershed Management, and the New Jersey BMP Manual.



         (c)   The applicant demonstrates that mitigation, in
addition to the requirements of the mitigation plan discussed in Subsection
H(1)(b) above, will be provided consistent with one of the following options:



            [1]   Mitigation may be provided off site, but
within the Pinelands Area and within the same drainage area as the
development site, and shall meet or exceed the equivalent recharge, quality
or quantity performance standard which is lacking on the development site due
to the exception; or



            [2]   In lieu of the required mitigation, a
monetary in-lieu contribution may be provided by the applicant to the Town of
Hammonton in accordance with the following:



               [a]   The amount of the in-lieu contribution
shall be determined by the Town of Hammonton, but the maximum in-lieu
contribution required shall be equivalent to the cost of implementing and
maintaining the stormwater management measure(s) for which the exception is
granted.



               [b]   The in-lieu contribution shall be used
to fund an off-site stormwater control mitigation project(s) located within
the Pinelands Area, within the same drainage area as the development site,
and shall meet or exceed the equivalent recharge, quality or quantity
performance standards which are lacking on the development site. Such
mitigation project shall be identified by the Town of Hammonton in the Town
of Hammonton's adopted municipal stormwater management plan. The stormwater
control project to which the monetary contribution will be applied shall be
identified by the Town of Hammonton at the time the exception is granted. The
applicant shall amend the project description and site plan required in §
175-171C(3) to incorporate a description of both the standards for which an
on-site exception is being granted and of the selected off-site mitigation
project.



               [c]   The Town of Hammonton shall expend the
in-lieu contribution to implement the selected off-site mitigation project
within five years from the date that payment is received. Should the Town of
Hammonton fail to expend the in-lieu contribution within the required time
frame, the mitigation option provided in Subsection H(1)(c)[2] of this
article shall be void and the Town of Hammonton shall be prohibited from
collecting in-lieu contributions.



      (2)   An exception from strict compliance granted in
accordance with Subsection H(1) above shall not constitute a waiver of strict
compliance from the requirements of the Pinelands Comprehensive Management
Plan at N.J.A.C. 7:50. An applicant should contact the Pinelands Commission
to determine whether a waiver of strict compliance is also required in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:50. Subchapter 4, Part V.



§ 175-174. Design construction and safety standards for structural
stormwater; management measures.



   A.   General design and construction standards.



      (1)   Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed to meet the standards established in this section. These standards
have been developed to protect public safety, conserve natural features,
create an aesthetically pleasing site and promote proper on-site stormwater
management. Where directed by the Town of Hammonton, the applicant shall be
required to retrofit any existing substandard basin directly impacted by the
proposed development in order to comply with the standards outlined in this
section.



      (2)   The following structural stormwater management measures
may be utilized as part of a stormwater management system at a major land
development in the Pinelands, provided that the applicant demonstrates that
they are designed, constructed and maintained so as to meet the standards and
requirements established by this article. If alternative stormwater
management measures are proposed, the applicant shall demonstrate that the
selected measures will achieve the standards established by this article.



         (a)   Bioretention systems;



         (b)   Constructed stormwater wetlands;



         (c)   Extended detention basins;



         (d)   Infiltration basins;



         (e)   Vegetated filter strips;



         (f)   Infiltration basins and trenches;



         (g)   Wet ponds with suitable liners;



         (h)   Pervious paving systems; and



         (i)   Manufactured treatment devices, provided their
pollutant removal rates are verified by the New Jersey Corporation for
Advanced Technology and certified by the NJDEP.



      (3)   Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed to take into account the existing site conditions, including
environmentally critical areas, wetlands, flood-prone areas, slopes, depth to
seasonal high water table, soil type, permeability and texture, and drainage
area and drainage patterns.



      (4)   Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed and constructed to be strong, durable, and corrosion resistant
(measures that are consistent with the relevant portions of the Residential
Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3, 5:21-7.4, and 5:21-7.8 shall
be deemed to meet this requirement); to minimize and facilitate maintenance
and repairs; and to ensure proper functioning.



      (5)   For all stormwater management measures at a development
site, each applicant shall submit a detailed inspection, maintenance and
repair plan consistent with the requirements of § 175-175 of this article.



      (6)   To the maximum extent practicable, the design engineer
shall design structural stormwater management measures on the development
site in a manner that:



         (a)   Limits site disturbance, maximizes stormwater
management efficiencies, and maintains or improves aesthetic conditions;



         (b)   Utilizes multiple stormwater management measures,
smaller in size and distributed spatially throughout the land development
site, instead of a single larger structural stormwater management measure;



         (c)   Incorporates pretreatment measures. Pretreatment
can extend the functional life and increase the pollutant removal capability
of a structural stormwater management measure. Pretreatment measures may be
designed in accordance with the New Jersey BMP Manual or other sources
approved by the municipal engineer.



      (7)   Stormwater management basins shall be designed in a
manner that complements and mimics the existing natural landscape, including
but not limited to the following design strategies:



         (a)   Use of natural, nonwetland wooded depressions for
stormwater runoff storage; and



         (b)   Establishment of attractive landscaping in and
around the basin that mimics the existing vegetation and incorporates native
Pinelands plants, including, but not limited to, the species listed in
N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.25 and 7:50-6.26.



      (8)   Stormwater management basins shall be designed with
gently sloping sides. The maximum allowable basin side slope shall be five
horizontal to one vertical.



      (9)   Guidance on the design and construction of structural
stormwater management measures may be found in the New Jersey BMP Manual.
Other guidance sources may also be used upon approval by the municipal
engineer.



      (10)   After all construction activities and required field
testing have been completed on the development site, as-built plans depicting
design and as-built elevations of all stormwater management measures shall be
prepared by a licensed land surveyor and submitted to the municipal engineer.
Based upon the municipal engineer's review of the as-built plans, all
corrections or remedial actions deemed by the municipal engineer to be
necessary due to the failure to comply with the standards established by this
article and/or any reasons of public health or safety shall be completed by
the applicant. In lieu of review by the municipal engineer, the Town of
Hammonton reserves the right to engage a professional engineer to review the
as-built plans. The applicant shall pay all costs associated with such review.



   B.   Design and construction standards for stormwater infiltration
BMPs.



      (1)   Stormwater infiltration BMPs, such as bioretention
systems with infiltration, dry wells, infiltration basins, pervious paving
systems with storage beds, and sand filters with infiltration, shall be
designed, constructed and maintained to completely drain the total runoff
volume generated by the basin's maximum design storm within 72 hours after a
storm event. Runoff storage for greater times can render the BMP ineffective
and may result in anaerobic conditions, odor and both water quality and
mosquito breeding problems.



      (2)   Stormwater infiltration BMPs shall be designed,
constructed and maintained to provide a minimum separation of at least three
feet between the elevation of the lowest point of the bottom of the
infiltration BMP and the seasonal high water table.



      (3)   A stormwater infiltration BMP shall be sited in suitable
soils verified by field testing to have permeability rates between 16 inches
and 20 inches per hour. If such site soils do not exist or if the design
engineer demonstrates that it is not practical for engineering, environmental
or safety reasons to site the stormwater infiltration BMPs in such soils,
then the stormwater infiltration BMPs may be sited in soils verified by field
testing to have permeability rates in excess of 20 inches per hour, provided
that a bioretention system, designed, installed and maintained in accordance
with the New Jersey BMP Manual, is installed to meet one of the following
conditions:



         (a)   The bioretention system is constructed as a
separate measure designed to provide pretreatment of stormwater and to convey
the pretreated stormwater into the infiltration BMP; or



         (b)   The bioretention system is integrated into and
made part of the infiltration BMP and, as such, does not require an under
drain system. If this option is selected, the infiltration BMP shall be
designed and constructed so that the maximum water depth in the bioretention
system portion of the BMP during treatment of the stormwater quality design
storm is 12 inches in accordance with the New Jersey BMP Manual.



      (4)   The minimum design permeability rate for the soil within
a BMP that relies on infiltration shall be eight inches per hour. A factor of
safety of two shall be applied to the soil's field-tested permeability rate
to determine the soil's design permeability rate. For example, if the
field-tested permeability rate of the soil is four inches per hour, its
design permeability rate would be two inches per hour. The minimum design
permeability rate for the soil within a stormwater infiltration basin shall
also be sufficient to achieve the minimum seventy-two-hour drain time
described in Subsection B(1) above. The maximum design permeability shall be
10 inches per hour.



      (5)   A soil's field-tested permeability rate shall be
determined in accordance with the following:



         (a)   The predevelopment field test permeability rate
shall be determined according to the methodologies provided in § 175-179C(3)
of this article;



         (b)   The results of the required field permeability
tests shall demonstrate a minimum tested infiltration rate of eight inches
per hour;



         (c)   After all construction activities have been
completed on the site and the finished grade has been established in the
infiltration BMP, post development field permeability tests shall also be
conducted according to the methodologies provided in § 175-179C(3) of this
article;



         (d)   If the results of the post development field
permeability tests fail to achieve the minimum required design permeability
rates in Subsection B(4) above utilizing a factor of safety of two, the
stormwater infiltration BMP shall be renovated and retested until such
minimum required design permeability rates are achieved; and



         (e)   The results of all field permeability tests shall
be certified by a professional engineer and transmitted to the municipal
engineer.



      (6)   To help ensure maintenance of the design permeability
rate over time, a six-inch layer of K5 soil shall be placed on the bottom of
a stormwater infiltration BMP. This soil layer shall meet the textural and
permeability specifications of a K5 soil as provided at N.J.A.C. 7:9A,
Appendix A, Figure 6, and be certified to meet these specifications by a
professional engineer licensed in the State of New Jersey. The depth to the
seasonal high water table shall be measured from the bottom of the K5 sand
layer.



      (7)   The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the project site and all stormwater
infiltration basins so as to avoid adverse hydraulic impacts. Adverse
hydraulic impacts include, but are not limited to, raising the groundwater
table so as to cause surface ponding; flooding of basements and other
subsurface structures and areas; preventing a stormwater infiltration basin
from completely draining via infiltration within 72 hours of a design storm
event; and interference with the proper operation of subsurface sewage
disposal systems and other surface and subsurface structures in the vicinity
of the stormwater infiltration basin.



      (8)   The design engineer shall conduct a mounding analysis,
as defined in § 175-176, of all stormwater infiltration BMPs. The mounding
analysis shall be conducted in accordance with the requirements in §
175-179C(1). Where the mounding analysis identifies adverse impacts, the
stormwater infiltration BMP shall be redesigned or relocated, as appropriate.



      (9)   Stormwater infiltration BMPs shall be constructed in
accordance with the following:



         (a)   To avoid sedimentation that may result in clogging
and reduce the basin's permeability rate, stormwater infiltration basins
shall be constructed according to the following:



            [1]   Unless the conditions in Subsection
B(9)(a)[2] below are met, a stormwater infiltration BMP shall not be placed
into operation until its drainage area is completely stabilized. Instead,
upstream runoff shall be diverted around the BMP and into separate, temporary
stormwater management facilities and sediment basins. Such temporary
facilities and basins shall be installed and utilized for stormwater
management and sediment control until stabilization is achieved in accordance
with the Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey, which
is incorporated herein by reference as amended and supplemented.



            [2]   If the design engineer determines that, for
engineering, environmental or safety reasons, temporary stormwater management
facilities and sediment basins cannot be constructed on the site, the
stormwater infiltration basin may be placed into operation prior to the
complete stabilization of its drainage area, provided that the basin's bottom
during this period is constructed at a depth at least two feet higher than
its final design elevation, or some other acceptable means to protect the
stormwater infiltration basin during project construction. All other
infiltration BMP construction requirements in this section shall be followed.
When the drainage area is completely stabilized, all accumulated sediment
shall be removed from the infiltration BMP, which shall then be excavated to
its final design elevation in accordance with the construction requirements
of this section and the performance standards in § 175-173.



         (b)   To avoid compaction of subgrade soils of BMPs that
rely on infiltration, no heavy equipment such as backhoes, dump trucks or
bulldozers shall be permitted to operate within the footprint of the BMP. All
excavation required to construct a stormwater infiltration BMP shall be
performed by equipment placed outside the BMP. If this is not possible, the
soils within the excavated area shall be renovated, fluffed and tilled after
construction is completed to reverse the effects of compaction. In addition,
post development soil permeability testing shall be performed in accordance
with Subsection B(5) of this section.



         (c)   Earthwork associated with stormwater infiltration
BMP construction, including excavation, grading, cutting or filling, shall
not be performed when soil moisture content is above the lower plastic limit.



   C.   Safety standards for structural stormwater management measures.



      (1)   If a structural stormwater management measure has an
outlet structure, escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the
structure. "Escape provisions" means the permanent installation of ladders,
steps, rungs, or other features that provide readily accessible means of
ingress and egress from the outlet structure.



      (2)   A trash rack is a device intended to intercept
runoff-borne trash and debris that might otherwise block the hydraulic
openings in an outlet structure of a structural stormwater management
measure. Trash racks shall be installed upstream of such outlet structure
openings as necessary to ensure proper functioning of the structural
stormwater management measure in accordance with the following:



         (a)   The trash rack should be constructed primarily of
bars aligned in the direction of flow with one-inch spacing between the bars
to the elevation of the water quality design storm. For elevations higher
than the water quality design storm, the bars shall be spaced no greater than
1/3 the width of the hydraulic opening it is protecting or six inches,
whichever is less. Transverse bars aligned perpendicular to flow should be
sized and spaced as necessary for rack stability and strength.



         (b)   The trash rack shall not adversely affect the
hydraulic performance of either the outlet structure opening it is protecting
or the overall outlet structure. The maintenance plan shall address periodic
maintenance and removal of debris from each trash rack.



         (c)   The trash rack shall have sufficient net open area
under clean conditions to limit the peak design storm velocity through it to
a maximum of 2.5 feet per second.



         (d)   The trash rack shall be constructed and installed
to be rigid, durable and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per square foot.



      (3)   An overflow grate is a device intended to protect the
opening in the top of a stormwater management measure outlet structure. If an
outlet structure has an overflow grate, such grate shall meet the following
requirements:



         (a)   The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet
structure but removable for emergencies and maintenance;



         (b)   The overflow grate spacing shall be no more than
two inches across the smallest dimension; and



         (c)   The overflow grate shall be constructed and
installed to be rigid, durable and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed
to withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per square foot.



      (4)   The maximum side slope for an earthen dam, embankment,
or berm shall not be steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.



      (5)   Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all
new structural stormwater management measures having a permanent pool of
water deeper than 2 ½ feet. Such safety ledges shall be comprised of two
steps. Each step shall be four feet to six feet in width. One step shall be
located approximately 2 ½ feet below the permanent water surface, and the
second step shall be located one foot to 1 ½ feet above the permanent water
surface. See Subsection C(5)(a) below for an illustration of safety ledges in
a stormwater management basin.



         (a)   Illustration of safety ledges.







 



§ 175-175. Inspection, maintenance and repair of stormwater management
measures.



   A.   Applicability. Projects subject to review pursuant to §
175-170C of this article shall comply with the requirements of Subsections B
and C below.



   B.   General inspection, maintenance and repair plan.



      (1)   The design engineer shall prepare an inspection,
maintenance and repair plan for the stormwater management measures, including
both structural and nonstructural measures incorporated into the design of a
major development. This plan shall be submitted as part of the checklist
requirements established in § 175-171C. Inspection and maintenance
guidelines for stormwater management measures are available in the New Jersey
BMP Manual.



      (2)   The inspection, maintenance and repair plan shall
contain the following:



         (a)   Accurate and comprehensive drawings of the site's
stormwater management measures;



         (b)   Specific locations of each stormwater management
measure identified by means of longitude and latitude as well as block and
lot number;



         (c)   Specific preventative and corrective maintenance
tasks and schedules for such tasks for each stormwater BMP;



         (d)   Cost estimates, including estimated cost of
sediment, debris or trash removal; and



         (e)   The name, address and telephone number of the
person or persons responsible for regular inspections and preventative and
corrective maintenance (including repair and replacement). If the responsible
person or persons is a corporation, company, partnership, firm, association,
municipality or political subdivision of this state, the name and telephone
number of an appropriate contact person shall also be included.



      (3)   The person responsible for inspection, maintenance and
repair identified under Subsection B(2) above shall maintain a detailed log
of all preventative and corrective maintenance performed for the site's
stormwater management measures, including a record of all inspections and
copies of all maintenance-related work orders in the inspection, maintenance
and repair plan. Said records and inspection reports shall be retained for a
minimum of five years.



      (4)   If the inspection, maintenance and repair plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public agency or
homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for inspection and
maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such person's agreement
to assume this responsibility, or of the developer's obligation to dedicate a
stormwater management measure to such person under an applicable ordinance or
regulation.



      (5)   If the person responsible for inspection, maintenance
and repair identified under Subsection B(3) above is not a public agency, the
maintenance plan and any future revisions based on Subsection B(6) below
shall be recorded upon the deed of record for each property on which the
maintenance described in the maintenance plan shall be undertaken.



      (6)   The person responsible for inspection, maintenance and
repair identified under Subsection B(2) above shall evaluate the
effectiveness of the inspection, maintenance and repair plan at least once
per year and update the plan and the deed as needed.



      (7)   The person responsible for inspection, maintenance and
repair identified under Subsection B(2) above shall submit the updated
inspection, maintenance and repair plan and the documentation required by
Subsections B(2) and (3) above to the Town of Hammonton once per year.



      (8)   The person responsible for inspection, maintenance and
repair identified under Subsection B(2) above shall retain and make
available, upon request by any public entity with administrative, health,
environmental or safety authority over the site, the inspection, Maintenance
and Repair Plan and the documentation required by Subsections B(2) and (3)
above.



   C.   Responsibility for inspection, repair and maintenance shall not
be assigned or transferred to the owner or tenant of an individual property
in a residential development or project, unless such owner or tenant owns or
leases the entire residential development or project.



   D.   Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure, including, but
not limited to, repairs or replacement to any associated appurtenance of the
measure; removal of sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas;
snow and ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
repair or replacement of linings; and restoration of infiltration function.



   E.   Stormwater management measure easements shall be provided by
the property owner as necessary for facility inspections and maintenance and
preservation of stormwater runoff conveyance, infiltration, and detention
areas and facilities. The purpose of the easement shall be specified in the
maintenance agreement.



   F.   In the event that the stormwater management measure becomes a
public health nuisance or danger to public safety or public health, or if it
is in need of maintenance or repair, the Town of Hammonton shall so notify
the responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and repair of the
facility in a manner that is approved by the municipal engineer or the
municipal engineer's designee. The Town of Hammonton, at its discretion, may
extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for good cause.
If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform such maintenance and
repair within the allowable time, the Town of Hammonton may immediately
proceed to do so with its own forces and equipment and/or through
contractors. The costs and expenses of such maintenance and repair by the
Town of Hammonton shall be entered on the tax roll as a special charge
against the property and collected with any other taxes levied thereon for
the year in which the maintenance and repair was performed.



   G.   Requirements for inspection, maintenance and repair of
stormwater BMPs that rely on infiltration. If a stormwater infiltration BMP
is incorporated into the design of a major development, the applicant shall
include the following requirements in its inspection, maintenance and repair
plan:



      (1)   Once per month (if needed): mow side slopes, remove
litter and debris, stabilize eroded banks, repair erosion at inflow
structure(s);



      (2)   After every storm exceeding one inch of rainfall: ensure
that infiltration BMPs drain completely within 72 hours after the storm
event. If stored water fails to infiltrate 72 hours after the end of the
storm, corrective measures shall be taken. Raking or tilling by light
equipment can assist in maintaining infiltration capacity and break up
clogged surfaces;



      (3)   Four times per year (quarterly): inspect stormwater
infiltration BMPs for clogging and excessive debris and sediment accumulation
within the BMP, remove sediment (if needed) when completely dry;



      (4)   Two times per year: inspect for signs of damage to
structures, repair eroded areas, check for signs of petroleum contamination
and remediate;



      (5)   Once per year: inspect BMPs for unwanted tree growth and
remove if necessary, disc or otherwise aerate bottom of infiltration basin to
a minimum depth of six inches; and



      (6)   After every storm exceeding one inch of rainfall,
inspect and, if necessary, remove and replace K5 sand layer and accumulated
sediment, to restore original infiltration rate.



      (7)   Additional guidance for the inspection, maintenance and
repair of stormwater infiltration BMPs can be found in the New Jersey BMP
Manual.



   H.   Maintenance guarantee.



      (1)   The applicant shall provide a maintenance guarantee in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53 to ensure that all stormwater management
measures required under the provisions of this article will be maintained in
accordance with the specifications established herein.



      (2)   Public agency inspection, maintenance and repair.



         (a)   Additionally, for those stormwater management
measures that are to be inspected, maintained and repaired by a public
agency, the Town of Hammonton shall collect a prepaid fee from the applicant
in the amount the Town of Hammonton determines is needed to provide long-term
inspection, maintenance and repair of all stormwater management measures.



         (b)   This prepaid fee shall be placed in a dedicated
cash management account and expended by the Town of Hammonton for the sole
purpose of conducting inspection, maintenance and repair activities for all
stormwater management measures required under the applicant's major
development application approval. The calculation of the fee shall be based
upon the inspection, maintenance and repair plan (plan) required to be
prepared by the applicant and approved by the Town of Hammonton.



         (c)   The plan shall include an estimate of the present
value of the cost to inspect, maintain and repair the stormwater management
measure(s) in accordance with the plan for the useful life of those
measure(s). The Town of Hammonton shall furnish the applicant its published
hourly rates as prescribed by its salary ordinance for public works and other
personnel having responsibilities associated with stormwater management.



         (d)   Added to this fee shall be an amount mutually
determined by the Town of Hammonton and the applicant to account for the
reconstruction/reconditioning of stormwater management measures that are
based on the reasonable life expectancies of those facilities. After an
agreed number of years, depending on the type of measure(s), the measure(s)
will need to be reconstructed/reconditioned. The amount shall be based on the
future value of the measure(s) being reconstructed/reconditioned.



         (e)   Both inflation rates and bank interest rates shall
be based on the ten-year average published in the Wall Street Journal or
other approved publication. Interest accruing in the account must also be
accounted for at an agreed upon interest rate to arrive at an amount. The
costs for reconstructing/reconditioning the measure(s) shall be taken from
the engineer's probable cost estimate that is utilized to determine the
amount of the required performance guarantee. It is acceptable to attach a
percentage of failure to certain line items in the estimate.



      (3)   Nonpublic agency inspection, maintenance and repair.



         (a)   Additionally, for those stormwater management
measures that are to be inspected, maintained and repaired by a homeowners'
association, condominium association or some other form of nonpublic
ownership, no fee shall be collected by the Town of Hammonton. Instead, the
ownership entity shall establish and maintain a fund for the annual
inspection and testing program, annual maintenance and repair program and
annual contribution to a contingency fund for long-term
reconstruction/reconditioning.



         (b)   The initial costs agreed to for the annual
inspection and testing program and annual maintenance and repair program
shall be based upon actual itemized proposals offered to the applicant by
prospective vendors. The annual cost expended on inspection, testing and
maintenance shall be reported to the Town of Hammonton to verify that
maintenance is not being deferred and to inform the Town of Hammonton on the
magnitude of those services.



         (c)   The contingency fund shall require sufficient
funds to be committed for long-term reconstruction/reconditioning of the
stormwater management measure(s). Major reconstruction/reconditioning
activities will necessitate proper financial planning. After an agreed number
of years, depending on the type of measure(s), the measure(s) will need to be
reconstructed/reconditioned. The contingency fund in the financial schedule
shall be based on the future value of the measure being
reconstructed/reconditioned.



         (d)   Both inflation rates and bank interest rates shall
be based on the ten-year average published in the Wall Street Journal or
other approved publication. Interest accruing in the account must also be
accounted for at an agreed upon interest rate to arrive at an annual
contribution amount.



§ 175-176. Definitions.



   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this
article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. When
used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings herein
ascribed to them:



   AQUACULTURE — The propagation, rearing and subsequent harvesting of
aquatic organisms in controlled or selected environments, and their
subsequent processing, packaging and marketing, including but not limited to
activities to intervene in the rearing process to increase production such as
stocking, feeding, transplanting and providing for protection from predators.



   CERTIFICATION — Either a written statement signed and sealed by a
licensed New Jersey professional engineer attesting that a BMP design or
stormwater management system conforms to or meets a particular set of
standards, or to action taken by the Commission pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-3,
Part II or Part IV. Depending upon the context in which the term is used, the
terms "certify" and "certified" shall be construed accordingly.



   COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density caused by subjecting
soil to greater-than-normal loading. Compaction can also decrease soil
infiltration and permeability rates.



   CONSTRUCTION — The construction, erection, reconstruction,
alteration, conversion, demolition, removal or equipping of buildings,
structures or components of a stormwater management system, including but not
limited to collection inlets, stormwater piping, swales and all other
conveyance systems, and stormwater BMPs.



   COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County Board of
Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management plans and
implementing ordinance(s). The county review agency may either be:



   A.   A county planning agency; or



   B.   A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A.
58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to approve,
conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal stormwater management plans
and implementing ordinances.



   DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation and
development of project design and preparation of drawings and specifications.



   DESIGN PERMEABILITY — The tested permeability rate with a factor of
safety of two applied to it (e.g., if the tested permeability rate of the
soils is four inches per hour, the design rate would be two inches per hour).



   DEVELOPMENT —



   A.   The change of or enlargement of any use or disturbance of any
land, the performance of any building or mining operation, the division of
land into two or more parcels, and the creation or termination of rights of
access or riparian rights including, but not limited to:



      (1)   A change in type of use of a structure or land;



      (2)   A reconstruction, alteration of the size, or material
change in the external appearance of a structure or land;



      (3)   A material increase in the intensity of use of land,
such as an increase in the number of businesses, manufacturing
establishments, offices or dwelling units in a structure or on land;



      (4)   Commencement of resource extraction or drilling or
excavation on a parcel of land;



      (5)   Demolition of a structure or removal of trees;



      (6)   Commencement of forestry activities;



      (7)   Deposit of refuse, solid or liquid waste or fill on a
parcel of land;



      (8)   In connection with the use of land, the making of any
material change in noise levels, thermal conditions, or emissions of waste
material; and



      (9)   Alteration, either physically or chemically, of a shore,
bank, or floodplain, seacoast, river, stream, lake, pond, wetlands or
artificial body or water.



   B.   In the case of development on agricultural land, i.e., lands
used for an agricultural use or purpose as defined at N.J.A.C. 7:50-2.11,
"development" means any activity that requires a state permit; any activity
reviewed by the County Agricultural Boards (CAB) and the State Agricultural
Development Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any activity not
exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.



   DEVELOPMENT, MAJOR — Any division of land into five or more lots; any
construction or expansion of any housing development of five or more dwelling
units; any construction or expansion of any commercial or industrial use or
structure on a site of more than three acres; or any nonresidential
development, grading, clearing or disturbance of an area in excess of 5,000
square feet. "Disturbance" for the purpose of this article is the placement
of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement of soil or bedrock or
clearing, cutting or removing of vegetation.



   DEVELOPMENT, MINOR — All development other than major development.



   DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater, sediments,
or dissolved materials drain to a BMP, a stormwater management system, a
particular receiving water body or a particular point along a receiving water
body.



   ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREA — An area or feature which is of
significant environmental value, including but not limited to stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened animal species; threatened or endangered plants of the Pinelands
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:5-6.27(a); large areas of contiguous open space or
upland forest; steep slopes; and wellhead protection and groundwater recharge
areas. T & E habitat constitutes habitat that is critical for the survival of
a local population of threatened and endangered species or habitat that is
identified using the Department's Landscape Project as approved by the
Department's Endangered and Nongame Species Program, whichever is more
inclusive. Threatened and endangered wildlife shall be protected in
conformance with N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.33.



   EXCEPTION — The approval by the approving authority of a variance or
other material departure from strict compliance with any section, part,
phrase or provision of this article. An exception may be granted only under
certain specific, narrowly-defined conditions described herein and does not
constitute a waiver of strict compliance with any section, part, phrase or
provision of the Pinelands Comprehensive Management Plan (N.J.A.C. 7:50-1.1
et seq.).



   EXTENDED DETENTION BASIN — A facility constructed through filling
and/or excavation that provides temporary storage of stormwater runoff. It
has an outlet structure that detains and attenuates runoff inflows and
promotes the settlement of pollutants. An extended detention basin is
normally designed as a multistage facility that provides runoff storage and
attenuation for both stormwater quality and quantity management. The term
"stormwater detention basin" shall have the same meaning as "extended
detention basin."



   FINISHED GRADE — The elevation of the surface of the ground after
completion of final grading, either via cutting, filling or a combination
thereof.



   GRADING — Modification of a land slope by cutting and filling with
the native soil or redistribution of the native soil which is present at the
site.



   GROUNDWATER — Water below the land surface in a zone of saturation.



   GROUNDWATER MOUNDING ANALYSIS — A test performed to demonstrate that
the groundwater below a stormwater infiltration basin will not "mound up,"
encroach on the unsaturated zone, break the surface of the ground at the
infiltration area or down slope, and create an overland flow situation.



   HEAVY EQUIPMENT — Equipment, machinery, or vehicles that exert ground
pressure in excess of eight pounds per square inch.



   HIGH POLLUTANT LOADING AREA — An area in an industrial or commercial
development site where solvents and/or petroleum products are
loaded/unloaded, stored, or applied; where pesticides are loaded/unloaded or
stored; where hazardous materials are expected to be present in greater than
"reportable quantities" as defined by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR 302.4; where recharge would be inconsistent
with NJDEP-approved remedial action work plan or landfill closure plan;
and/or where a high risk exists for spills of toxic materials, such as gas
stations and vehicle maintenance facilities. The term "HPLA" shall have the
same meaning as "high pollutant loading area."



   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.



   INFILTRATION — The process by which precipitation enters the soil
through its surface.



   IN-LIEU CONTRIBUTION — A monetary fee collected by the Town of
Hammonton in lieu of requiring strict on-site compliance with the groundwater
recharge, stormwater runoff quantity and/or stormwater runoff quality
standards established in this article.



   INSTALL — To assemble, construct, put in place or connect components
of a stormwater management system.



   MITIGATION — Acts necessary to prevent, limit, remedy or compensate
for conditions that may result from those cases where an applicant has
demonstrated the inability or impracticality of strict compliance with the
stormwater management requirements set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:8, in an adopted
regional stormwater management plan, or in a local ordinance which is as
protective as N.J.A.C. 7:8, and an exception from strict compliance is
granted by the Town of Hammonton and the Pinelands Commission.



   NEW JERSEY STORMWATER BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES MANUAL — Guidance
developed by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, in
coordination with the New Jersey Department of Agriculture, the New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs, the New Jersey Department of Transportation,
municipal engineers, county engineers, consulting firms, contractors, and
environmental organizations to address the standards in the New Jersey
Stormwater Management Rules, N.J.A.C. 7:8. The BMP Manual provides examples
of ways to meet the standards contained in the rule. An applicant may
demonstrate that other proposed management practices will also achieve the
standards established in the rules. The manual and notices regarding future
versions of the manual, are available from the Division of Watershed
Management, NJDEP, P.O. Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey 08625; and on the
NJDEP's website, www.njstormwater.org. The term "New Jersey BMP Manual" shall
have the same meaning as "New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices
Manual."



   NJDEP — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.



   NJPDES — The New Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq. and in N.J.A.C. 7:14A.



   NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the NJDEP pursuant to the
authority of the Water Pollution Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq., and
N.J.A.C. 7:14A for a discharge of pollutants.



   NONPOINT SOURCE —



   A.   Any human-made or human-induced activity, factor, or condition,
other than a point source, from which pollutants are or may be discharged;



   B.   Any human-made or human-induced activity, factor, or condition,
other than a point source, that may temporarily or permanently change any
chemical, physical, biological, or radiological characteristic of waters of
the state from what was or is the natural, pristine condition of such waters,
or that may increase the degree of such change; or



   C.   Any activity, factor, or condition, other than a point source,
that contributes or may contribute to water pollution.



   The term "NPS" shall have the same meaning as "nonpoint source."



   NONSTRUCTURAL BMP — A stormwater management measure, strategy or
combination of strategies that reduces adverse stormwater runoff impacts
through sound site planning and design. Nonstructural BMPs include such
practices as minimizing site disturbance, preserving important site features,
reducing and disconnecting impervious cover, flattening slopes, utilizing
native vegetation, minimizing turf grass lawns, maintaining natural drainage
features and characteristics and controlling stormwater runoff and pollutants
closer to the source. The term "low-impact development technique" shall have
the same meaning as "nonstructural BMP."



   NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of organisms.



   PERMEABILITY — The rate at which water moves through a saturated unit
area of soil or rock material at hydraulic gradient of one, determined as
prescribed in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.2 (Tube Permeameter Test), N.J.A.C. 6.5 (Pit
Bailing Test) or N.J.A.C. 6.6 (Piezometer Test). Alternative permeability
test procedures may be accepted by the approving authority, provided the test
procedure attains saturation of surrounding soils, accounts for hydraulic
head effects on infiltration rates, provides a permeability rate with units
expressed in inches per hour and is accompanied by a published source
reference. Examples of suitable sources include hydrogeology, geotechnical,
or engineering text and design manuals, proceedings of American Society for
Testing and Materials (ASTM) symposia, or peer-review journals. Neither a
soil permeability class rating test, as described in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.3, nor a
percolation test, as described in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.4, are acceptable tests for
establishing permeability values for the purpose of complying with this
article.



   PERMEABLE — Having a permeability of 16 inches per hour or faster.
The terms "permeable soil," "permeable rock" and "permeable fill" shall be
construed accordingly.



   PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, municipality or political subdivision of this state subject to
municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.



   PINELANDS COMMISSION or COMMISSION — The Commission created pursuant
Section 5 of the Pinelands Protection Act, N.J.S.A. 13:18A-5.



   PINELANDS CMP — The New Jersey Pinelands Comprehensive Management
Plan (N.J.A.C. 7:50 1.1 et seq.).



   POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance,
including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit,
well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding
operation, landfill leachate collection system, vessel, or other floating
craft, from which pollutants are or may be discharged. This term does not
include return flows from irrigated agriculture.



   POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
filter backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge,
munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
substances [except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as
amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.)], thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, suspended solids, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal,
agricultural, and construction wastes or runoff, or other residue discharged
directly or indirectly to the land, ground waters or surface waters of the
state, or to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous
and nonhazardous pollutants.



   PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER — A person licensed to practice professional
engineering in the State of New Jersey pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:8-27 et seq.



   RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates
into the ground and is not evapotranspired.



   REPLICATE — One of two or more soil samples or tests taken at the
same location (within five feet of each other) and depth, within the same
soil horizon or substratum. In the case of fill material, replicate tests are
tests are tests performed on sub samples of the same bulk sample packed to
the same bulk density.



   SAND — A particle size category consisting of mineral particles which
are between 0.05 millimeter and 2.0 millimeters in equivalent spherical
diameter. Also, a soil textural class having 85% or more of sand and a
content of silt and clay such that the percentage of silt plus 1.5 times the
percentage of clay does not exceed 15, as shown in § 175-179C(1) (USDA Soil
Textural Triangle).



   SEASONALLY HIGH WATER TABLE — The upper limit of the shallowest zone
of saturation which occurs in the soil, identified as prescribed in N.J.A.C.
7:9A-5.8.



   SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension,
is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water
or gravity as a product of erosion.



   SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or
has occurred.



   SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin
which is not a rock substratum, including sediments below the biologically
active and/or weathered zones.



   SOURCE MATERIAL — Any material(s) or machinery, located at an
industrial facility, that is directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which could be a source of
pollutants in any industrial stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw materials; intermediate
products; final products; waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery
and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents that are related to
process, manufacturing, or other products; industrial activities that are
exposed to stormwater.



   STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or
is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities,
or conveyed by snow removal equipment.



   STORMWATER INFILTRATION BMP — A basin or other facility constructed
within permeable soils that provides temporary storage of stormwater runoff.
An infiltration BMP does not normally have a structural outlet to discharge
runoff from the stormwater quality design storm. Instead, outflow from an
infiltration BMP is through the surrounding soil. The terms "infiltration
measure" and "infiltration practice" shall have the same meaning as
"stormwater infiltration basin."



   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or nonstructural
strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other method intended to
control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated pollutants, or to induce
or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge of stormwater or to
eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater discharges into stormwater
conveyances. This includes, but is not limited to, structural and
nonstructural stormwater best management practices described in the New
Jersey BMP Manual and designed to meet the standards for stormwater control
contained within this article. The terms "stormwater best management
practice" and "stormwater BMP" shall have the same meaning as "stormwater
management measure."



   STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or in
storm sewers resulting from precipitation.



   SUITABLE SOIL — Unsaturated soil, above the seasonally high water
table, which contains less than 50% by volume of coarse fragments and which
has a tested permeability rate of between 16 inches and 20 inches per hour.



   SURFACE WATER — Any waters of the state which are not groundwater.



   TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area, which may be
influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is primarily
caused by the Atlantic Ocean.



   TIME OF CONCENTRATION — The time it takes for runoff to travel from
the hydraulically most distant point of the drainage area to the point of
interest within a watershed.



   TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The insoluble solid matter suspended in
water and stormwater that is separable by laboratory filtration in accordance
with the procedure contained in the Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, prepared and published jointly by the American Public
Health Association, American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution
Control Federation. The term "TSS" shall have the same meaning as "total
suspended solids."



   TOWN OF HAMMONTON — The Planning Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment or
other board, agency or official of the Town of Hammonton with authority to
approve or disapprove subdivisions, site plans, construction permits,
building permits or other applications for development approval. For the
purposes of reviewing development applications and ensuring compliance with
the requirements of this article, the Town of Hammonton may designate the
municipal engineer or other qualified designee to act on behalf of the Town
of Hammonton.



   WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs,
streams and bodies of surface and groundwater, whether natural or artificial,
within the boundaries of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.



   WATER TABLE — The upper surface of a zone of saturation.



   WELL — A bored, drilled or driven shaft, or a dug hole, which extends
below the seasonally high water table and which has a depth which is greater
than its largest surface dimension.



   WETLANDS — Those lands which are inundated or saturated by water at a
magnitude, duration and frequency sufficient to support the growth of
hydrophytes. Wetlands include lands with poorly drained or very poorly
drained soils as designated by the National Cooperative Soils Survey of the
Soil Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture.
Wetlands include coastal wetlands and inland wetlands, including submerged
lands. The New Jersey Pinelands Commission Manual for Identifying and
Delineating Pinelands Area Wetlands: A Pinelands Supplement to the Federal
Manual for Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands, dated January
1991, as amended, may be utilized in delineating the extent of wetlands based
on the definitions of wetlands and wetlands soils contained in this section,
N.J.A.C. 7:50-2.11, 7:50-6.4 and 7:50-6.5. The term "wetland" shall have the
same meaning as "wetlands."



   WET POND — A stormwater facility constructed through filling and/or
excavation that provides both permanent and temporary storage of stormwater
runoff. It has an outlet structure that creates a permanent pool and detains
and attenuates runoff inflows and promotes the settling of pollutants. A
stormwater retention basin can also be designed as a multistage facility that
also provides extended detention for enhanced stormwater quality design storm
treatment and runoff storage and attenuation for stormwater quantity
management. The term "stormwater retention basin" shall have the same meaning
as "wet pond."



§ 175-177. Violations and penalties.



   Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts,
maintains, or uses any building, structure or land in violation of this
article shall be subject to the following penalties:



   A.   A single event violation/offense of $1,000.



   B.   Two hundred dollars per day for continuing violations/offenses
(to be assessed for each day until the violation/offense is remedied).



§ 175-178. When effective.



   This article shall take effect immediately upon the following:



   A.   Certification by the Pinelands Commission in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 7:50, Subchapter 3; and



   B.   Approval by the county review agency.



§ 175-179. Appendices.



   A.   Methods for calculating groundwater recharge.



      (1)   The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32: A Method
for Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in NJ; available at
http://www.njgeology.org/geodata/dgs99-2.htm.



      (2)   The New Jersey Groundwater Recharge Spreadsheet (NJGRS);
available in the New Jersey BMP Manual, Chapter 6, at
http://www.njstormwater.org/bmp_manual2.htm.



   B.   NJDEP Nonstructural Strategies Point System (Reserved). [NOTE:
Refer to NJDEP for information on development of the nonstructural point
system. The New Jersey Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.2(a),
and § 175-173A of this article require nonstructural stormwater management
strategies to be incorporated into the site design of a major development. A
total of nine strategies are to be used to the maximum extent practical to
meet the groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and stormwater quantity
requirements of the rules prior to utilizing structural stormwater management
measures. The New Jersey Nonstructural Stormwater Management Strategies Point
System (NSPS) provides a tool to assist planners, designers and regulators in
determining that the strategies have been used to the maximum extent
practical at a major development as required by the rules. Refer online to
http://www.njstormwater.org for information on the NSPS.



   C.   Soils.



      (1)   USDA Soil Textural Triangle.







 



      (2)   Definitions. For the purposes of this appendix, the
following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them.



   A-HORIZON — The uppermost mineral horizon in a normal soil profile.
The upper part of the A-horizon is characterized by maximum accumulation of
finely divided, dark-colored organic residues, known as "humus," which are
intimately mixed with the mineral particles of the soil.



   ARTESIAN ZONE OF SATURATION — A zone of saturation which exists
immediately below a hydraulically restrictive horizon, and which has an upper
surface which is at a pressure greater than atmospheric, either seasonally or
throughout the year.



   CHROMA — The relative purity or strength of a color, a quantity which
decreases with increasing grayness. Chroma is one of the three variables of
soil color as defined in the Munsell system of classification.



   CLAY — A particle size category consisting of mineral particles which
are smaller than 0.002 millimeter in equivalent spherical diameter. Also, a
soil textural class having more than 40% clay, less than 45% sand, and less
than 40% silt, as shown in Subsection C(1) (USDA Soil Textural Triangle).



   CLAY LOAM — A soil textural class having 27% to 40% clay 20% to 45%
sand, as shown in Subsection C(1) (USDA Soil Textural Triangle).



   COARSE FRAGMENT — A rock fragment contained within the soil which is
greater than two millimeters in equivalent spherical diameter or which is
retained on a two-millimeter sieve.



   COUNTY SOIL SURVEY REPORT — A report prepared by the US Department of
Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service, which includes maps
showing the distribution of soil mapping units throughout a particular county
together with narrative descriptions of the soil series shown and other
information relating to the uses and properties of the various soil series.



   DIRECT SUPERVISION — Control over and direction of work carried out
by others with full knowledge of and responsibility for such work.



   EQUIVALENT SPHERICAL DIAMETER OF A PRACTICE — The diameter of a
sphere which has a volume equal to the volume of the particle.



   EXCESSIVELY COARSE HORIZON — A horizon of limited thickness within
the soil profile which provides inadequate removal of pollutants from
stormwater due to a high coarse fragment content, excessively coarse texture
and/or excessively rapid permeability.



   EXCESSIVELY COARSE SUBSTRATUM — A substratum below the soil profile
which extends beyond the depth of soil profile pits and borings and which
provides inadequate removal of pollutants from stormwater due to a high
coarse fragment content, excessively coarse texture and/or excessively rapid
permeability.



   EXTREMELY FIRM CONSISTENCE — A type of soil material whose moist
aggregated mass crushes only under very strong pressure; cannot be crushed
between the thumb and forefinger and shall be broken apart bit by bit.



   FIRM CONSISTENCE — A type of soil material whose moist aggregated
mass crushes under moderate pressure between the thumb and forefinger but
resistance is distinctly noticeable.



   HARD CONSISTENCE — A type of soil material whose dry aggregated mass
is moderately resistant to pressure; can be broken in the hands without
difficulty but is barely breakable between the thumb and forefinger.



   HUE — The dominant spectral color, one of the three variables of soil
color defined within the Munsell system of classification.



   HYDRAULICALLY RESTRICTIVE HORIZON — A horizon within the soil profile
which slows or prevents the downward or lateral movement of water and which
is underlain by permeable soil horizons or substrata. Any soil horizon which
has a saturated permeability less than 16 inches per hour is hydraulically
restrictive.



   HYDRAULICALLY RESTRICTIVE SUBSTRATUM — A substratum below the soil
profile which slows or prevents the downward or lateral movement of water and
which extends beyond the depth of profile pits or borings or to a massive
substratum. A substratum which has a saturated permeability less than 16
inches per hour is hydraulically restrictive.



   LOAMY SAND — A soil textural class, as shown in Subsection C(1) (USDA
Soil Textural Triangle), that has a maximum of 85% to 90% sand with a
percentage of silt plus 1.5 times the percentage of clay not in excess of 15;
or a minimum of 70% to 85% sand with a percentage of silt plus 1.5 times the
percentage of clay not in excess of 30.



   LOWER PLASTIC LIMIT — The moisture content corresponding to the
transition between the plastic and semisolid states of soil consistency. This
corresponds to the lowest soil moisture content at which the soil can be
molded in the fingers to form a rod or wire, 1/8 inch in thickness, without
crumbling.



   MOTTLING — A color pattern observed in soil consisting of blotches or
spots of contrasting color. The term "mottle" refers to an individual blotch
or spot. The terms "color variegation," "iron depletion" and "iron
concentration" are equivalent to the term "mottling." Mottling due to
redoximorphic reactions is an indication of seasonal or periodic and
recurrent saturation.



   MUNSELL SYSTEM — A system of classifying soil color consisting of an
alphanumeric designation for hue, value and chroma, such as "7.5 YR 6/2,"
together with a descriptive color name, such as "strong brown."



   O-HORIZON — A surface horizon, occurring above the A-horizon in some
soils, which is composed primarily of undecomposed or partially decomposed
plant remains which have not been incorporated into the mineral soil.



   PERCHED ZONE OF SATURATION — A zone of saturation which occurs
immediately above a hydraulically restrictive horizon and which is underlain
by permeable horizons or substrata which are not permanently or seasonally
saturated.



   PIEZOMETER — A device consisting of a length of metal or plastic
pipe, open at the bottom or perforated within a specified interval, and used
for the determination of depth to water, permeability or hydraulic head
within a specific soil horizon or substratum.



   PLATY STRUCTURE — Characterized by a soil aggregate which has one
axis distinctly shorter than the other two and are oriented with the short
axis vertical.



   REGIONAL ZONE OF SATURATION — A zone of saturation which extends
vertically without interruption below the depth of soil borings and profile
pits.



   SANDY CLAY — A soil textural class having 35% or more of clay and 45%
or more of sand, as shown in Subsection C(1) (USDA Soil Textural Triangle).



   SANDY LOAM — A soil textural class, as shown in Subsection C(1) (USDA
Soil Textural Triangle), that has a maximum of 20% clay, and the percentage
of silt plus twice the percentage of clay exceeds 30, and contains 52% or
more sand; or less than 7% clay, less than 50% silt, and between 43% and 52%
sand.



   SILT — A particle size category consisting of mineral particles which
are between 0.002 millimeter and 0.05 millimeter in equivalent spherical
diameter. It also means a soil textural class having 80% or more of silt and
12% or less of clay, as shown in Subsection C(1) (USDA Soil Textural
Triangle).



   SILT LOAM — A soil textural class having 50% or more of silt and 12%
to 27% of clay; or 50% to 80% of silt and less than 12% of clay, as shown in
Subsection C(1) (USDA Soil Textural Triangle).



   SILTY CLAY — A soil textural class having 40% or more of clay and 40%
or more of silt, as shown in Subsection C(1) (USDA Soil Textural Triangle).



   SILTY CLAY LOAM — A Soil textural class having 27% to 40% of clay and
less than 20% of sand, as shown in Subsection C(1) (USDA Soil Textural
Triangle).



   SOIL AGGREGATE — A naturally occurring unit of soil structure
consisting of particles of sand, silt, clay, organic matter, and coarse
fragments held together by the natural cohesion of the soil.



   SOIL COLOR — The soil color name and Munsell color designation
determined by comparison of the moist soil with color chips contained in a
Munsell soil color book.



   SOIL CONSISTENCE — The resistance of a soil aggregate or clod to
being crushed between the fingers or broken by the hands. Terms for
describing soil consistence are in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-5.3(h).



   SOIL HORIZON — A layer within a soil profile differing from layers of
soil above and below it in one or more of the soil morphological
characteristics including color, texture, coarse fragment content, structure,
consistence and mottling.



   SOIL LOG — A description of the soil profile which includes the
depth, thickness, color, texture, coarse fragment content, mottling,
structure and consistence of each soil horizon or substratum.



   SOIL MAPPING UNIT — An area outlined on a map in a County Soil Survey
Report and marked with a letter symbol designating a soil phase, a complex of
two or more soil phases, or some other descriptive term where no soil type
has been identified.



   SOIL PHASE — A specific type of soil which is mapped by the Natural
Resources Conservation Service and which belongs to a soil series described
within the County Soil Survey Report.



   SOIL PROFILE — A vertical cross section of undisturbed soil showing
the characteristic horizontal layers or horizons of the soil which have
formed as a result of the combined effects of parent material, topography,
climate, biological activity and time.



   SOIL SERIES — A grouping of soil types possessing a specific range of
soil profile characteristics which are described within the County Soil
Survey Report. Each soil series may consist of several soil phases which may
differ in slope, texture of the surface horizon or stoniness.



   SOIL STRUCTURAL CLASS — One of the shape classes of soil structure
described in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-5.3(g).



   SOIL STRUCTURE — The naturally occurring arrangement, within a soil
horizon, of sand, silt and clay particles, coarse fragments and organic
matter, which are held together in clusters or aggregates of similar shape
and size.



   SOIL TEST PIT — An excavation made for the purpose of exposing a soil
profile which is to be described.



   SOIL TEXTURAL CLASS — One of the classes of soil texture defined
within the USDA system of classification. (Soil Survey Manual, Agricultural
Handbook No. 18, USDA Soil Conservation Service 1962.)



   SOIL TEXTURE — The relative proportions of sand, silt and clay in
that portion of the soil which passes through a sieve with two-millimeter
openings.



   STATIC WATER LEVEL — The depth below the ground surface or the
elevation with respect to some reference level of the water level observed
within a soil profile pit or boring, or within a piezometer, after this level
has stabilized or become relatively constant with the passage of time.



   SUBSTRATUM — A layer of soil or rock material present below the soil
profile and extending beyond the depth of soil borings or profile pits.



   UNSUITABLE SOIL — All soil other than suitable soil.



   USDA SYSTEM OF CLASSIFICATION — The system of classifying soil
texture used by the United States Department of Agriculture which defines 12
soil textural classes based upon the weight percentages of sand, silt and
clay in that portion of the soil which passes through a sieve with
two-millimeter openings. The soil textural classes are shown graphically on
the USDA Soil Textural Triangle, as shown in Subsection C(1).



   VALUE — The relative lightness or intensity of a color, one of the
three variables of soil color defined within the Munsell system of
classification.



   VERY FIRM CONSISTENCE — Characterized by a moist soil which crushes
under strong pressure; barely crushable between thumb and forefinger.



   VERY HARD CONSISTENCE — Characterized by a dry soil which is
resistant to pressure, can be broken in the hands only with difficulty; not
breakable between the thumb and forefinger.



   ZONE OF SATURATION — A layer within or below the soil profile which
is saturated with groundwater either seasonally or throughout the year. This
includes both regional and perched zones.



      (3)   Methods for assessing soil suitability for infiltration
stormwater management BMPs. The results of a subsurface investigation shall
serve as the basis for the site selection and design of stormwater
infiltration BMPs. The subsurface investigation shall include, but not be
limited to, a series of soil test pits and soil permeability tests conducted
in accordance with the following:



         (a)   All soil test pits and soil permeability results
shall be performed under the direct supervision of a professional engineer.
All soil logs and permeability test data shall be accompanied by a
certification by a professional engineer. The results and location
(horizontal and vertical) of all soil test pits and soil permeability tests,
both passing and failing, shall be reported to the Town of Hammonton.



         (b)   During all subsurface investigations and soil test
procedures, adequate safety measures shall be taken to prohibit unauthorized
access to the excavations at all times. It is the responsibility of persons
performing or witnessing subsurface investigations and soil permeability
tests to comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws and
regulations governing occupational safety.



         (c)   A minimum of two soil test pits shall be excavated
within the footprint of any proposed infiltration BMP to determine the
suitability and distribution of soil types present at the site. Placement of
the test pits shall be within 20 feet of the basin perimeter, located along
the longest axis bisecting the BMP. For BMPs larger than 10,000 square feet
in area, a minimum of one additional soil test pit shall be conducted within
each additional area of 10,000 square feet. The additional test pit(s) shall
be placed approximately equidistant to other test pits, so as to provide
adequate characterization of the subsurface material. In all cases, where
soil and/or groundwater properties vary significantly, additional test pits
shall be excavated in order to accurately characterize the subsurface
conditions below the proposed infiltration BMP. Soil test pits shall extend
to a minimum depth of eight feet below the lowest elevation of the basin
bottom or to a depth that is at least two times the maximum potential water
depth in the proposed infiltration BMP, whichever is greater.



         (d)   A soil test pit log shall be prepared for each
soil test pit. The test pit log shall, at a minimum, provide the elevation of
the existing ground surface, the depth and thickness (in inches) of each soil
horizon or substratum, the dominant matrix or background and mottle colors
using the Munsell system of classification for hue, value and chroma, the
appropriate textural class as shown on the USDA Textural Triangle, the volume
percentage of coarse fragments (larger than two millimeters in diameter), the
abundance, size, and contrast of mottles, the soil structure, soil
consistence, and soil moisture condition, using standard USDA classification
terminology for each of these soil properties. Soil test pit logs shall
identify the presence of any soil horizon, substratum or other feature that
exhibits an in-place permeability rate less than 16 inches per hour.



         (e)   Each soil test pit log shall report the depth to
seasonally high water level, either perched or regional, and the static water
level based upon the presence of soil mottles or other redoximorphic
features, and observed seepage or saturation. Where redoximorphic features
including soil mottles resulting from soil saturation are present, they shall
be interpreted to represent the depth to the seasonal high water table unless
soil saturation or seepage is observed at a higher level. When the
determination of the seasonally high water table shall be made in ground
previously disturbed by excavation, direct observation of the static water
table during the months of January through April shall be the only method
permitted.



         (f)   Any soil horizon or substratum which exists
immediately below a perched zone of saturation shall be deemed by rule to
exhibit unacceptable permeability (less than 16 inches per hour). The perched
zone of saturation may be observed directly, inferred based upon soil
morphology, or confirmed by performance of a hydraulic head test as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:9A-5.9.



         (g)   Stormwater infiltration BMPs shall not be
installed in soils that exhibit artesian groundwater conditions. A
permeability test shall be conducted in all soils that immediately underlie a
perched zone of saturation. Any zone of saturation which is present below a
soil horizon which exhibits an in-place permeability of less than 0.2 inch
per hour shall be considered an artesian zone of saturation unless a minimum
one-foot-thick zone of unsaturated soil, free of mottling or other
redoximorphic features and possessing a chroma of four or higher, exists
immediately below the unsuitable soil.



         (h)   A minimum of one permeability test shall be
performed at each soil test pit location. The soil permeability rate shall be
determined using test methodology as prescribed in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.2 (Tube
Permeameter Test), 6.5 (Pit Balling Test) or 6.6 (Piezometer Test). When the
tube Permeameter test is used, a minimum of two replicate samples shall be
taken and tested. Alternative permeability test procedures may be accepted by
the approving authority, provided the test procedure attains saturation of
surrounding soils, accounts for hydraulic head effects on infiltration rates,
provides a permeability rate with units expressed in inches per hour and is
accompanied by a published source reference. Examples of suitable sources
include hydrogeology, geotechnical or engineering text and design manuals,
proceedings of American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) symposia, or
peer-review journals. Neither a soil permeability class rating test, as
described in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.3, nor a percolation test, as described in
N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.4, are acceptable tests for establishing permeability values
for the purpose of complying with this article.



         (i)   Soil permeability tests shall be conducted on the
most hydraulically restrictive horizon or substratum to be left in place
below the basin as follows. Where no soil replacement is proposed, the
permeability tests shall be conducted on the most hydraulically restrictive
horizon or substratum within four feet of the lowest elevation of the basin
bottom or to a depth equal to two times the maximum potential water depth
within the basin, whichever is greater. Where soil replacement is proposed,
the permeability tests shall be conducted within the soil immediately below
the depth of proposed soil replacement or within the most hydraulically
restrictive horizon or substratum to a depth equal to two times the maximum
potential water depth within the basin, whichever is greater. Permeability
tests may be performed on the most hydraulically restrictive soil horizons or
substrata at depths greater than those identified above based upon the
discretion of the design or testing engineer. The tested infiltration rate
should then be divided by two to establish the soil's design permeability
rate. Such division will provide a one-hundred-percent safety factor to the
tested rate.



         (j)   The minimum acceptable tested permeability rate of
any soil horizon or substratum shall be 16 inches per hour. Soil materials
that exhibit tested permeability rates slower than 16 inches per hour shall
be considered unsuitable for stormwater infiltration. The maximum reportable
tested permeability rate of any soil horizon or substratum shall be no
greater than 20 inches per hour regardless of the rate attained in the test
procedure.



         (k)   After all construction activities have been
completed on the development site and the finished grade has been established
in the infiltration BMP, a minimum of one permeability test shall be
conducted within the most hydraulically restrictive soil horizon or
substratum below the as-built BMP to ensure the performance of the
infiltration BMP is as designed. Hand tools and manual permeability test
procedures shall be used for the purpose of confirming BMP performance. In
addition, the infiltration BMP shall be flooded with water sufficient to
demonstrate the performance of the BMP. Test results shall be certified to
the municipal engineer.



         (l)   A groundwater mounding analysis shall be provided
for each stormwater infiltration BMP. The groundwater mounding analysis shall
calculate the maximum height of the groundwater mound based upon the volume
of the maximum design storm. The professional engineer conducting the
analysis shall provide the municipal engineer with the methodology and
supporting documentation for the mounding analysis used and shall certify to
the Town of Hammonton, based upon the analysis, that the groundwater mound
will not cause stormwater or groundwater to break out to the land surface or
cause adverse impact to adjacent surface water bodies, wetlands or subsurface
structures including but not limited to basements and septic systems. If
there is more than one infiltration BMP proposed, the model shall indicate if
and how the mounds will interact. The mounding analysis shall be calculated
using the most restrictive soil horizon that will remain in place within the
explored aquifer thickness unless alternative analyses is authorized by the
municipal engineer. The mounding analysis shall be accompanied by a cross
section of the infiltration BMP and surrounding topography and the mound
analysis shall extend out to the point(s) at which the mound intersects with
the preexisting maximum water table elevation.



         (m)   The applicant shall demonstrate that stormwater
infiltration BMPs meet the seventy-two-hour drain time requirement
established in § 175-174B(1) of this article.



   D.   Pretreatment measures for infiltration BMPs. By reducing
incoming velocities and capturing coarser sediments, pretreatment can extend
the functional life and increase the pollutant removal capability of
infiltration measures. Therefore, the installation of pretreatment measures
is recommended for all development sites. Pretreatment measures may include,
but are not limited to, the following:



      (1)   Vegetative filter strips;



      (2)   Bioretention systems. Used in conjunction with a
bioretention system, the infiltration basin takes the place of the standard
under drain;



      (3)   Sand filters;



      (4)   Grassed swales; and



      (5)   Detention basins.



   E.   Collection and conveyance.



      (1)   Bicycle-safe inlet grates. Site development plans that
incorporate site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash and
debris from drainage systems shall comply with the following standard to
control passage of solid and floatable materials through storm drain inlets.
For purposes of this subsection, "solid and floatable materials" means
sediment, debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids.



         (a)   Design engineers shall use either of the following
grates whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to
collect stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water body
under that grate:



            [1]   The New Jersey Department of Transportation
(NJDOT) bicycle-safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT
Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design Guidelines
(April 1996); or



            [2]   A different grate, if each individual clear
space in that grate has an area of no more than seven square inches, or is no
greater than 0.5 inch across the smallest dimension. Examples of grates
subject to this standard include grates in grate inlets, the grate portion
(non-curb-opening portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer bars in slotted
drains. Examples of ground surfaces include surfaces of roads (including
bridges), driveways, parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns,
fields, open channels, and stormwater basin floors.



         (b)   Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening
inlet, the clear space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space,
if the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no
more than seven square inches, or be no greater than two inches across the
smallest dimension.



         (c)   This standard does not apply:



            [1]   Where the review agency determines that this
standard would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not
practicably be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;



            [2]   Where flows from the water quality design
storm as specified in § 175-172 are conveyed through any device (e.g.,
end-of-pipe netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and
floatable materials that could not pass through one of the following:



               [a]   A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long
and 1.5 inches wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or



               [b]   A bar screen having a bar spacing of
0.5 inch.



            [3]   Where flows are conveyed through a trash
rack that has parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars, to the
elevation of the water quality design storm as specified in § 175-172 of
this article; or



            [4]   Where the NJDEP determines, pursuant to the
New Jersey Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that constitutes an
encroachment or will damage or destroy the New Jersey Register-listed
historic property.



      (2)   Catch basins. Catch basins are storm drain inlets with
or without sumps. Catch basins may provide pretreatment for other stormwater
BMPs by capturing large sediments. The sediment and pollutant removal
efficiency of catch basins depends on the size of the sump and the
performance of routine maintenance to retain the available sediment storage
space in the sump. Where catch basins with sumps are proposed, the minimum
two-feet separation between the bottom of the sump and seasonally high water
table shall be provided.



      (3)   Open or perforated conveyance piping. Where adequate
separation to the seasonal high water table exists, stormwater from the
development site may be conveyed to a stormwater basin via a system of
perforated pipes. These pipes may be made of PVC or corrugated metal and are
available with perforations of varying size and spacing. Perforated pipe
specifications shall be certified by a professional engineer. A professional
engineer shall certify that perforated conveyance piping will not act to
intercept the seasonal high water table and convey groundwater to the
stormwater basin. All open or perforated stormwater conveyance systems shall
be installed with a minimum separation of three feet from the seasonal high
water table.



§ 175-180. Additional sources for technical guidance.



   A.   NJDEP technical guidance sources:



      (1)   New Jersey BMP Manual: available from the Division of
Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, P.O.
Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey 08625; or online at http://www.njstormwater.org.



      (2)   NJDEP Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance
Manual: available from the Division of Watershed Management, New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, P.O. Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey
08625; or online at http://injedl.rutgers.edu/ftp/PDFs/1188.pdf.



   B.   Additional guidance sources:



      (1)   New Jersey Pinelands Commission, P.O. Box 7, 15
Springfield Road, New Lisbon, New Jersey 08064; phone: 609-894-7300; website:
http://www.state.nj.us/pinelands.



      (2)   State Soil Conservation Committee Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey: available from all State Soil
Conservation Districts, including the Cape-Atlantic Soil Conservation
District, 6260 Old Harding Highway, Mays Landings, NJ 08330; phone: (609)
625-3144; (609) 625-7360.



      (3)   Cape-Atlantic Soil Conservation Districts.



      (4)   New Jersey Department of Transportation, P.O. Box 600,
Trenton, NJ 08625-0600; phone: 609-530-3536; website:
http://www.state.nj.us/transportation.



ARTICLE XVIII Personal Wireless Telecommunications Facilities



[Added 8-23-2004 by Ord. No. 22-2004]



§ 175-181. Purpose.



   The purpose of this article is to provide procedures, standards and
regulations for personal wireless telecommunications and similar facilities
and to protect the Town of Hammonton from the visual or other adverse impacts
of these facilities, while encouraging their unobtrusive development to
provide the benefits of comprehensive wireless telecommunications services to
the Town of Hammonton, its residents and businesses. The Town expresses a
preference that all antennas be located on existing buildings and towers or
on municipal or other public property, and in nonresidential zones, rather
than to construct newly constructed telecommunications towers and
telecommunications facilities.



§ 175-182. Development.



   A.   All facilities and structures constructed pursuant to this
article shall comply with the standards of N.J.A.C. 7:50-5.4 of the Pinelands
Comprehensive Management Plan and any comprehensive plan for local
communications facilities approved by the Pinelands Commission in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 7:50-5.4(c)6. The applicant shall also comply with § 175-60 of
the Municipal Land Use Law of the Town of Hammonton.



   B.   All antennas, antenna support structures, personal wireless
telecommunications facilities, personal wireless telecommunications equipment
facilities, and telecommunications towers are conditional uses within all
zone districts of the Town of Hammonton and are subject to Planning Board
review and approval pursuant to the following standards and requirements:



      (1)   Any application for a PWTF shall require major site plan
approval. A previously approved collocation site, where only the addition of
PWTEFs equipment is proposed, shall require minor site plan approval.



      (2)   In order to provide full wireless communications service
within the Town of Hammonton, PWTFs and PWTEFs shall be permitted in the
following priority of locations. Locations cited in a comprehensive plan for
Local Communications facilities approved by the Pinelands Commission shall
serve as evidence of the suitability for a PWTF at a specific site but shall
not be conclusive.



         (a)   The first priority location shall be collocation
on existing PWTFs or existing structures, provided the new installation does
not increase the height of the structure by more than 15 feet.



         (b)   The second priority location shall be on lands or
structures in any nonresidential zone owned by the Town of Hammonton, the
Town of Hammonton School Board, or any other governmental entity.



         (c)   The third priority location shall be on lands or
structures which were previously privately owned in any nonresidential zone.



         (d)   The fourth priority location shall be such
locations as the applicant proves are essential to provide required wireless
communications service within the Town of Hammonton.



      (3)   New telecommunications towers shall be permitted in the
FA, PA and SAPA Districts only at the following locations:



         (a)   On developed publicly owned lands within 500 feet
of an existing structure, provided the facility will be located on previously
disturbed lands that have not subsequently been restored and that no facility
will be located on state, county or municipal conservation lands, state
recreation lands or county and municipal lands used for low-intensity
recreational purposes.



         (b)   On the parcel of an approved resource extraction
operation, provided the facility will be located on previously disturbed
lands that have not subsequently been restored.



         (c)   On the parcel of an existing first-aid or fire
station.



         (d)   On the parcel of an existing landfill, provided
the facility will be located on previously disturbed lands that have not
subsequently been restored.



      (4)   An applicant shall seek to site a PWTF or PWTEF in
accordance with the following hierarchy, with the first designation being the
location of greatest preference:



         (a)   Within a Pinelands town, including the B-1, B-2,
M-1, MD and REC Districts.



         (b)   Within an Agricultural Production Area, including
the AP and AP/CLI Districts.



         (c)   Within the Preservation Area District, a Special
Agricultural Production Area or a Forest Area, including the PA, SAPA and
FAFA Districts.



      (5)   All PWTF and PWTEF sites shall be located to minimize
visual impacts on the surrounding area in accordance with the following
standards. In applying these standards, locations in a higher-priority
category under Subsection B(2) shall be deemed more acceptable than
lower-priority sites.



         (a)   At sites for all PWTFs and PWTEFs, the applicant
for low-intensity recreation facilities and campgrounds must demonstrate they
provide the least visual impact on residential areas and public
rights-of-way. All potential visual impacts must be analyzed to demonstrate
that the selected site provides an opportunity to minimize the visual impact
of the proposed facility.



         (b)   All PWTEF sites should be located to avoid being
visually solitary or prominent when viewed from residential areas and public
rights-of-way. The facility should be obscured by vegetation, tree cover,
topographic features and/or other structures to the maximum extent feasible.



         (c)   All PWTFs and PWTEFs shall be placed to ensure
that existing views capes, streetscapes, and landscapes are protected. The
views of and vistas from architecturally significant structures should not be
impaired or diminished by the placement of PWTFs or PWTEFs.



§ 175-183. Design standards.



   The following design standards shall apply to all PWTFs and PWTEFs
installed or constructed pursuant to the terms of this article:



   A.   PWTFs and PWTEF's shall be surrounded by a security fence. The
security fence shall be either chain link, or a style architecturally
suitable to the location, of at least six feet in height. All
telecommunications towers shall be designed with anti-climbing devices and to
prevent unauthorized access. Additional safety devices may be permitted or
required, as needed, for the safety of the public, and as approved by the
Board.



   B.   All landscaping on a parcel of land containing PWTFs and PWTEFs
shall be in accordance with the applicable landscaping requirements as set
forth in the Town of Hammonton Municipal Land Use Ordinance at § 175-136. In
addition to said requirements, the Board may also require a perimeter of
trees which, upon maturity, would be 30 feet or higher, planted in a circular
pattern around such PWTFs and PWTEFs. Additionally, any area not planted with
trees shall be landscaped to create an aesthetically pleasing environment and
to enhance the comparability with adjacent land uses.



   C.   Signs shall not be permitted except for signs displaying owner
contact information, warnings, equipment information, and safety
instructions. Such signs shall not exceed five square feet in area. No
commercial advertising shall be permitted on any PWTF and PWTEF.



   D.   PWTFs shall be of a color appropriate to the tower's locational
context and designed to make it as unobtrusive as possible, unless otherwise
required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).



   E.   All equipment shall be designed and automated to the greatest
extent possible in order to reduce the need for on-site maintenance and to
minimize the need for vehicular trips to and from the site. Access shall be
from established site access points whenever possible. Off-street parking
shall be provided as needed.



   F.   No lighting is permitted except as follows:



      (1)   PWTEFs enclosing electronic equipment may have security
and safety lighting at the entrance, provided the lighting is attached to the
facility, is focused downward, and is on timing devices and/or sensors so the
light turns off when not needed for safety or security purposes.



      (2)   No lighting is permitted on a PWTF except lighting that
specifically is required by the Federal Aviation Administration and for the
safety of aviation. Any such lighting shall be focused and shielded to the
greatest extent possible so as not to project towards nearby residential
properties.



   G.   Any proposed new telecommunications tower shall be of a
monopole design unless the applicant can demonstrate a different type of
telecommunications tower is necessary for the collocation of additional
antennas or to transmit an appropriate signal. To the extent possible, such
towers may employ camouflage technology.



   H.   No equipment on site shall be operated so as to produce noise
in excess of the limits set forth in § 175-120, except for emergency
situations.



   I.   PWTFS must be constructed in compliance with the Electronic
Industries Association/Telecommunications Industries Association 222 Revision
F standard (ANSI/TIA/ELA-222-F-96) entitled "Structural Standards for Steel
Antenna Towers and Antenna Supporting Structures" (or equivalent), as it may
be updated or amended.



   J.   PWTFs shall be maintained to assure their continued structural
integrity. The owner of the PWTF shall also perform such other maintenance on
the structure and the landscaping of the site as to assure it does not create
a visual nuisance.



§ 175-184. Collocation policy.



   A.   The Town of Hammonton's Municipal Engineer shall maintain an
inventory of existing PWTF sites within the Town of Hammonton.



   B.   An applicant proposing a PWTF at a new location shall
demonstrate that it made a reasonable attempt to find a collocation site
acceptable to the applicable engineering standard and none was practically or
economically feasible.



   C.   Each application for a new PWTF site shall be accompanied by a
plan which shall reference all existing PWTF locations in the Town of
Hammonton and any such facilities in the abutting municipalities which
provide service to areas within the Town of Hammonton.



   D.   Each application shall include a site location alternative
analysis, describing the location of other sites considered, the availability
of those sites, the extent to which other sites do or do not meet the
provider's service or engineering needs, and the reasons why the proposed
site was chosen. The analysis shall include, but is not limited to:



      (1)   How the proposed location of the PETF or PWTEF relates
to the location of any existing sites within and near the Town of Hammonton.



      (2)   How the location of the proposed PWTF or PWTEF relates
to the anticipated need for additional wireless communications antennas
within the Town of Hammonton by the applicant.



      (3)   How the proposed location of the proposed PWTF or PWTEF
relates to the objective of allocating the antennas of many different
providers of wireless communications services on the same PWTF; and



      (4)   A report, prepared and signed by a qualified expert,
documenting the capacity of any proposed PWTF for the number and type of
antennas;



      (5)   A letter of intent signed by the applicant, indicating
the applicant will share the use of any PWTF with other licensed providers of
wireless communications services.



      (6)   The applicant shall supply the Town Engineer appropriate
certified longitude and latitude information for Hammonton's G.I.S. data bank.



      (7)   How the proposed location of the PWTF or PWTEF relates
to any comprehensive plan for local community facilities which has been
approved by the Pinelands Commission pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-5.4(c).



   E.   The appropriate Land Use Board may retain its own technical
consultants as it deems necessary to provide assistance in the review of the
site location alternatives analysis or other aspects of the application. The
applicant shall bear the reasonable cost associated with such consultation,
which cost shall be deposited in accordance with the Town of Hammonton's
escrow provisions.



   F.   Any PWTF which is not operated for any continuous period of 12
months shall be considered abandoned. If there are two or more users of a
single PWTF, then the abandonment shall not become effective until all users
cease using the PWTF for any continuous period of 12 months. The owner of
such PWTF shall remove same within 90 days of notice from the Town of
Hammonton's Zoning Officer that the PWTF is abandoned. If such PWTF is not
removed within said 90 days, the Town of Hammonton may remove such PWTF at
the owner's expense. Upon the dismantling and removal of a PWTF, the property
on which the facility was located shall be restored in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.24.



   G.   New PWTFs may be constructed to a maximum height of 200 feet
above ground level. All towers shall be designed so that their height may be
increased to 200 feet if necessary to accommodate the needs of other PWTFs in
the future. Any PWTF mounted on an existing building or structure shall not
extend beyond the overall height of any such building or structure by more
than 15 feet. PWTEFs are limited to 15 feet in height. The height shall be
subject to FAA approval.



   H.   All PWTF and PWTEF shall be subject to a minimum lot size
requirement of either the square of 1/2 the height of the PWTF, or the
minimum yard requirement of the zone in which it is located, whichever is
greater. If PWTFs are located on the roof of a building or structure, the
area of the PWTFs and PWTEF shall not occupy more than 25% of the roof area.



   I.   PWTFs shall be separated from all residential dwellings by a
minimum of 200 feet. To the extent this subsection imposes a greater setback
requirement than otherwise set forth in the Town of Hammonton's Municipal
Land Use Ordinances, this section shall be controlling.



ARTICLE XIX Wind and Solar Energy Systems



[Added 3-28-2011 by Ord. No. 4-2011]



§ 175-185. Purpose.



   A.   The purpose of this article is to provide procedures, standards
and regulations for installation and maintenance of small wind energy
systems, wind energy systems and solar energy systems and to protect the Town
of Hammonton from the visual or other adverse impacts of these facilities,
while encouraging their unobtrusive development to provide the benefits of
alternative clean energy to the Town of Hammonton, its residents and
businesses.



   B.   The primary purpose of a wind or solar energy system shall be
to provide power for the principal use of the property whereon said system is
to be located rather than for the generation of power for commercial
purposes, although this provision shall not be interpreted to prohibit the
sale of excess power generated from time to time from a wind or solar energy
system designed to meet the energy needs of the principal use. For the
purposes of this subsection, the sale of excess power shall be limited so
that in no event shall an energy system be designed to generate more energy
for sale than that which is reasonably necessary to power the principal use
on the property.



§ 175-186. Small wind energy systems and solar energy systems permitted as
accessory uses; restrictions.



   A.   All small wind energy systems and solar energy systems are
permitted accessory structures and uses within all zoning districts of the
Town of Hammonton in connection with any principal use lawfully existing
within such district. Any question of whether a particular use is permitted
as an accessory use by the provisions of this section shall be determined by
the Town Planner and Zoning Officer.



   B.   No small wind energy system or solar energy system shall be
established or constructed unless a zoning permit evidencing the compliance
of such use or structure with the provisions of this section shall have first
been issued. The exception to this provision is any structure or use
requiring site plan approval.



   C.   In addition to all of the use limitations applicable in the
district in which a small wind energy system or solar energy system is
located, no such system shall be permitted unless it complies with the
following restrictions:



      (1)   No sign or other advertising, except as expressly
authorized by this section or by § 175-161 shall be maintained in connection
with an accessory use; and



      (2)   No small wind energy system or solar energy system shall
be constructed or established on any lot prior to the time of the substantial
completion of the principal structure to which it is accessory. Agricultural
uses are exempt from this provision.



   D.   Wind and solar energy systems shall only be permitted as an
accessory use on the same lot as the principal use. All energy systems
require approval from the Zoning Officer and construction office prior to
installation. Applications for an energy system shall include information
demonstrating compliance with the provisions of this subsection. In the event
that the Zoning Officer or construction office does not believe the proposed
installation satisfies the conditions of this subsection, an applicant may
request a variance from the Town of Hammonton Zoning Board of Adjustment.



§ 175-187. Development requirements for wind energy systems.



   A.   Wind energy systems (as defined herein) and wind turbines shall
be permitted in all agricultural, forest and preservation districts subject
to the following requirements:



      (1)   Minimum lot size: three acres.



      (2)   Minimum setbacks. All wind turbines shall be set back
from all property lines a distance equal to 125% of the height of the
structure including the blades.



      (3)   Wind turbines shall not be permitted in any front yard.



      (4)   Maximum height. Freestanding wind turbines shall not
exceed a height of 80 feet on lots between one acre and three acres. On lots
of three acres or more, a maximum height of 200 feet is permitted. The
maximum height shall include the height of the blades at their highest point.



      (5)   No more than one wind turbine shall be permitted per
property.



      (6)   Wind turbines shall not be permitted as a rooftop
installation.



   B.   Wind energy systems shall be subject to the bulk requirements
for that district and the following:



      (1)   Minimum lot size: three acres.



      (2)   The maximum height for a wind turbine shall not exceed
200 feet, including the height of the blades at their highest point. No
moving part shall be less then 30 feet from the nearest ground surface.



      (3)   Minimum setbacks. All wind turbines shall be set back
from all property lines a distance equal to 125% of the height of the
structure including the blades.



      (4)   Wind turbines shall not be permitted in a front yard.



      (5)   No more than one wind turbine shall be permitted per lot.



      (6)   Wind turbines shall not be permitted as a rooftop
installation.



      (7)   The tower shall be designed and installed so as not to
provide step bolts, a ladder, or other publicly accessible means of climbing
the tower for a minimum height of eight feet above the ground.



   C.   Noise. All wind energy systems shall comply with the following:



      (1)   In all other cases at a common property line sound
levels of the wind energy system shall not exceed 65 dBA.



      (2)   These levels may be exceeded during short-term events
such as utility outages and/or severe wind storms.



   D.   Wind turbines shall be designed with an automatic brake or
other similar device to prevent over-speeding and excessive pressure on the
tower structure.



   E.   Wind energy systems shall not be artificially lighted, except
to the extent required by the FAA or other applicable governmental authority.



   F.   All wind energy systems shall maintain ground-mounted
electrical and control equipment and shall be labeled and secured to prevent
unauthorized access.



   G.   All moving parts of the wind energy system shall be a minimum
of 30 feet above ground level.



   H.   The blades on the wind energy system shall be constructed of a
corrosion- resistant material.



   I.   All guy wires or any part of the wind energy system shall be
located on the same lot as the energy system.



   J.   Nothing contained herein shall waive any obligation on the part
of any developer of a wind energy system to comply with all FAA regulations
regarding interference with aircraft.



§ 175-188. Development requirements for solar energy systems.



   A.   Solar panels shall be permitted as a rooftop installation in
any zoning district. The solar panels shall not exceed a height of 12 inches
from the rooftop. In no event shall the placement of the solar panels result
in a total height, including building and panels, in excess of that which is
permitted in that particular zone for the principal building.



   B.   Solar panels shall be permitted as ground arrays only in
nonresidential zones in accordance with the following:



      (1)   All ground arrays shall be set back a distance in
conformance with the bulk standards for accessory structures in commercial
districts as provided herein.



      (2)   Ground arrays shall not be permitted in the B-1 or B-2
Zone.



      (3)   Ground arrays shall be located so that any glare is
directed away from an adjoining property that contains either a residential
or nonresidential structure. If the ground arrays cannot be situated in such
a way to avoid any glare on an adjoining property which contains either a
residential or other structure designed for human occupancy then the
Applicant shall be required to install screening along the property line to
the satisfaction of the Town Planner.



      (4)   Ground arrays shall not exceed a height of 15 feet.



      (5)   Ground arrays shall be structures included in the
calculation of lot coverage. The lot coverage including ground arrays shall
not exceed the permitted lot coverage within a zoning district.



§ 175-189. General requirements for all small wind energy systems and solar
energy systems.



   A.   Wind and solar energy systems shall not be used for displaying
any advertisement except for reasonable identification of the manufacturer or
operator of the system. In no case shall any identification be visible from a
property line or a public right-of-way.



   B.   The design of wind or solar energy systems shall, to the extent
reasonably possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening and
landscaping that will blend the facility into the natural setting and
existing environment.



   C.   All applications for a wind or solar energy system shall
conform to the provisions of §§ 267-7 through 267-18 of the Town of
Hammonton Tree Preservation and Maintenance Ordinance, with respect to tree
removal. An applicant shall locate a wind or solar energy system so that tree
removal is not required to the extent practical.



   D.   The installation of a wind or solar energy system shall conform
to the National Electric Code as adopted by the New Jersey Department of
Community Affairs.



   E.   The installation of a wind or solar energy system is subject to
all Atlantic City Electric Company requirements or the requirements of any
other entity supplying power to the area for interconnection.



   F.   The provisions of § 175-106 shall not apply to wind and solar
energy systems with regard to height. Wind and solar energy systems shall
conform to the height restrictions provided in this article.



   G.   Abandonment.



      (1)   A small wind energy system or solar energy system that
is out of service for a continuous twelve-month period will be deemed to have
been abandoned.



      (2)   The Zoning Officer may issue a notice of abandonment to
the owner. The notice shall be sent via regular and certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the owner of record.



      (3)   Any abandoned system shall be removed at the owner's
sole expense within six months after the owner receives a notice of
abandonment from the municipality. If the system is not removed within six
months of receipt of notice from the Town notifying the owner of such
abandonment, the Town may remove the system as set forth below.



      (4)   When an owner of a wind or solar energy system has been
notified to remove same and has not done so six months after receiving said
notice, then the Town may remove such system and place a lien upon the
property for the cost of the removal. If removed by the owner, a demolition
permit shall be obtained prior to the system being removed and the facility
shall thereafter be removed. Upon removal, the site shall be cleaned,
restored and revegetated to blend with the existing surrounding vegetation at
the time of abandonment.



 



 


Notes

2 
2.   Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed the former definition of
"certificate of conformity," which immediately followed this definition.

3 
3.   Editor's Note: The former definition of "cluster development," which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 3-25-2002 by Ord. No.
12-2002.

3 
3.   Editor's Note: The former definition of "Historic, Archaeological and
Cultural Preservation Board," which immediately followed this definition, was
repealed 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989.

4 
4.   Editor's Note: The former definition of "historic site," which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 4-10-1989 by Ord. No.
7-1989.

6 
6.   Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 30:4-23 was repealed by L. 1987. c. 116, §
30, effective June 7, 1989. See now N.J.S.A. 30:4-27.2.

7 
7.   Editor's Note: The former definition of "notice of filing," which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 4-10-1989 by Ord. No.
7-1989.

8 
8.   Editor's Note: The former definition of "Pinelands development
approval," which immediately followed this definition, was repealed 4-10-1989
by Ord. No. 7-1989.

9 
9.   Editor's Note: this article also repealed the former definition of
"public services," which immediately followed this definition.

10 
10.   Editor's Note: The former definition of "residential cluster," which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 3-25-2002 by Ord. No.
12-2002.

11 
11.   Editor's Note: The former definition of "specimen tree," which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 7-28-1997 by Ord. No.
10-1997.

12 
12.   Editor's Note: The former definition of "standard subsurface sewage
disposal system," added 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989, was repealed 7-28-1997
by Ord. No. 10-1997.

18 
18.   Editor's Note: The Sewer Department was inactivated 1-24-2011 by
Ord. No. 3-2011. See now Ch. 53, Public Utilities Department; Public Works
Manager.

19 
19.   Editor's Note: The Sewer Department was inactivated 1-24-2011 by
Ord. No. 3-2011. See now Ch. 53, Public Utilities Department; Public Works
Manager.

16 
16.   Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 46:23-1 was repealed by L. 1953, c. 358, p.
1941, § 7, effective January 1, 1954. See now N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.

18 
18.   Editor's Note: Former § 175-93, Cluster development, as amended
4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989, was repealed 3-25-2002 by Ord. No. 12-2002.

19 
19.   Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.11.

20 
20.   Editor's Note: Former Ch. 118, Motor Vehicles: Inoperable, was
repealed 7-23-2001 by Ord. No. 26-2001.

21 
21.   Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, regarding storage or discharge
of hazardous waste, as amended 4-10-1989 by Ord. No. 7-1989, was repealed
7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 10-1997.

22 
22.   Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included in a pocket at the end of
this volume.

32 
32.   Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(4), regarding single-family
detached dwellings, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed
10-27-2003 by Ord. No. 24-2003. this article also provided that the
provisions shall not apply to existing residential development in the B-2
Zoning District on existing lots of record and that existing residential uses
in the B-2 Zoning District shall continue as permitted conditional uses until
such time as the residential use is abandoned.

33 
33.   Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(2), regarding single-family
attached/multifamily dwelling units, was repealed 12-27-1999 by Ord. No.
35-1999.

34 
34.   Editor's Note: Section 3 of this article also provided that
"Residential buildings shall also conform to the distance requirements for
similar uses in the R-3 Zoning Districts."

35 
35.   Editor's Note: Section 3 of this article also provided that
"Residential buildings shall also conform to the distance requirements for
similar uses in the R-3 Zoning Districts."

36 
36.    Editor's Note: Section 3 of this article also provided that
"Residential buildings shall also conform to the distance requirements for
similar uses in the R-3 Zoning Districts."

37 
37.   Editor's Note: This subsection was included as adopted by the Town
of Hammonton.

2 
2 Source: N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(a).

3 
3 Source: 7:85.5(c) and New Jersey BMP Manual Chapter 4.


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2018 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.



