Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 3-13-2018 by Ord. No. MC3635]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Township of Irvington of
a general and permanent nature adopted by the Municipal Council of the
Township of Irvington, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters
and sections by General Code, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 650,
together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and
enacted as the "Code of the Township of Irvington," hereinafter known and
referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances; authority to enforce
Revised Code numbering.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force. This ordinance specifically repeals the Revised Code of
the Town of Irvington, adopted January 13, 1981, by Ord. No. MC 2622, as
amended and supplemented; provided, however, that the Municipal Court
is authorized to enforce ordinances as numbered and codified in the 1981
Revised Code or in this recodified Code of the Township of Irvington.
Chapter and section numbers in the 1981 Revised Code, as amended and
supplemented, may be referenced in enforcement proceedings.
§ 1-3. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Municipal Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the
public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance
shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Township
of Irvington by impressing thereon the Seal of the Township, as provided by
law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of
the Township, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Township of Irvington" shall
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5
1:3
be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-6. Publication; filing.
The Municipal Clerk of the Township of Irvington, pursuant to law, shall
cause this Adopting Ordinance to be published, in the manner required,
in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Sufficient copies
of the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection
by the public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this Adopting Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Municipal Clerk or someone authorized and
directed by the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book
containing the Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of
the public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent
to the effective date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically
as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by
reference until such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements
to said Code book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted
therein.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a fee
authorized by the Township. The Clerk shall also arrange for procedures for
the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Township
of Irvington to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or
any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to one or more
of the following: a fine of not more than $2,000, imprisonment for not more
than 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, in the
discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
§ 1-5 IRVINGTON CODE § 1-10
1:4
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-12. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
A. Except as provided in § 1-13, Ordinances saved from repeal, below, all
ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions
contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are hereby repealed;
provided, however, that such repeal shall only be to the extent of such
inconsistency, and any valid legislation of the Township of Irvington
which is not in conflict with the provisions of the Code shall be deemed
to remain in full force and effect.
B. Repeal of specific ordinances. The Municipal Council of the Township of
Irvington has determined that the following chapters and articles of the
1981 Revised Code are no longer in effect and hereby specifically
repeals the following legislation:
(1) Former Chapter 5, Administration, Article XVI, Traffic Safety
Advisory Committee, of the 1981 Revised Code.
(2) Former Chapter 5, Administration, Article XVII, Industrial
Commission, of the 1981 Revised Code.
(3) Former Chapter 5, Administration, Article XXIV, Parking Advisory
Committee, of the 1981 Revised Code.
(4) Former Chapter 12, Education, Board of, Article I, Composition, of
the 1981 Revised Code.
(5) Former Chapter 12, Education, Board of, Article II, Use of Paging
Devices on School Property, of the 1981 Revised Code.
(6) Former Chapter 25, Irvington General Hospital, of the 1981
Revised Code.
(7) Former Chapter 77, Cellular Telephones, Article I, Mobile
Communications Device Use in Vehicles, of the 1981 Revised Code.
(8) Former Chapter 89, Discriminatory Practices, Article I, Cavassing
for Real Estate Listings, of the 1981 Revised Code.
(9) Former Chapter 89, Discriminatory Practices, Article II,
Community Relations Board, of the 1981 Revised Code.
§ 1-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-12
1:5
§ 1-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
(10) Former Chapter 134A, Loitering, of the 1981 Revised Code.
(11) Former Chapter 135, Pay Telephones, of the 1981 Revised Code.
(12) Former Chapter 136, Parks and Recreation, Article I, Tennis Courts
and Swimming Pools, of the 1981 Revised Code.
(13) Former Chapter 139, Peace and Good Order, Article II, Drug
Paraphernalia, of the 1981 Revised Code.
(14) Former Chapter 139, Peace and Good Order, Article VI, Weapons-
Free Zone, of the 1981 Revised Code.
(15) Former Chapter 164, Sexual Offenders, of the 1981 Revised Code.
(16) Former Chapter 167, Smoke Control, of the 1981 Revised Code.
(17) Former Chapter 168, Smoking, Article I, Smoking in Public Places,
§§ 168-1 through 168-4 and 168-5, of the 1981 Revised Code.
(18) Former Chapter 168, Smoking, Article II, Smoking in Township
Places, of the 1981 Revised Code.
(19) Former Chapter 169, Solid Waste Collectors, of the 1981 Revised
Code.
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to December 12, 2017.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
§ 1-12 IRVINGTON CODE § 1-13
1:6
§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the Township's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance adopting or amending the Zoning Map.
M. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Municipal Council that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed
had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth in
Schedule A1 attached hereto and made a part hereof are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance.
(Chapter and section number references are to the ordinances as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)
C. Nomenclature. Throughout the Code, the following nomenclature
changes have been made:
(1) "Police Department" ("Department of Police") was changed to
"Public Safety Department" ("Department of Public Safety").
(2) "Director of Police" ("Police Director") was changed to "Director of
the Department of Public Safety."
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-14B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 3-13-2018 by Ord. No. MC
3635." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
Township offices.
§ 1-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7
(3) "License Division," "Bureau of Licenses," "License Bureau" and
"Division of License" was changed to "Division of Licensing."
(4) References to the Map Filing Law, N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq. (P.L.
1960, Ch. 141) were updated to refer to N.J.S.A. 46:26B-1 et seq.
(P.L.2011, Ch. 217).
(5) "Town Clerk" and "Township Clerk" were changed to "Municipal
Clerk."
§ 1-14 IRVINGTON CODE § 1-14
1:8
ARTICLE II
Definitions and Word Usage
[Adopted 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622 (Ch. 1, Art. II, of the 1981
Revised Code)]
§ 1-15. Definition of terms.
As used in the Revised Code of the Town of Irvington and in any other
ordinance of the Town, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated unless the context clearly indicates another meaning or unless
otherwise specifically provided in another chapter of the Revised Code or
ordinance of the Town:
CHARTER, TOWN CHARTER — Mayor-Council Plan D, as set out in N.J.S.A.
40:69A-61 through 40:69A-67, as amended and supplemented, and all other
statutory provisions of the state lawfully applicable to the Town.2
CODE or REVISED CODE — The Revised Code of the Town of Irvington,
New Jersey.
COUNCIL or MUNICIPAL COUNCIL — The Municipal Council of the Town
of Irvington, New Jersey, the local legislative body of the Town, constituted
and elected pursuant to the Charter.
COUNTY — The County of Essex in the State of New Jersey.
DEPARTMENT — An organizational unit of the Town government,
established or designated by or pursuant to this Revised Code or other
ordinance of the Town as a department.
DIRECTOR — The administrative head of a department.
GOVERNING BODY — The Municipal Council as constituted under the
Charter.
MONTH — A calendar month unless otherwise specifically provided.
ORDINANCE — The Revised Code and any other act of local legislation
or regulation heretofore or hereafter adopted by the Municipal Council,
required by law to be reduced to writing, read at more than one meeting,
published and formally adopted pursuant to law.
OWNER (APPLIED TO A BUILDING OR LAND) — Includes any part owner,
any corporation, joint owner, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by
the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
PERSON — Any corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization or
other entity, as well as an individual.
RESOLUTION — Any act or regulation of the Municipal Council required to
be reduced to writing, but which may be finally passed at the meeting at
which it is introduced without formal publication.
STATE — The State of New Jersey.
2. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:69A-61 et seq. was repealed by P.L. 1981, c. 465. See now N.J.S.A.
40:69A-31 et seq.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:9
STREET — Includes a highway, road, avenue, court, public lane or alley;
and it shall also be construed to include a sidewalk or footpath unless the
contrary is expressed or unless such construction would be inconsistent
with the manifest intent of the Municipal Council.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Irvington, in the County of Essex, State of
New Jersey.[Amended 3-13-2018 by Ord. No. MC 3635]
YEAR — A calendar year, unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 1-16. Word usage.
In the Revised Code and in other ordinances of the Town, the following rules
of word usage shall apply unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
A. Computation of time. In computing any period of time, the day of the act
or event after which the designated period begins to run shall not be
included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included,
unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, in which event the
period shall run until the end of the next day which is neither a
Saturday, Sunday nor a holiday. When a period of time prescribed or
allowed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and
legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation.
B. Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and
be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as
well as to males.
C. Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and
thing.
D. "Preceding" and "following." The words "preceding" and "following"
mean next before and next after, respectively.
E. "Shall" and "may." The word "shall" is mandatory. The word "may" is
permissive.
F. Time. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well
as the past and present.
G. "Writing" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any
representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or
otherwise.
§ 1-15 IRVINGTON CODE § 1-16
1:10
ARTICLE III
Penalties
[Adopted 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622 (Ch. 1, Art. III, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 1-17. Violations and penalties.
A. Except as hereinafter provided, whenever in the Revised Code or in any
other ordinance of the Town or in any rule, regulation or order
promulgated pursuant to such Revised Code or other ordinance of the
Town any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an
offense, or whenever in such Code or in such other Town ordinance,
rule, regulation or order the doing of any act is required or the failure to
do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense, where no specific
penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of the
Revised Code or of any other ordinance of the Town or any rule,
regulation or order promulgated pursuant to such Code or other Town
ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or by
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days, or by both such fine
and imprisonment. In addition to the aforementioned penalties, the
court may impose as a condition of sentence a term of community
service not to exceed 90 days. [Amended 3-27-1984 by Ord. No. MC
2724; 3-22-1988 by Ord. No. 28503]
B. Whenever any provision of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated limits
the authority of the Town to punish the violation of any particular
provision of the Revised Code or other Town ordinance or rule,
regulation or order promulgated pursuant thereto to a fine of less
amount than that provided in this section or imprisonment for a shorter
term than that provided in this section, then the violation of such
particular provision of the Revised Code or other Town ordinance, rule,
regulation or order shall be punished by the imposition of not more than
the maximum fine or imprisonment so authorized or by both such fine
and imprisonment.
C. Each day any violation of the Revised Code or any other Town ordinance
or rule, regulation or order promulgated pursuant thereto shall
continue shall constitute a separate offense, unless otherwise provided.
D. Whenever any such fine is imposed upon any corporation, such fine and
costs and charges incident thereto may be collected in an action of debt
or in such other manner as may be provided by law.
E. The provisions of this section shall be applicable to the violation of any
ordinance adopted as an amendment of or addition to this chapter and
in which no other penalty provision is included.4
3. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
4. Editor's Note: Original § 1-15F of the 1981 Revised Code, Minimum fine, added 9-8-1987
by Ord. No. MC 2835, as amended, which listed penalties for all sections throughout the
Code, which previously followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code
§ 1-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-17
1:11
F. The Municipal Council may suspend or revoke any license issued by the
Township of Irvington for a second or subsequent violation of any of the
provisions of the Revised Code of the Township of Irvington, including,
but not limited to, hours of operation. The licensee shall be given notice
of the violation and an opportunity to be heard by the Municipal Council
on the sole issue of why the license should not be suspended or
revoked. Notice shall be sent certified mail, return receipt requested, to
the address as set forth on the application for the license. The
suspension or revocation of the license shall be in addition to any other
penalties allowed by law. [Added 9-9-2003 by Ord. No. MC 3232]
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). The penalties that previously appeared in § 1-15F
have been relocated into the applicable chapters of the Township Code.
§ 1-17 IRVINGTON CODE § 1-17
1:12
ARTICLE IV
Local Supplemental Violations Bureau Schedule
[Adopted 2-15-2012 by Ord. No. MC 3457 (Ch. 1, Art. V, of the 1981
Revised Code); amended in its entirety 1-26-2016 by Ord. No. MC
3563]
§ 1-18. Schedule of Fines established.5
§ 1-19. Allocation and distribution of payable amount.
A. Pursuant to R. 7:12-4, the following Local Supplemental Violations
Bureau Schedule of Designated Offenses (revised effective December
15, 2015) and payable amounts has been approved by the vicinage
Assignment Judge and shall be in effect for offenses committed on and
after December 15, 2015. This Local Schedule shall be prominently
posted for public inspection at the location of the Violations Bureau.
B. The Local Supplemental Violations Bureau Schedule that was prepared,
pursuant to R. 7:12-4, for offenses committed prior to the effective date
of this schedule is on file with the Municipal Court Administrator and is
available for public inspection upon request.
A. Violations Bureau payments. Parts I and II of the Schedule of Fines list
specific amounts that are payable through the Violations Bureau for
designated traffic and nontraffic offenses, pursuant to New Jersey Court
Rule 7:12-4. However, payment for any of those listed offenses, or any
other matter, may not be made through the Violations Bureau if the law
enforcement officer marks on the complaint-summons that a court
appearance is required.
B. Allocation of payable amounts between fines, assessments and court
costs.
(1) In Part I (Traffic Violations), the payable amount established in this
Local Supplemental Violations Bureau Schedule, for each offense,
includes at least a fine, court costs (which may equal but not
exceed the fine) and amounts required by statute to be assessed.
These amounts are:
(a) For the Body Armor Replacement Fund: $1.
(b) For the New Jersey Spinal Cord Research Fund: $1.
(c) For the New Jersey Forensic DNA Laboratory Fund: $2.
(d) For the Autism Medical Research and Treatment Fund: $1.
5. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Fines adopted as part of Ord. No. MC 3563 consists of Part
I, Traffic Section Designated Offenses, and Part II, Nontraffic Section Designated Offenses.
All of the fine amounts listed in the Schedule of Fines have been relocated to the
applicable sections of this Township Code. An intact version of the Schedule of Fines is
not included in the Township Code but is on file with the Municipal Court.
§ 1-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-19
1:13
§ 1-20. Additional penalties; appearance of defendant; bail as
payment; defense by affidavit.
(e) For the New Jersey Brain Injury Fund: $1.
(2) In Part II (Nontraffic Violations), the payable amount established in
this Local Schedule, for each offense, includes a fine and court
costs (which may equal but not exceed the fine).
C. Allocation and distribution of court costs. A portion of the total court
costs allocated, pursuant to § 1-19A of this Local Schedule, shall be
distributed upon collection in accordance with N.J.S.A. 22A:3-4 and
N.J.S.A. 2B:12-30, as follows:
(1) For all violations payable through the Violations Bureau, pursuant
to the Statewide Violations Bureau Schedule or a local schedule, $2
shall be collected by the Municipal Court Administrator and
deposited into the Automated Traffic System Fund and $3 shall be
collected by the Municipal Court Administrator and deposited into
the Automated Traffic System Statewide Modernization Fund. This
portion of court costs cannot be suspended.
(2) For all violations of the provisions of Title 39, or any other motor
vehicle or traffic violation payable through the Violations Bureau,
pursuant to the Statewide Violations Bureau Schedule or a local
schedule, $0.50 shall be collected by the Municipal Court
Administrator and deposited into the Emergency Medical
Technician Training Fund. This portion of court costs cannot be
suspended.
(3) Any remaining court costs shall be collected by the Municipal Court
Administrator for distribution to the municipality.
A. Additional penalties for failure to appear on return dates.
(1) Motor vehicle, traffic and parking cases. For offenses listed on this
Local Schedule, the following additional penalties will be added to
the payable amount, as indicated:
(a) When a supplemental notice is sent, $10 will be added to the
payable amount.
(b) When a notice of proposed suspension for a parking violation is
sent, $10 will be added to the payable amount.
(c) When an order to suspend is issued for a parking violation, $15
will be added to the payable amount.
(d) A DMV fee of $3 is also to be added to the total payable amount
due upon the issuance of an order to suspend.
§ 1-19 IRVINGTON CODE § 1-20
1:14
(e) When a warrant is issued, unless the judge otherwise orders,
the amount of the bail indicated on the warrant shall be as
follows:
[1] Parking offenses: the payable amount plus $15.
[2] All other listed offenses: the payable amount plus $25.
(f) Note: Under the provision of N.J.S.A. 39:5-9, costs, not to
exceed $33, may be deducted by the court from forfeited bail in
traffic cases.
(2) Nontraffic cases. For offenses listed in Part II of this Schedule,
N.J.S.A. 2B:12-31 permits the Municipal Court to order the
suspension of a defendant's driving privilege for failure to appear
at any scheduled court appearance. The following procedures may
be used by the court to effectuate that process:
(a) Send a "Notice of Proposed Suspension of Driving Privileges
for Failure to Appear" to the defendant. This notice may be
used for violations that are payable on this Schedule, as well as
for those violations that are not. Note: Unlike traffic matters,
no fee may be assessed for the mailing of this notice.
(b) Should the defendant fail to respond to the notice of proposed
suspension, the court may issue an order of suspension. When
the court issues the order, $25 [$10 (notice) + $15 (order)] will
be added to the total payable amount.
(c) A DMV fee of $3 is also to be added to the payable amount,
upon the issuance of the order of suspension.
(d) When a warrant is issued, unless the judge otherwise orders,
the amount of the bail indicated on the warrant shall be the
amount of the payable amount plus $50.
B. Appearance of defendant in certain cases. If, in the opinion of the officer
issuing the complaint-summons, circumstances indicate that the
defendant should appear in court, the officer has the option to check
the "Court Appearance Required" box on the complaint-summons, in
which case the matter may not be processed in the Violations Bureau.
C. Authorization to apply bail against fine(s) and costs. By executing the
form of Authorization to Apply Bail against Fine(s) and Cost and Waiver
of Rights, a defendant against whom a warrant has been issued waives
the rights to a lawyer and a trial, enters a plea of guilty to the offense
charged and authorizes the Municipal Court Administrator to apply the
bail posted toward the payment of fines, assessments and costs owed.
This form may be used for all offenses payable through the Violations
Bureau.
D. Defense by affidavit in certain cases. For any offense not listed on this
Schedule or on a local schedule, a court appearance is required, unless
§ 1-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-20
1:15
the court authorizes a defendant by affidavit in accordance with the
provisions of New Jersey Court Rule 7:12-3. For offenses involving
traffic accidents resulting in personal injury, a court appearance is also
required.
§ 1-20 IRVINGTON CODE § 1-20
1:16
Chapter 7
ADMINISTRATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Attendance at meetings — See Ch. 13.
Commissions, committees, councils and other
agencies — See Ch. 22.
Municipal Court — See Ch. 26.
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 32.
Political fund-raising — See Ch. 91.
Purchasing — See Ch. 100.
Residency requirements — See Ch. 105.
Records — See Ch. 462.
§ 1-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-20
1:17

ARTICLE I
In General
§ 7-1. Governmental organization generally. [Amended 8-12-1969 by
Ord. No. MC 2229; 8-11-1970 by Ord. No. MC 2260; 5-10-1972 by
Ord. No. MC 2318; 6-10-1975 by Ord. No. MC 2451; 11-10-1978 by
Ord. No. MC 25486]
There shall be the following administrative departments and offices in the
government of the Town:
§ 7-2. Powers and duties of department heads generally.
The head of each department of the Town government shall, subject to the
Charter, the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the Town:
A. Office of the Mayor.
B. Office of the Municipal Clerk.
C. Office of the Town Attorney.
D. Office of the Legislative Research Officer.
E. Department of Administration.
F. Department of Revenue and Finance.
G. Department of Parks and Recreation.
H. Department of Health. [Added 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
I. Department of Housing Services. [Added 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC
3511]
J. Department of Public Works. [Added 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC
3511]
K. Department of Public Safety. [Added 10-15-2015 by Ord. No. MC
3553]
A. Devote full time as required for the proper and efficient discharge of the
duties of his office.
B. Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of the
department.
6. Editor's Note: The following ordinances have amended this section and made changes to
the organization of the Township government: Former § 5-1F, Department of Police, and
former § 5-1G, Department of Fire, were repealed 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553.
Former § 5-1I, Department of Neighborhood Services, added 3-10-2009 by Ord. No. MC
3392, was repealed 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511. Former § 5-1I, Department of Public
Works, was repealed 3-10-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3395. Former § 5-1J, Department of
Housing Services, as amended, was repealed 3-10-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3394. Former
§ 5-1L, Department of Health and Welfare, was repealed 3-10-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3393.
Former § 5-1M, Department of Building Construction, was repealed 8-24-1982 by Ord. No.
MC 2666.
§ 7-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-2
1:19
§ 7-3. Vacancies in certain offices. [Amended 3-23-1999 by Ord. No.
MC 31137]
Whenever a vacancy exists by resignation, removal, death or otherwise in
any office of director of a department, head of a division or bureau or
office, the Mayor may temporarily fill such vacancy in cases not otherwise
specifically provided for in the Charter, this Code, other ordinances or
general laws, by appointing an acting director or acting head from among
the existing officers and employees of the Town, who shall perform all
the duties and functions of such department, office or bureau head until
such office shall be filled permanently. Any such appointment of an acting
head or director shall terminate not later than 90 days after the date of
the appointment, unless the Council shall by resolution authorize one or
more extensions thereof. Any person serving beyond the ninety-day time
period proscribed by law without the consent of the Municipal Council shall
be removed from the municipal payroll in such capacity immediately upon
notification of the Council to the administration.
§ 7-4. Interest of officers in contracts.
No officer or employee, elected or appointed, in the Town government
shall be interested directly or indirectly in any contract or job for work or
materials, or the profits thereof, to be furnished or performed for the Town,
and no such officer or employee shall be interested directly or indirectly
in any contract or job for work or materials, or the profits thereof, to be
furnished or performed for any person operating any interurban railway,
C. Prescribe the internal organization of the department and the duties of
his subordinates and assistants.
D. Administer the work of the department through the divisions
established by this chapter and such other units of administration as he
may find necessary or desirable.
E. Appoint officers and employees employed within the department and
assign functions, powers and duties to them, subject to the provisions of
Title 11 (civil service statutes) of the Revised Statutes.
F. Delegate such of his powers as he may deem necessary for the efficient
administration of the department to be exercised under his direction
and supervision of division heads.
G. Report at least annually to the Mayor and Council on the work of the
department during the preceding year.
H. Attend regular Council meetings and be available to answer questions
from citizens and Council members upon advance notice to the Mayor
by the Council of the necessity for the attendance of specific
department heads. [Added 5-14-1991 by Ord. No. MC 2925]
7. Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor 3-27-1999; said veto was
overridden by a two-thirds vote of the Council 4-27-1999 by Res. No. MC 99-0427-33.
§ 7-2 IRVINGTON CODE § 7-4
1:20
street railway, gasworks, waterworks, electric light or power plant, heating
plant, telegraph line, telephone exchange or other public utility within the
territorial limits of the Town.
§ 7-5. Annual audit of Town's accounts.
The Council shall cause to be made an annual audit of the Town's accounts
and financial transactions as required by law. Such annual audit shall be
made by a registered municipal accountant of the state selected by the
Council.
§ 7-6. Supervision of statutory agencies.
The administrative functions, powers and duties of statutory and other
agencies of the Town government not allocated and assigned by this chapter
shall be subject to the supervision of the Mayor except as otherwise
specifically required by law, and for this purpose such statutory and other
agencies are allocated and assigned to the office of the Mayor.
§ 7-7. Police and Fire Chaplains and Surgeon. [Amended 3-22-1983
by Ord. No. MC 2690; 9-29-1992 by Ord. No. MC 2957; 10-14-2015
by Ord. No. MC 3553]
The Chaplains for the Department of Public Safety and the Police and Fire
Surgeon shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of
the Council for a term of office coinciding with that of the Mayor, and their
compensation shall be fixed by ordinance. The four Chaplains and the Police
and Fire Surgeon shall serve both the Division of Police and the Division of
Fire within the Department of Public Safety.
§ 7-8. Transfers of divisions, bureaus or units.
Whenever, after organization, a division, bureau, unit or unit of functional
duties shall, by ordinance, be transferred from one department to another
department of the Town government, all the functions, powers and duties
thereof shall be and are transferred as of the effective date of the ordinance.
§ 7-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-8
1:21

ARTICLE II
Rules of Council
§ 7-9. Adherence to rules.
The rules of procedure set forth in this article shall govern the conduct of
the meetings of the Town Council.
§ 7-10. Robert's Rules of Procedure.
Except as may be provided in the Charter, questions of order, the methods
of organization and the conduct of business of the Town Council shall be
governed by Robert's Rules of Procedure in all cases to which they are
applicable and in which they are not inconsistent with the rules of the
Council.
§ 7-11. Regular meetings. [Amended 9-11-1984 by Ord. No. MC
2742; 1-8-1985 by Ord. No. MC 2762; 1-14-1986 by Ord. No. MC
2804; 6-10-1987 by Ord. No. MC 2829; 4-12-1988 by Ord. No. MC
2851]
A. The Council shall meet at least once a month for a regular meeting on
the dates and times fixed by the Council, as permitted by law. All
regular meetings of the Council shall be held in the Council Chambers
or such other place as the Council may designate. [Amended
10-10-2018 by Ord. No. MC 3667]
B. (Reserved)8
C. Attendance at Municipal Council meetings. Every department head
shall attend regular Municipal Council meetings at a time designated
by the Council upon notification to the Mayor. In the event that the
department head is unable to attend these meetings, he or she shall
designate someone from his or her department to attend in his or her
absence, provided that the representative must have knowledge of the
workings of the department he or she represents and have decisionmaking
rank or authority within that department. Each person
addressing the Council members and/or department heads or their
designee during these meetings shall step up to the microphone
provided for this purpose, shall give his or her name and address in an
audible tone of voice for the records, and unless further time is granted
by the presiding officer, shall limit his address to five minutes. All
remarks shall be addressed to the presiding officer. No person, other
than Council members, department heads and the person having the
floor, shall be permitted to enter into any discussion, either directly or
through a Council member or department head or his or her designee,
without the permission of the presiding officer. Council members and
department heads shall be limited in their responses to five minutes in
8. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, regarding rescheduling meetings, was repealed
10-10-2018 by Ord. No. MC 3667.
§ 7-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-11
1:23
§ 7-12. Special meetings.
§ 7-13. Premeeting conferences. [Amended 1-8-1985 by Ord. No.
MC 2762; 8-12-1986 by Ord. No. MC 2811; 6-10-1987 by Ord. No.
MC 2829; 4-12-1988 by Ord. No. MC 2851]
aggregate per response. [Added 2-11-1991 by Ord. No. MC 2921;
amended 8-10-1993 by Ord. No. MC 2979]
A. The Mayor or the President of the Council may, and upon written
request of a majority of the members of the Council shall, call a special
meeting of the Council. The request and call for a special meeting shall
specify the purpose of the meeting, and no business shall be transacted
at any special meeting other than that so specified. The call for a special
meeting shall be filed with the Municipal Clerk, who shall serve notice
upon each Councilman as hereinafter provided at least 24 hours prior to
the time for which the meeting is called; provided that the Mayor or the
President of the Council may determine that an emergency exists
affecting the health or safety of the people which requires consideration
by the Council within a shorter time, and upon such determination,
which the Mayor or the President of the Council shall set forth in the
call, the call may be filed with the Municipal Clerk at any time not less
than three hours prior to the time set for the meeting.
B. Upon the filing of any call for a special meeting, the Municipal Clerk
shall forthwith give notice thereof by telephone or telegraph to each
Councilman, at such place as he shall have previously designated for
that purpose, and shall also serve or cause to be served a written copy
of the call upon each Councilman, by delivery of a copy to him
personally or by the leaving of a copy at his usual place of abode. The
Public Safety Department shall cooperate with the Municipal Clerk in
effectuating such service of notice. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord.
No. MC 3553]
C. Upon written waiver of notice executed by all members of the Council, a
special meeting may be held without prior notice notwithstanding the
above provisions of this section.
A. The Council may hold premeeting conferences in preparation for
regular meetings, as permitted by law. When held, the time shall be
fixed by the Council and scheduled on the same day as the regular
meeting. All premeeting conferences of the Council shall be held in the
Council Chambers or such other place as the Council may designate. A
majority of the Council may request the Mayor and/or any department
head or officer of the Township to attend any premeeting conference,
and the department head or officer, when requested to do so, shall
attend the conference. [Amended 11-12-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3516;
10-10-2018 by Ord. No. MC 3667]
B. (Reserved)9
§ 7-11 IRVINGTON CODE § 7-13
1:24
§ 7-14. Agenda; legal bills.
C. The Mayor of the Township of Irvington upon written notice from the
Municipal Council shall be required to attend one premeeting
conference per month. Upon receiving written notice, the Mayor shall
respond and advise the Council of what date he/she will be in
attendance at the Council's premeeting conference. [Added
11-13-1996 by Ord. No. MC 304810]
A. All reports, communications, ordinances, resolutions, claims, license
reports, contract documents or other matters to be submitted to the
Council by its members or by the administration shall, at least 32
business hours prior to each Council meeting, be delivered to the
Municipal Clerk, whereupon the Municipal Clerk shall immediately
prepare a calendar of such matters, together with such additional
matters that he may have to present, in conformity with the prescribed
order of business as provided by this article, and shall furnish a copy
thereof to each member of the Council. He shall furnish the Mayor, the
Business Administrator, the Legislative Research Officer, directors of
the departments and all other officers with a copy of the same prior to
the Council meeting and as far in advance of the meeting as time for
preparation will permit. None of the foregoing matters shall be
presented to the Council by the administrative heads of the several
departments of the Town government except those of an urgent nature,
and the same when so presented shall have the written approval of the
Mayor before presentation to the Council; provided, however, that the
Council may bring before it any matters that it determines necessary.
B. Legal bills. [Added 2-24-1998 by Ord. No. MC 308911]
(1) Any legal bills submitted for Council approval for payment shall be
accompanied by the following:
(a) A copy of the contract for legal services previously approved by
the administration and Municipal Council.
(b) A resolution indicating the name of the case or cases that such
bills or invoices apply to and acknowledgment that the Law
Department for the Township of Irvington has reviewed the
invoice for the scope of services performed and acknowledges
that such has been performed.
(c) Attached to the resolution an itemized invoice from the
attorney or law firm requesting to have the bill approved for
payment by the Municipal Council.
9. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, regarding rescheduling meetings, was repealed
10-10-2018 by Ord. No. MC 3667.
10.Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor; said veto was overridden by a twothirds
vote of the Council 12-10-1996 by Res. No. MC 96-1210-107.
11.Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor; said veto was overridden by a twothirds
vote of the Council 3-23-1998 by Res. No. MC 98-0324-23.
§ 7-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-14
1:25
§ 7-15. Introduction for consideration and adoption of ordinances.
[Added 6-28-1983 by Ord. No. MC 2702]
§ 7-16. Reappointment or replacement of members of boards,
committees, commissions or authorities. [Added 1-10-1984 by Ord.
No. MC 2719]
The members of the Municipal Council shall not submit names to the
Municipal Clerk to be placed on the agenda for consideration for
reappointment or replacement of one or more members of any board,
committee, commission or authority more than one month prior to the
expiration of the citizen member's term of office.
§ 7-17. Organization of Council; President; committees.
(2) This does not apply to matters settled, adjusted or disposed of by
counsel representing the Township's insurance carrier.
(3) The above shall be submitted at least 32 business hours prior to
each Council meeting.
A. Procedure.
(1) All proposed ordinances shall be submitted to the Municipal Clerk
as provided in § 7-14 of the Code, at which time the Municipal Clerk
shall place said ordinance or ordinances on the agenda of the next
Council conference meeting under the category of "pending
business" for discussion. After this procedure has been
accomplished, the Municipal Clerk shall then place said ordinance
or ordinances on the agenda of the next following Council
conference meeting under the category of ordinances on first
reading for consideration and introduction as provided in § 7-32C
of the Code.
(2) Unless tabled, postponed or amended, the ordinance shall then be
placed on the Council's agenda for final consideration and vote on
second and final reading as provided in the statutes and § 7-32 of
the Irvington Township Code.
B. The foregoing procedures may be waived and early consideration and
adoption procedures adopted if approved by a majority of the members
of the Council present at the meeting or if permitted by statute as an
emergency matter or otherwise.
A. The Council shall organize on July 1 pursuant to statute and thereupon
select from its members a presiding officer, who shall be known as
President of the Council and who shall serve for a period of two years
beginning July 1. He shall conduct all meetings in accordance with this
article and the rules adopted thereunder and maintain order at such
meetings. He shall be entitled to vote on all questions, being called last
in any roll call. The President of the Council shall sign all ordinances
§ 7-14 IRVINGTON CODE § 7-17
1:26
and resolutions adopted by the Council during his presence. In the
event of the absence of the President of the Council, such ordinances
and resolutions shall be signed by the presiding officer.
B. The President of the Council or such other member of the Council as
may be presiding may move, second and debate from the chair, subject
only to such limitations of debate as are imposed by these rules upon all
members, and shall not be deprived of any of the rights and privileges
of a Councilman by reason of his being the presiding Chairman. A
majority vote of the Council members present shall govern and
conclusively determine all questions of order not otherwise covered by
this article.
C. In the event of the temporary absence or the temporary disability of the
President of the Council, the Vice President of the Council shall preside
over the Council, and, during such absence or disability of the
President, the Vice President shall have the duties and powers of the
President of the Council. In the event that the absence or disability of
the President of the Council continues or exceeds six months, the
Council shall declare the office of the President of the Council vacant,
and the Vice President shall serve as President of the Council for the
unexpired term of the President. [Amended 7-24-1984 by Ord. No.
MC 2739]
D. All special committees and the chairmen thereof shall be appointed by
the presiding officer from time to time as the Council by a majority vote
shall require at a regular or special meeting. All special committees
shall be made up of Council members exclusively and shall consist of no
more than four members of the Council, including the presiding officer,
who shall be a member ex officio of all special committees; provided,
however, that the presiding officer may appoint a special committee
consisting of all the members of the Council. A quorum of each special
committee appointed shall consist of a majority of the members thereof.
Meetings of special committees shall be held at such times as do not
conflict with regular meetings of the Council.
E. The only standing committee shall be the committee of the whole, and
the rules of proceedings of the Council shall also be observed in the
committee of the whole as far as applicable. The committee of the whole
shall make its report in writing, which shall be filed with the Municipal
Clerk, returning at the same time all petitions, resolutions or other
papers submitted to it for consideration.
F. No committee shall make public its report or determinations prior to
introduction of the report to the Council.
G. Beginning July 1, 1984, the Municipal Council shall appoint by
resolution for a term of two years a Council member as a representative
of the Township of Irvington to the Joint Meeting of Essex and Union
Counties. [Added 7-12-1983 by Ord. No. MC 2703]
§ 7-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-17
1:27
§ 7-18. Parliamentarian.
The Municipal Clerk, as Clerk of the Council, or his designee in his absence,
shall act as parliamentarian and shall advise and assist the presiding officer
in matters of parliamentary law.
§ 7-19. Duties of Legislative Research Officer.
The Legislative Research Officer or such member of his office as he may
designate shall be available to the Council at all regular and special
meetings. He or his designee shall draw ordinances for any member of
the Council when and as requested. All ordinances, resolutions, contract
documents and all other legal documents shall bear the stamp and signature
of the Legislative Research Officer approving the same as to legality and
form prior to their consideration by the Council. No such document shall be
signed by the Mayor or the administrative heads of the various departments
of the Town government until the approval of the Legislative Research
Officer is appended thereto.
§ 7-20. Call to order.
The President of the Council shall take the chair at the hour appointed
for the meeting and shall immediately call the Council to order. In the
absence of the President of the Council, the Clerk of the Council or his
designee shall call the Council to order. The Clerk of the Council shall then
determine whether a quorum is present and in that event shall call for the
election of a temporary President. Upon the arrival of the President of the
H. Beginning July 1, 1984, the Municipal Council shall appoint by
resolution for a term of two years a Council member to serve as
Chairman of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Board. [Added 8-9-1983
Ord. No. MC 2709]
I. The Municipal Council shall elect from its members a First Vice
President of the Municipal Council who shall act as President Pro
Tempore during the absence or disability of the President as herein
provided in Chapter 7 of the Revised Code of the Township of Irvington.
The First Vice President of the Municipal Council shall be appointed at
the Municipal Council's biennial inauguration and reorganization
meeting and shall serve for a term of two years effective from the date
of said meeting. The Municipal Council shall also elect from its
members a Second Vice President of the Municipal Council who shall
act as President Pro Tempore during the absence or disability of the
President and First Vice President as herein provided in Chapter 7 of
the Revised Code of the Township of Irvington. The Second Vice
President of the Municipal Council shall be also appointed at the
Municipal Council's biennial inauguration and reorganization meeting
and shall also serve for a term of two years effective beginning one year
from the date of said meeting. [Added 7-24-1984 by Ord. No. MC
2739; amended 7-12-1994 by Ord. No. MC 3001]
§ 7-17 IRVINGTON CODE § 7-20
1:28
Council, the temporary President shall forthwith relinquish the chair upon
the conclusion of the business immediately before the Council.
§ 7-21. Roll call.
Before proceeding with the business of the Council, the Clerk of the Council
or his designee shall call the roll of the members in alphabetical order, and
the names of those present shall be entered in the minutes.
§ 7-22. Quorum.
§ 7-23. Open meetings; order of business. [Amended 3-8-1977 by
Ord. No. MC 2487; 5-23-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3017; 7-11-1995 by
Ord. No. MC 3021]
All regular and special meetings of the Council shall be open to the public.
Promptly at the hour set for each meeting, the members of the Council and
the Clerk thereof shall take their regular stations, in the Council chamber,
and the business of the Council shall be taken up for consideration and
disposition in the following order:
A. A majority of the whole number of members of the Council shall
constitute a quorum. No ordinance, resolution or motion shall be
adopted by the Council without the affirmative vote of the majority of all
the members of the Council.
B. Should no quorum attend within 30 minutes after the hour appointed
for the meeting of the Council, the President of the Council, or in his
absence the Clerk of the Council, or his designee, may thereupon
adjourn the meeting until the next day, unless, by unanimous
agreement, those members present select another hour or day. The
names of the members present and their action at such meeting shall be
recorded in the minutes by the Clerk.
A. Pledge of allegiance to the flag.
B. Moment of silence.
C. Roll call.
D. Reading of the statement of proper notice.
E. Hearing of citizens.
F. Hearing of Council members.
G. Reports and recommendations of Town officers, boards and
commissions.
H. Reports of committees.
I. Ordinances, bills and claims.
§ 7-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-23
1:29
§ 7-24. Reading of minutes.
Unless a reading of the minutes of a prior Council meeting is requested by
a majority of the members of the Council, such minutes, when signed by the
President of the Council and the Clerk of the Council, shall be considered
approved without reading, provided that the Clerk of the Council, at least
two full working days preceding the meeting, shall deliver a copy thereof to
each member of the Council.
§ 7-25. Rules of debate.
J. Resolutions and motions.
K. Communications and petitions.
L. Pending business on the calendar.
M. New business on the calendar.
N. Miscellaneous.
O. Hearing of citizens.
P. Hearing of Council members.
Q. Adjournment.
A. Question under consideration. When a question is presented and
seconded, it is under consideration, and no motion shall be received
thereafter, except to adjourn, to lay on the table, to postpone or to
amend, until the question is decided. These motions shall have
preference in the order in which they are mentioned, and the first two
shall be decided without debate.
B. President or presiding officer may debate, etc. The President of the
Council or such other member of the Council as may be presiding may
move, second and debate from the chair, subject only to such limitations
of debate as are by these rules imposed upon all members, and shall not
be deprived of any of the rights and privileges of a Councilman by
reason of his being the presiding Chairman.
C. Every member desiring to speak for any purpose whatsoever shall
address the presiding officer and, upon recognition, shall confine
himself to the question under consideration and avoid all personalities
and indecorous language (in which event a member may be silenced).
When said debate occurs at the regular or special open business
meetings (not a premeeting conference or caucus), a member's remarks
shall be limited to 10 minutes unless further time is granted by the
Council. A member may only speak once on the subject but may speak
to clear up a matter of fact or explain a material part of his speech. A
member introducing a motion, ordinance or resolution may once again
speak on the subject as the last speaker closing the debate. [Amended
10-11-1983 by Ord. No. MC 2715]
§ 7-23 IRVINGTON CODE § 7-25
1:30
§ 7-26. Voting on motions; signing of resolutions and ordinances.
The vote upon every motion, resolution or ordinance shall be taken by roll
call in alphabetical order, except that the President of the Council shall be
the last member called, and the vote by "yes" or "no" shall be entered upon
the minutes. Resolutions and ordinances shall be signed by the presiding
officer at such meetings and by the Clerk of the Council before they are
entered upon the minutes.
§ 7-27. Addressing the Council, generally.
§ 7-28. Manner of addressing Council. [Amended 5-23-1995 by Ord.
No. MC 3017; 7-11-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3021; 4-22-1997 by Ord.
No. MC 3064; 9-23-2019 by Ord. No. MC 3713]
D. Interruptions. A member, once recognized, shall not be interrupted
when speaking unless it is to call him to order or as herein otherwise
provided. If a member, while speaking, is called to order, he shall cease
speaking until the question of order is determined by the presiding
officer, and, if in order, he shall be permitted to proceed. Any member
may appeal to the Council from the decision of the presiding officer
upon a question of order, when, without debate, the presiding officer
shall submit to the Council the question, "Shall the decision of the chair
be sustained?," and the Council shall decide by a majority vote.
E. Privilege of closing debate. The Councilman moving the adoption of an
ordinance or resolution shall have the privilege of closing the debate,
although he may have already spoken thereon at its moving.
F. Roll call. Upon any roll call there shall be no discussion or explanation
given by any member voting, and he shall vote "yes" or "no" unless he
shall first receive special permission from the Council to explain his
vote. A member of the Council may abstain from voting on any matter.
A. Subject to the provisions of § 7-32, any person may petition the
presiding officer for leave to address the Council, which permission
shall be granted only after a showing to the satisfaction of the presiding
officer that the subject matter of the address deserves the time and
attention of the Council, by oral communication, on any matter over
which the Council has control; provided, however, that notice is given to
the Clerk of the Council 32 business hours in advance of the Council
meeting in order that the same may appear on the calendar of the
Council.
B. Any person may orally petition the Council, at any Council meeting, for
leave to orally address the Council at that meeting, which leave shall be
granted only after showing to the satisfaction of a majority of the
members of the Council present that the subject matter of the address
deserves the time and attention of the Council.
§ 7-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-28
1:31
§ 7-29. Decorum generally.
A. Citizens seeking to address the Council at the beginning of the meeting
under Hearing of Citizens on Agenda Items Only session about agenda
items only must sign in with their name, address, telephone number
and agenda item number at the beginning of each regular Council
meeting on a form. Failure to submit the form with the required
information within five minutes from the scheduled start of the meeting
shall preclude the citizen from addressing the Council during the
beginning of the meeting under the Hearing of Citizens on Agenda
Items Only session. Citizens' remarks are also limited to three minutes,
totaling no more than 30 minutes. Questions raised by citizens during
this session of the meeting involving administrative matters shall be
included on the form and answered in writing by the appropriate
administrative department, upon it being transmitted to the
appropriate administrative departments. For the purposes of this
section, no time balance from any one citizen or any one Council
member may be relinquished to another citizen or Council member. All
remarks shall be addressed to the Council President. All remarks for
the purposes of this section must pertain directly to matters which
appear on the Municipal Council's agenda for that particular meeting.
Dialogue between the person addressing the Council and the members
of Council shall not be allowed.
B. Citizens seeking to address the Council at the end of the meeting under
the General Hearing of Citizens and Council Members session on
community issues only must sign in with their name, address and
telephone number at the beginning of each regular Council meeting on
a form. Failure to submit the form with the required information within
five minutes from the scheduled start of the meeting shall preclude the
citizen from addressing the Council at the end of the meeting under the
General Hearing of Citizens and Council Members session. Citizens'
remarks are limited to three minutes. Questions raised by citizens
during this session of the meeting involving administrative matters
shall be included on the form and answered in writing by the
appropriate administrative department, upon it being transmitted to
the appropriate administrative departments. For the purposes of this
section, no time balance from any one citizen or any one Council
member may be relinquished to another citizen or Council member. All
remarks shall be addressed to the Council President. All remarks for
the purposes of this section must pertain directly to community issues
only. Dialogue between the person addressing the Council and the
members of Council shall not be allowed.
A. Council members. While the Council is in session, the members thereof
shall preserve order and decorum, and a member shall neither, by
conversation or otherwise, except as otherwise provided by this article,
delay or interrupt the proceedings or the peace of the Council nor
disturb any member while speaking or refuse to obey the orders of the
Council or its presiding officer.
§ 7-28 IRVINGTON CODE § 7-29
1:32
§ 7-30. Enforcement of decorum. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No.
MC 3553]
The Director of Public Safety or such member of the Public Safety
Department as he may designate shall be the Sergeant at Arms of the
Council meetings. He shall carry out all orders and instructions given by the
presiding officer for the purpose of maintaining order and decorum at the
Council meetings.
§ 7-31. Going upon Council dais.
No person, except Town officers or their representatives, shall be permitted
upon the dais of the Council or be permitted to disturb any Councilman
while on the dais, during any meeting, without the express permission of
the Council.
§ 7-32. Ordinances and resolutions.
B. Other persons. Any person making impertinent or slanderous remarks
or who shall become boisterous, immoderate or disorderly shall
forthwith be barred from the Council chamber by the presiding officer,
unless permission to remain or address the Council is granted by the
majority vote of the Council.
A. Preparation of ordinances. The Legislative Research Officer or his
designee, when requested, shall prepare ordinances, which shall be
delivered to the Municipal Clerk in conformity with § 7-19. A copy of the
same shall be forthwith furnished to each member of the Council by the
Municipal Clerk.
B. Prior examination by Mayor, administrative heads of departments, etc.
All ordinances, resolutions and contract documents, before
presentation to the Council by the Mayor or the Business Administrator,
shall have been reduced to writing and shall have been approved as to
form and legality by the Legislative Research Officer or his designee.
Prior to presentation, all such documents shall have first been referred
to the head of the department under whose jurisdiction the
administration of the subject matter of the ordinance, resolution or
contract document would devolve. When examined, the Mayor or
Business Administrator or his designee shall affix his signature on the
document certifying to the factual contents.
C. Introducing for passage or approval. Ordinances, resolutions and other
matters and subjects requiring action by the Council shall be
introduced and sponsored by a member of the Council; except that the
Mayor may present, under § 7-14, ordinances, resolutions and other
matters or subjects to the Council, and any Councilman may assume
sponsorship thereof by moving that such ordinance, resolution, matter
or subject be adopted in accordance with law; otherwise, they shall not
be considered. When a Councilman assumes sponsorship of an
§ 7-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-32
1:33
ordinance or resolution, he shall countersign the same in the space
provided thereon.
D. When ordinances effective. All ordinances shall take effect 20 days after
final passage and approval by the Mayor. Two-thirds of the Council may,
however, declare an emergency by written resolution to reduce this
twenty-day period, except that the period for bond ordinances shall not
be reduced.
E. Adoption of ordinances.
(1) Ordinances other than bond and appropriation ordinances shall
require four affirmative votes for adoption. Bond and appropriation
ordinances shall require five affirmative votes for adoption.
(2) Ordinances shall be introduced and adopted in the manner
prescribed by general law.
F. Passage, etc., of ordinance over veto. The Council will reconsider any
ordinance returned by the Mayor within the time permitted by the
Charter, together with a statement setting forth his objections thereto
or to any item or part thereof. Such reconsideration of the ordinance or
any item or part thereof from which the Mayor is constrained to
withhold his approval shall be at the next meeting of Council which
occurs not less than three days following the return of the ordinance by
the Mayor. Whenever an ordinance has been reconsidered by the
Council following a veto by the Mayor, the Municipal Clerk shall append
to such ordinance a certification of the action of the Council upon such
reconsideration in substantially the following form:
"I hereby certify that the above ordinance adopted by the Council of
the Town of Irvington on the __________ day of __________, _____, was
delivered to me on the __________ day of __________, _____, together with
the Mayor's statement of the reasons for which he was constrained
to withhold his approval of such ordinance, item or part thereof. On
reconsideration thereof, on the __________ day of __________, _____, (the
Council duly resolved by the affirmative vote of two-thirds of its
members to enact such ordinance, item or part thereof
notwithstanding the Mayor's veto) or (the Mayor's veto was sustained).
Dated:
Municipal Clerk"
G. Ordinances not returned by Mayor. Whenever an ordinance shall take
effect without the Mayor's signature by reason of his failure to return it
to the Council by filing it with the Municipal Clerk within 10 days after
it has been presented to him, the Municipal Clerk shall append to such
ordinance as engrossed a certificate in substantially the following form:
§ 7-32 IRVINGTON CODE § 7-32
1:34
§ 7-33. Nominations by Mayor.
§ 7-34. Filing of reports and resolutions.
All reports and resolutions shall be filed with the Municipal Clerk and
entered in the minutes.
§ 7-35. Adjournment.
A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and decided without debate.
"I hereby certify that the above ordinance was adopted by the Town
Council on the __________ day of _________, _____, and was presented to
the Mayor duly certified on the __________ day of __________, _____, and
upon his failure to sign it or to return and file it with the Municipal
Clerk within 10 days thereafter, the said ordinance took effect in like
manner as if the Mayor had signed it.
Dated:
Municipal Clerk"
H. Emergency resolutions. Resolutions creating emergency appropriations
shall require five affirmative votes for adoption.
A. Upon the receipt from the Mayor of his nomination to any office or
position, the same shall be read under communications by the
Municipal Clerk or his designee, and unless otherwise ordered, shall be
considered by the Council under "new business." When taken up for
action, the President of the Council shall put the question on each
nomination as follows: "Will the Council confirm the nomination?" On
that motion, a vote shall be ordered, and if four or more members vote
to confirm, the President of the Council shall announce, "The
nomination is confirmed." If less than four members vote to confirm, the
President of the Council shall announce, "The nomination is rejected."
B. Action by confirmation or rejection upon a nomination made by the
Mayor shall not be postponed or delayed longer than for one regular
meeting.
C. Within two days after confirmation or rejection of a nomination, the
Municipal Clerk shall, in writing, notify the Mayor of that fact.
§ 7-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-35
1:35

ARTICLE III
Mayor
§ 7-36. Service as chief executive officer.
The chief executive officer of the Town shall be the Mayor.
§ 7-37. Powers and duties.
The Mayor shall:
§ 7-38. Acting Mayor.
The Mayor shall designate the Business Administrator or any department
head or the Municipal Clerk to act as Mayor whenever the Mayor shall
be prevented by absence from the Town, disability or other cause from
attending the duties of his office. During such time, the person so
designated by the Mayor shall possess all the rights, powers and duties
of the Mayor. Whenever the Mayor shall have been unable to attend the
duties of his office for a period of 60 consecutive days for any of the abovestated
reasons, an Acting Mayor shall be appointed by the Council, who
shall succeed to all the rights, powers and duties of the Mayor or the then
Acting Mayor.
§ 7-39. Confidential Assistant to the Mayor. [Added 7-1-2014 by
Ord. No. MC 3511]12
A. Enforce the provisions of the Charter, this Code and other ordinances of
the Town and supervise all the departments of the Town government
and require each to make such reports as he may deem advisable.
B. Have such powers of appointment and removal as are provided by the
Charter or general law.
C. Have power to appoint, with the advice and consent of the Council, to
all offices where no other provision is made for such appointment.
D. Annually report to the Council and to the public on the works of the
previous year and on the condition and requirements of the Town
government.
E. Make recommendations to the Council on such matters as he may deem
in the public interest.
A. There is hereby established, with the Office of the Mayor, the position of
Confidential Assistant to the Mayor.
12.Editor's Note: Former § 5-36.1 of the 1981 Revised Code, Confidential Assistant to the
Mayor, added 10-10-1990 by Ord. No. MC 2912, was repealed 10-14-1998 by Ord. No. MC
3100. This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor; said veto was overridden by a two-thirds
vote of the Council 10-27-1998 by Res. No. MC 98-1027-95. Ordinance No. MC 3511,
adopted 7-1-2014, repealed Ord. No. MC 3100 and reinstated the position of Confidential
Assistant to the Mayor.
§ 7-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-39
1:37
B. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 11A:3-5(b), this position shall be a
civil service unclassified service position.
C. The duties and examples of work of the Confidential Assistant to the
Mayor are as follows:
(1) Definition. Under direction, acts as a personal aide and liaison
between the Mayor and the public and/or various governmental
agencies and assists him by performing varied highly responsible
administrative duties, some of which may be of a confidential
nature and/or involve elements of troubleshooting; does related
work as required.
(2) Examples of work. Assists the Mayor in the formulation of effective
policies and procedures in the operation of the municipal
government; collects and analyzes data needed as a basis for
administrative decisions; prepares correspondence, reports and
recommendations for the review and signature of the Mayor, some
of which may be of a complex and confidential nature; coordinates
the activities of municipal departments entailing a comprehensive
knowledge of municipal departments, bureau or division programs,
objectives, standards, policies and procedures; interviews callers at
the office; acts as a liaison between the Mayor and public and
provides information to those requesting it, including department,
division or bureau personnel, the representatives of state, local and
other groups, represents the Mayor at speaking engagements,
hearings, and conferences; assembles statistical and other
materials required for reports; memoranda and speeches; when so
directed takes the appropriate action(s) to resolve any problems
brought to the attention of the Mayor; makes special investigations
for the Mayor; maintains confidential, personal correspondence
and other records and files.
D. The qualifications and requirements of the position are as follows:
(1) Requirements.
(a) Attendance at a college/university or community college for at
least two years.
(b) Three years of experience in the planning, promoting,
organizing and/or administering a comprehensive program in a
public or private organization.
[1] Note: Applicants who do not meet the above educational
requirements may substitute additional work experience
as described below on a year-for-year basis.
(c) Knowledge of policies, procedures, and regulations relative to
the work of municipal government, of the statutory provisions
regarding municipal government and of the policies and
procedures involved in the formulation of effective municipal
§ 7-39 IRVINGTON CODE § 7-39
1:38
§ 7-40. Executive orders. [Added 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. MC 2962]
services, and/or similar knowledge within the corporate or
private sector.
(d) Ability to organize assigned technical tasks and interpret basic
law and regulations; to talk with employees and public
officials; to prepare detailed correspondence; to prepare clear,
sound, accurate and informative statistical and other reports
on personnel transactions and problems containing findings,
conclusions, and recommendations.
(e) Good health and freedom from disabling physical and mental
defects which would impair the proper performance of the
required duties or which might endanger the health and safety
of oneself or others.
A. Within three working days of the signing of an executive order by the
Mayor or his designee, the executive order shall be filed with the
Municipal Clerk by the Mayor or his designee.
(1) In the event that the filed executive order involves personnel
matters relating to the change of salary or compensation of
employees of the Township, then the Mayor or his designee shall
also, within 48 hours, deliver to the Municipal Clerk information
setting forth the existing salary or compensation of the position or
title immediately prior to the issuance of the executive order and
also the amount accurately representing the increase in salary or
compensation.
(2) This section shall apply only to every executive order issued by the
Mayor or his designee involving personnel matters except those
executive orders regarding leaves of absences.
(3) The Department of Revenue and Finance shall supply the
information required by this section to the Municipal Clerk.
B. Within 10 working days after receiving the executive order in
Subsection A above, the Municipal Clerk shall proceed to publish the
full contents of the executive order and the information setting forth the
existing salary or compensation of the title or the position immediately
prior to the issuance of the executive order and an amount accurately
representing the increase in salary or compensation.
§ 7-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-40
1:39

ARTICLE IV
Municipal Clerk13
§ 7-41. Appointment.
The Municipal Clerk shall be appointed by the Council.
§ 7-42. Qualifications.
The Municipal Clerk shall, prior to his appointment, have been qualified by
training or experience to perform the duties of the office.
§ 7-43. Term; compensation.
§ 7-44. Duties generally. [Amended 3-24-1998 by Ord. No. MC 3090]
The Municipal Clerk shall:
A. The Municipal Clerk shall serve for a term of three years from the date
of his appointment.
B. The compensation of the Municipal Clerk shall be at the rate fixed by
ordinance.
A. Serve as Clerk of the Council, by virtue of that office, and keep its
minutes and records of its proceedings in appropriate books to be kept
in that office.
B. Maintain and compile the ordinances and resolutions of the Township
as required by the Charter and general law.
C. Have custody and safely keep the seal of the Township and all records
and documents, reports, papers and maps required to be filed in his
office.
D. Perform such other duties as may be provided by general law, the
Charter, the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the
Township and as the Council may prescribe.
E. Provide secretarial and clerical services for the Council members in the
discharge of their official duties and one or more offices for conferences
and consultation.
F. For the purposes of Title 11A of the New Jersey Revised Statutes, as
well as the internal recordkeeping purposes of the municipality, serve
as the official appointing authority for all employees under the
jurisdiction of the office of the Municipal Clerk and the Office of the
Municipal Council, all bodies created thereby and all bodies hereinafter
created thereby, with the advise and consent of Council. Additionally,
the Municipal Clerk shall have the power to determine separation of
13.Editor's Note: References throughout the Code to "Town Clerk" and "Township Clerk" shall
be deemed to read "Municipal Clerk."
§ 7-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-44
1:41
§ 7-45. Affixing Town Seal.
The Municipal Clerk shall cause the Town Seal to be affixed to instruments
and writings when authorized by any ordinance or resolution or when
necessary to exemplify any document or record in his office or to certify any
act or paper which, from the records in his office, shall appear to have been
a public act of the Town or a public document. He shall not affix the seal or
cause or permit it to be affixed to any instrument or writing or other paper
except as provided in this section, unless required by Charter or general
law.
§ 7-46. Binding, certifying and distributing copies of ordinances
and resolutions.
§ 7-47. Publication of ordinances.
The Municipal Clerk shall prepare a copy of all ordinances or proposed
ordinances which will require publication under the Charter or general law,
and cause the same, properly attested, to be published in any newspaper
legally qualified for the publication of official Town advertisements, and
shall file in his office the requisite proofs of such publication.
§ 7-48. Notice to attend Council meetings.
The Municipal Clerk shall issue notices to the respective members of the
Council and to all other persons whose attendance may be required at any
regular meeting of the Council. Such notice shall be in accordance with a
schedule which the Municipal Clerk shall prepare on the first day of January
of each year for the ensuing year. The Municipal Clerk shall, whenever a
special meeting of the Council is called in accordance with law, issue and
service, for whatever reason, layoffs and demotions in lieu of layoffs in
accordance with the New Jersey Department of Personnel procedures
for all employees under the jurisdiction of the Office of the Municipal
Clerk and the Office of the Municipal Council, all bodies created
thereby and all bodies hereinafter created thereby, with the advise
and consent of Council. The term "layoff" shall be defined as "the
involuntary separation of an employee from the Township of Irvington
for reasons other than delinquency or misconduct."
A. The Municipal Clerk shall cause all ordinances and resolutions of a
permanent nature passed by the Council to be carefully and securely
bound in books to be provided for that purpose. He shall enter after
each ordinance his certificate of due and proper passage and of the
proof of the due publication thereof; but his omission to certify any
ordinance or proof of publication thereof as hereby directed shall not
impair or affect the validity in any respect.
B. Certified copies of all ordinances and resolutions shall forthwith be
distributed to the Town Attorney and to all departments of the Town
that will be affected thereby.
§ 7-44 IRVINGTON CODE § 7-48
1:42
cause notices thereof to be served upon the members of the Council and any
other persons whose presence may be required.
§ 7-49. Communication of Council actions.
Whenever the Council has taken any action requiring any act or forbearance
of any officer or employee of the Town or affecting the administration of
the functions, powers or duties of any such officer or employee, it shall be
the duty of the Municipal Clerk to communicate officially the action of the
Council to the persons affected and to retain the matter on the agenda of
the Council for such further disposition as may be required. Each officer and
employee shall, unless otherwise directed, direct his response to the action
of the Council to the attention of the Municipal Clerk, for presentation to
and information of the Council.
§ 7-50. Fees.
The Municipal Clerk shall charge and receive for the use of the Town such
fees for searches, transcripts and certifications as shall be authorized by
resolution of the Council.
§ 7-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-50
1:43

ARTICLE V
Deputy Municipal Clerk
[Added 10-11-1989 by Ord No. MC 2891]
§ 7-51. Creation of office; powers and duties.
There is hereby created the office of Deputy Municipal Clerk pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-135. During the absence or disability of the Municipal Clerk,
the Deputy Municipal Clerk shall have all the powers of the Municipal Clerk
and shall perform the functions and duties of such office.
§ 7-52. Appointment.
The Deputy Municipal Clerk shall be appointed by the Municipal Clerk and
shall serve at the pleasure of the Municipal Clerk.
§ 7-53. Compensation.
The compensation of the Deputy Municipal Clerk shall be established by
resolution of the Municipal Council pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-36j.
§ 7-54. Examples of work.
The examples of work of the Deputy Municipal Clerk, in addition to those
aforesaid, shall include, but not be limited to: receiving license applications
and fees and issuing certain licenses; registering and transferring voters;
giving suitable work assignments to subordinate employees; supervision of
subordinate employees' work; reviewing and verifying personnel records,
payrolls, vouchers and claims; preparing financial, budgetary and other
reports; researching legislative information and assisting in the preparation
of ordinances and resolutions; preparing periodic reports of cash receipts,
accounts and budgetary breakdowns; answering inquiries and
disseminating information relating to municipal affairs and the affairs of
the office of the Municipal Clerk; assisting in the establishment and
maintenance of an extensive filing system; assisting in the preparation
of the municipal budget for the office of the Municipal Clerk; assisting
in the general conduct of elections; preparing and distributing election
information, materials, equipment and supplies to election officials; giving
suitable instructions to election officers; receiving election returns;
maintaining election personnel records; and performing such other duties
as shall from time to time be prescribed by the Municipal Clerk.
§ 7-55. Qualifications.
The requirements for said position of Deputy Municipal Clerk shall include,
but not be limited to: graduation from an accredited high school or
possession of an approved high school equivalency certificate; five years
of supervisory office experience in the management of a large office or
in highly specialized administrative work, (college credits in the area of
business administration, finance or related fields on a year for year basis
§ 7-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-55
1:45
or the possession of a Registered Municipal Clerk's certificate issued by the
New Jersey Department of Community Affairs may be substituted for said
supervisory experience); knowledge of state and local laws, rules, policies,
regulations and procedures that apply to the administration of municipal
affairs, of the procedures for preparing a municipality for an election, of
the proper methods of checking and verifying payrolls and claims and
of establishing and maintaining an extensive record and filing system;
ability to give suitable work assignments to subordinate staff members and
supervise their work; and to prepare clear, concise, accurate, sound and
informative legislative, budgetary and financial and other reports.
§ 7-55 IRVINGTON CODE § 7-55
1:46
ARTICLE VI
Town Attorney
§ 7-56. Appointment; term.
The Town Attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor for a term of office
coinciding with that of the Mayor.
§ 7-57. Qualifications.
The Town Attorney shall be a counselor at law duly admitted to the practice
of the law in this state.
§ 7-58. Compensation.
The Town Attorney shall receive such compensation as shall be provided by
ordinance.
§ 7-59. Powers and duties.
The Town Attorney shall be the legal advisor to the Mayor and all
departments of the Town except as may be otherwise provided by the
Charter. He shall prosecute and defend actions and proceedings by and
against the Town and every department thereof. In furtherance of these
general powers and without limitation thereto, he shall:
A. Advise the Council and its members, the Mayor and the other officers of
the Town in all matters which may be submitted to him for his opinion.
B. Review and approve all contracts, deeds, documents and instruments
prior to the execution thereof by or on behalf of the Town.
C. Conduct appeals from orders, decisions or judgments affecting any
interest of the Town as he may in his discretion determine to be
necessary or desirable or as directed by the Mayor or Council.
D. Subject to the approval of Council, have power to enter into any
agreement, compromise or settlement of any litigation in which the
Town is involved.
E. Render opinions in writing upon any question of law submitted to him
by the Mayor, the Council, the Business Administrator or the head of
any department.
F. Maintain a record of all actions, suits, proceedings and matters which
relate to the Town's interest and report thereon from time to time as the
Mayor or Council may require.
G. Conduct prosecutions for crimes and offenses cognizable by the
Municipal Court of the Town, except such crimes and offenses as it may
be the duty of the County Prosecutor to prosecute, including violations
of this Code, other ordinances of the Town, complaints of any
§ 7-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-59
1:47
§ 7-60. Assistant Township Attorneys. [Amended 4-22-1975 by Ord.
No. MC 2444; 3-26-1985 by Ord. No. MC 277614]
§ 7-61. Powers and duties of assistants.
The Assistant Town Attorney shall, during the absence or disability of the
Town Attorney, possess all the powers and perform all the duties of the Town
Attorney, and in the event of the death or resignation of the Town Attorney
or of the occurrence of a vacancy in such office for any other reason, the
Assistant Town Attorney shall act as Town Attorney until the office is duly
filled pursuant to the Charter.15
department under the state law and violations of rules or regulations
duly promulgated by any department.
H. Have such other and different functions, powers and duties as may be
provided by the Charter, this Code or other ordinance.
I. Provide for the defense of criminal, quasi-criminal and motor vehicle
matters in Municipal Court and, where appropriate, on appeal. [Added
7-14-1987 by Ord. No. MC 2832]
A. The Township Attorney shall appoint in the Office of the Township
Attorney a First Assistant Township Attorney and two Second Assistant
Township Attorneys, who shall serve at the pleasure of the Township
Attorney during the term of office of the Township Attorney appointing
him or her.
B. Prior to said appointment, he or she shall have been duly admitted to
the practices of law in this state.
C. The salaries of the aforesaid appointees shall be such sums as shall be
fixed by ordinance. Such compensation shall be in lieu of all other fees
or compensation for the official services of said appointees.
D. All employees of the Office of Township Attorney shall perform such
duties as may from time to time be assigned to them by the Township
Attorney.
E. The Township Attorney shall designate one Second Assistant Township
Attorney to be Prosecutor and the other Second Assistant Township
Attorney to be Assistant Prosecutor.
14.Editor's Note: Section 4 of this ordinance provided that the positions of the First Assistant
Township Attorney and Second Assistant Township Attorney shall be in the unclassified
service pursuant to N.J.S.A. 11:22-2.
15.Editor's Note: Former § 5-53 of the 1981 Revised Code, Legal Assistant-Prosecutors, which
previously followed this section, added 9-9-1969 by Ord. No. MC 2238, amended 9-26-1978
by Ord. No. MC 2544, was repealed 3-26-1985 by Ord. No. MC 2776. Editor's Note: Former
§ 5-54 of the 1981 Revised Code, Powers and duties of Legal Assistant-Prosecutors, which
previously followed this section, added 9-9-1969 by Ord. No. MC 2238, amended 9-26-1978
by Ord. No. MC 2544, was repealed 3-26-1985 by Ord. No. MC 2776.
§ 7-59 IRVINGTON CODE § 7-62
1:48
§ 7-62. Public Defenders. [Added 7-14-1987 by Ord. No. MC 2832;
amended 3-11-1997 by Ord. No. MC 3059; amended 11-25-1997 by
Ord. No. MC 3085; 3-24-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3528; 9-11-2018 by
Ord. No. MC 3662; 1-28-2019 by Ord. No. MC 3684]
§ 7-63. Special counsel.
Whenever the Council deems the interests of the Town to so require, it may
appoint special counsel.
§ 7-64. Records and papers; termination of service.
All papers, documents, memoranda, reports and other materials relating
to the administration of the Office of Town Attorney shall be and remain
the property of the Town. Upon the termination of his service with the
Town, the Town Attorney shall forthwith surrender to his successor all such
property, together with a written consent to substitution of his successor in
all legal actions and proceedings then pending to which the Town is a party.
The Assistant Town Attorney shall have a like duty and obligation upon the
termination of his service with the Town.
A. The Business Administrator shall appoint in the Office of the Business
Administrator one or more Municipal Public Defenders who shall, prior
to their appointment, have been duly admitted to the practice of law in
this state. There shall be a Chief Public Defender who shall be paid
$30,000 per year. There also may be subordinate Public Defenders who
shall be per diem. The rate per session for per diem Public Defenders
shall be $225 for the year 2018 and $250 per session for the year 2019
and beyond. All Municipal Public Defenders' days and hours of
assignment shall be as designated by the Business Administrator.
B. Any person applying for representation by the Municipal Public
Defender must pay a fee of $250. The application fee can only be
waived after a review and determination of the Municipal Court Judge
that such person cannot afford to pay the same and thus may be
deprived of the right to counsel.
§ 7-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-64
1:49

ARTICLE VII
Legislative Research Officer16
§ 7-65. Terminology.
It shall be expressly understood that the terms "Corporation Counsel" and
"Corporation Legislative Counsel," for the purposes of this chapter, shall
mean the Legislative Research Officer referred to in this article.
§ 7-66. Appointment.
There shall be Legislative Research Officer, who shall be appointed by the
Council by a majority vote thereof.
§ 7-67. Qualifications.
The Legislative Research Officer, prior to his appointment, shall be a
counselor at law duly qualified and admitted to practice law in this state.
§ 7-68. Office separate from that of Town Attorney.
The office of Legislative Research Officer shall be separate and distinct from
the office of Town Attorney, and the Legislative Research Officer shall serve
under the sole direction of the Council for such term as may be provided.
§ 7-69. Compensation.
The Legislative Research Officer shall receive such compensation as shall
be provided by ordinance.
§ 7-70. Powers and duties.
The Legislative Research Officer shall be the legal advisor to the Council.
He shall advise the Council as to the form and sufficiency of all ordinances
and resolutions prior to their passage and shall perform the duties
hereinbefore set forth in § 7-19.
16.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. MC 3083, adopted 11-12-1997, created the position of
Legislative Research Officer. All references to "Corporation Legislative Counsel" and
"Corporation Counsel" shall refer to "Legislative Research Officer."
§ 7-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-70
1:51

ARTICLE VIII
Department of Administration
§ 7-71. Establishment.
There is hereby established a Department of Administration.
§ 7-72. Business Administrator to head department.
The Business Administrator shall be the head of the Department of
Administration. He shall be responsible for the efficient and economical
administration of the Department of Administration and shall have the
general functions, powers and duties of a department head pursuant to this
chapter.
§ 7-73. Division of Administration.
The Division of Administration shall be headed by a director who shall be
known and designated as "Business Administrator."
§ 7-74. Qualifications of Administrator.
The Business Administrator shall be chosen solely on the basis of his
demonstrated executive and administrative qualifications, with special
reference to his actual experience in or his knowledge of accepted practices
in respect to the duties of his office as set forth in this article.
§ 7-75. Residence of Administrator.
The Business Administrator shall establish bona fide residence in the Town
within one year from the date of his appointment.
§ 7-76. Term of office; compensation.
The term of office and annual compensation of the Business Administrator
shall be as fixed by ordinance or resolution of the Town Council.
§ 7-77. Powers and duties of Administrator.
The Business Administrator shall have, exercise and discharge the
functions, powers and duties of the Department of Administration and,
under the direction and supervision of the Mayor, shall:
A. Assist in the preparation of the Town budget.17
17.Editor's Note: Former § 5-69B of the 1981 Revised Code, Administer a centralized
purchase system, which previously followed this subsection, was repealed 11-13-2002 by
Ord. No. MC 3204, except insofar as it conflicts with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:69A-44(b). See now § 7-83C. Section 3 of Ord. No. MC 3204 reads as follows: "Section
3. All the powers, duties, functions and employees presently assigned to the Department
of Administration are hereby transferred over to the Department of Revenue and Finance
except that all administrative functions shall remain with the Department of
Administration pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:69A-44(b)."
§ 7-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-77
1:53
§ 7-78. Acting Business Administrator.
Whenever and so long as there is a vacancy in the office of Business
Administrator, the Mayor may serve as Acting Business Administrator,
without additional compensation, and shall for the time being have all the
functions, powers and duties of the Business Administrator.
B. Be responsible for the development and administration of a sound
personnel system.
C. Develop, in cooperation with other department heads, standards and
procedures for the most efficient management of the Town government,
not inconsistent with the Charter, this Code and other ordinances of the
Town.
D. Perform such other duties as Council may prescribe.
§ 7-77 IRVINGTON CODE § 7-78
1:54
ARTICLE IX
Department of Revenue and Finance
§ 7-79. Establishment.
There is hereby established a Department of Revenue and Finance.
§ 7-80. Director to head Department.
The head of the Department of Revenue and Finance shall be the Director
of Revenue and Finance.
§ 7-81. Qualifications of Director. [Amended 1-14-1975 by Ord. No.
MC 2434]
Prior to his appointment, the Director of Revenue and Finance shall be a
registered municipal accountant or a certified municipal finance officer and
shall be qualified by training and experience in municipal finance.
§ 7-82. Powers and duties of Director; Council review of revenue
reports.
A. The Director of Revenue and Finance shall have all the functions,
powers and duties that are hereby or may be hereafter conferred and
imposed on him by law, this Code and the other ordinances of the Town,
and he shall:
(1) Supervise the office and be responsible for all the operations of the
Department of Revenue and Finance and the personnel therein.
(2) Formulate such rules and regulations as are necessary for the
efficient and economical operation of the Department of Revenue
and Finance.
(3) Make periodical reports to the Mayor and Council concerning the
operation of the Department of Revenue and Finance.
(4) Perform any other duties placed upon him by the Council.
B. Council review of revenue reports. [Added 3-9-1999 by Ord. No. MC
3110]
(1) It shall be required that the Municipal Council review all detailed
revenue reports from the Chief Financial Officer, or his designee,
for review by the Council at its regular bimonthly caucus meetings.
Such report should reflect the current status of each department
budget.
(2) Failure to provide this information as requested will be considered
a violation of a municipal ordinance subjecting the violator to any
penalties set forth in Chapter 1, Article III, § 1-17A of the Code of
the Township of Irvington.
§ 7-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-83
1:55
§ 7-83. Composition of Department. [Amended 9-27-1988 by Ord.
No. MC 2866; 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. MC 2961]
In the Department of Revenue and Finance, there shall be the following
divisions:
§ 7-84. Composition of Division of Revenue. [Amended 11-29-1979
by Ord. No. MC 2586; 3-23-1982 by Ord. No. MC 2653; 9-27-1988 by
Ord. No. MC 2866; 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. MC 2961]
The Division of Revenue shall be organized into the following three
divisions:
§ 7-85. Municipal Tax Assessors. [Amended 1-26-1971 by Ord. No.
MC 2278; 2-23-1982 by Ord. No. MC 2653]
There is hereby created the office of Municipal Tax Assessor consisting of a
Municipal Tax Assessor and a Deputy Tax Assessor who shall be appointed
by the Municipal Council. The Municipal Council shall provide such other
personnel as may be required to perform the duties of the office. The term
of office and compensation of the Municipal Tax Assessor and Deputy Tax
Assessor shall be set by ordinance in accordance with law.
§ 7-86. Powers and duties of Assessors. [Amended 2-23-1982 by
Ord. No. MC 2653]
A. Division of Revenue.
B. Division of Finance.
C. Division of Centralized Purchasing. [Added 11-13-2002 by Ord. No.
320418]
A. Bureau of Tax Collection.
B. Division of Licensing.
C. Bureau of Sewer User Charge Collections.
A. The Municipal Tax Assessor and Deputy Tax Assessor shall, prior to
appointment, be qualified by training and property appraisal and
valuation experience and shall hold a Tax Assessor certificate provided
for in P.L. 1967, c.44. (N.J.S.A. 54:1-35.25 et seq.).
B. The Municipal Tax Assessor and Deputy Tax Assessor shall:
(1) Value all real and personal property in the Town for the purpose of
assessments and taxation in accordance with general law.
18.Editor's Note: This ordinance added this subsection except insofar as it conflicts with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:69A-44(b).
§ 7-83 IRVINGTON CODE § 7-86
1:56
§ 7-87. Tax Collector.
The Tax Collector, prior to his appointment, shall be qualified by training
and experience in the administration of municipal tax collections and tax
accounting procedures. He shall be appointed by the Director of Revenue
and Finance and shall serve for a term prescribed by law for the office of Tax
Collector. His compensation shall be fixed by ordinance. The office of Tax
Collector shall be a full-time position and the Tax Collector shall not accept
or hold other office or employment during his term as Tax Collector.
§ 7-88. Duties of Tax Collector.
The Tax Collector shall:
§ 7-89. Cashier.
There shall be a Cashier within the Bureau of Tax Collections. All cash
receipts of the Town government shall, insofar as practicable, be received
and accounted for by the Cashier. Parking meter collections shall be
delivered to the Cashier, to be counted and accounted for in such manner
as may be prescribed or approved by the Comptroller.
(2) Prepare the tax list and duplicate as required by law and maintain
adequate assessment records of each and every parcel of real
property assessed.
(3) Have custody of and maintain an up-to-date Town Tax Map and
provide for the recording thereon of all changes in ownership or
character of the property assessed.
(4) Make all special assessments of benefits for local improvements.
(5) Be responsible for all appraisals of property for any Town purpose,
provided that it may, with the approval of the Mayor and the
consent of Council and within the limits of available appropriations,
retain outside experts or appraisers whenever the public interest
requires.
A. Extend each year's tax on the tax duplicate, prepare and mail tax bills
and maintain tax accounting records in such manner as may be
prescribed by law.
B. Receive and collect all delinquent real and personal property taxes,
charge and receive penalties and interest pursuant to law and account
for all collections in such form and manner as may be prescribed by law.
C. Make or cause to be made and certify searches for tax and other liens
on any real property in the Town as may be authorized by law, and
charge and collect for the use of the Town the fee required by law for
any such search.
§ 7-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-90
1:57
§ 7-90. Division of Licensing.
There shall be a Division of Licensing, the head of which shall be the Chief
License Clerk. The Chief License Clerk shall administer and enforce the
provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the Town relating to his
duties as heretofore. The compensation of the Chief License Clerk shall
be such sum annually as shall have been fixed by ordinance. All fees and
revenue for licenses (other than statutory permits, inspections and the like)
shall be paid to this Division insofar as practicable.
§ 7-91. Bureau of Sewer User Charge Collections. [Added
11-29-1979 by Ord. No. MC 2586]
§ 7-92. Division of Finance.
The Division of Finance shall consist of:
§ 7-93. Comptroller.
A. There shall be a Bureau of Sewer User Charge Collections, the head of
which shall be the Supervisor of User Charge Collections. The
Supervisor of User Charge Collections shall enforce the provisions of
Ordinance No. MC 2517, as amended, and Ordinance No. MC 2518, as
amended,19 as they relate to the collection of the charges imposed
thereby; shall maintain such records as may be necessary; shall turn
over all funds collected to the Cashier for deposit; and shall render such
reports and recommendations as the Director of Revenue and Finance
may require.
B. The Supervisor of Sewer User Charge Collections shall be the Tax
Collector and his compensation shall be defined by ordinance.
C. The salary compensation to the Supervisor of Sewer User Charge
Collections shall be such annual salary as shall be provided by the
Municipal Council by ordinance.20 [Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord. No.
MC 2622]
A. The Office of the Comptroller.
B. The Office of the Treasurer.
C. The Bureau of Insurance.
A. There shall be a Comptroller, who shall have the functions, powers and
duties heretofore vested in the Comptroller and who shall:
19.Editor's Note: See Ch. 499, Sewer Rents and Charges.
20.Editor's Note: Former § 5-83.1 of the 1981 Revised Code, Bureau of Parking, which
previously followed this section, added 9-27-1988 by Ord. No. MC 2866, amended
2-15-1989 by Ord. No. MC 2878, was repealed 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. MC 2961. For
current provisions, see now § 7-143, Division of Parking.
§ 7-90 IRVINGTON CODE § 7-93
1:58
§ 7-94. Chief Financial Officer. [Added 1-24-1989 by Ord. No. MC
2877]
(1) Maintain the Town's accounting records and prescribe and enforce
the uniform system of accounts for all departments, offices and
agencies of the Town government; provided that such system shall,
so far as consistent with sound accounting principles, facilitate the
production of records of the cost of performance of each functional
program on activity.
(2) Preaudit all bills, claims and demands against the Town, including
payrolls.
(3) Require reports of receipts and disbursements from each
department, office and agency of the Town government to be made
daily or at such intervals as he may determine will most efficiently
protect the Town's interest.
(4) Provide for the installation and use of a central payroll system.
(5) Control all expenditures to ensure that budget appropriations are
not exceeded; pass upon each proposed expenditure for conformity
with general law, the Charter, this Code and other ordinances of the
Town; and unless he shall certify that there is an unencumbered
balance of appropriation and available funds, no appropriation
shall be encumbered and no expenditure shall be made.
(6) Keep books and records of accounts for the exercise of the
foregoing financial budgetary control over each department, office
and agency of the Town government; and keep such accounts as
will show the amount of each appropriation, the cumulative amount
paid therefrom and the unpaid obligations and unencumbered
balance thereof.
(7) Authorize the payment of bills, claims, demands and payrolls upon
the proper certification of the appropriate department head of the
amount due and owing.
B. In the absence of the Comptroller from his duties by reason of illness,
vacation, resignation, retirement or any other reason, the functions,
powers and duties of the Comptroller set forth in Subsection A shall be
performed by the Acting Comptroller or the Chief Accountant in the
Department of Revenue and Finance or such other person in such
Department designated by the Director of Revenue and Finance.
[Added 2-26-1974 by Ord. No. MC 2395]
A. There shall be a Chief Financial Officer, who is defined as a person who
is a certified municipal finance officer appointed pursuant to the
provisions of Section 5 of P.L. 1988, c. 110,21 to carry out the
21.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.10.
§ 7-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-94
1:59
§ 7-95. Treasurer.
§ 7-96. Presentation and payment of bills. [Amended 2-26-1974 by
Ord. No. MC 2395]
§ 7-97. Bureau of Insurance.
responsibilities as set forth in P.L. 1947, c. 151 (N.J.S.A. 52:27BB-26 et
seq.) and N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1 et seq., as amended.
B. The Comptroller shall be the Chief Financial Officer.
A. The Town Treasurer shall, under the direction of the Director of
Revenue and Finance, supervise and perform the work involved in the
disbursement and accounting of funds received and disbursed. He shall
supervise and perform the work involved in the preparation of varied
financial reports and statements. He shall perform such other related
duties as Council may require.
B. The Treasurer shall be appointed by the Director of Revenue and
Finance and his term of office and compensation shall be fixed by
ordinance according to law.
A. Bills, claims and demands against the Town shall be submitted for
approval to the Municipal Council at least 16 business hours before its
regular meeting.
B. Bills, claims and demands against the Town, when duly authorized and
approved, shall be paid upon the audit, warrant or approval of the
Comptroller or, in his absence, by the Chief Accountant in the
Department of Revenue and Finance or such other person so
designated by the Director of Revenue and Finance.
C. After audit and approval, payments and disbursements shall be made by
bank check or draft warranted or drawn by the Comptroller or Chief
Accountant in the Department of Revenue and Finance or such other
person in such Department designated by the Director of Revenue and
Finance and signed by the Town Treasurer and countersigned by the
Mayor or the Business Administrator.
D. The Mayor is hereby authorized and directed to provide to the
Municipal Council: [Added 6-25-1996 by Ord. No. MC 3041]
(1) A certification of funds as it pertains to expenditures contained in
any bill lists which may be submitted to the Municipal Council for
its approval or an explanation of why a certification of funds cannot
be provided for any particular item of expenditure which is
included in the bill lists.
(2) A monthly report showing a cumulative statement of expenditures
as compared to the budget.
§ 7-94 IRVINGTON CODE § 7-97
1:60
§ 7-98. Capital Improvement Fund.
A Capital Improvements Fund may be instituted by the Council and
provided in the budget for specific purposes against a direct expenditure
to be made with the approval of the Council. Such appropriation shall
be shown under the classification of "capital improvement." Items of
appropriation under the classification of "capital improvements" may
include only those items which have a life within the meaning of the Local
Bond Law and which could be financed by the issuance of notes and bonds
under the Local Bond Law. Each item shall be a separate appropriation.22
A. Within the Division of Finance there shall be a Bureau of Insurance,
which shall consist of an Insurance Clerk, the Director of Revenue and
Finance and the Business Administrator. The Bureau of Insurance shall
have the powers and duties to purchase, contract and place such
hazard and risk insurance as shall be practical to serve the best
interests of the Town government and to provide for proper
recordkeeping and continuous audit of all insurance policies for proper
coverage. Insurance coverage shall be purchased on competitive
bidding unless the best interests of the Town would otherwise be
served. The Insurance Clerk shall be appointed pursuant to law.
B. The Bureau of Insurance shall supervise the contractual administration
of the self-insurance program and agreement entered into by the Town
and shall report at least quarter-annually, to the Municipal Council, the
financial status of the program, the number and kind of worker's
compensation claims filed and make such recommendations as deemed
advisable. [Added 2-9-1982 by Ord. No. MC 2651]
22.Editor's Note: Former Art. IX of Ch. 5 of the 1981 Revised Code, Department of Public
Works, as amended, which previously followed this article, was repealed 3-10-2009 by Ord.
No. MC 3395. Former Art. X of Ch. 5 of the 1981 Revised Code, Department of Health and
Welfare, as amended, which previously followed this article, was repealed 3-10-2009 by
Ord. No. MC 3393. Ordinance No. 3511, adopted 7-1-2014, reinstituted the Department of
Public Works and the Department of Health. See now Art. XI, Department of Health, and
Art. XIII, Department of Public Works, of this chapter.
§ 7-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-98
1:61

ARTICLE X
Department of Parks and Recreation
[Added 8-11-1970 by Ord. No. MC 2260]
§ 7-99. Establishment.
There is hereby established a Department of Parks and Recreation.
§ 7-100. Director to head Department.
The head of the Department of Parks and Recreation shall be the Director
of Parks and Recreation.
§ 7-101. Qualifications of Director.
The Director of Parks and Recreation shall, prior to his appointment, hold
a professional degree in recreation or equivalent, have training and
experience in recreational programs and park maintenance and have the
ability to supervise and direct personnel and administer the Department.
§ 7-102. Powers and duties of Director.
The Director of Parks and Recreation shall have all the functions, powers
and duties that are hereby or may be hereafter conferred and imposed on
him by law, this Code and the other ordinances of the Town, and he shall:
A. As the chief administrative officer of the Department of Parks and
Recreation, be responsible for the proper and efficient operation of that
Department.
B. Administer the work of the Department.
C. Supervise, direct and train the employees of the Department.
D. Prepare the budget for the Department.
E. Plan the construction, maintenance and operation schedule of all parks,
playgrounds and recreational facilities.
F. Keep records, prepare reports, conduct studies of the present and
future park, playground and recreational needs.
G. Develop immediate and long-range plans and submit recommendations
for improving the recreational facilities, programs and ordinances
relating to parks, playgrounds and recreation.
H. Develop and administer the recreation program.
I. Conduct public relations programs.
J. Approve, develop and supervise the park and playground construction
and maintenance program.
§ 7-99 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-102
1:63
§ 7-103. Appointment, term and compensation of Director.
The Director of Parks and Recreation shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of the Council for a term of office as fixed by law and
at an annual compensation as fixed by ordinance.
§ 7-104. Functions of Department.
The Department of Parks and Recreation shall:
§ 7-105. Composition of Department.
Within the Department of Parks and Recreation there shall be the following
division:23
§ 7-106. Division of Recreation.
There shall be within the Department of Parks and Recreation a Division of
Recreation, the head of which shall be the Superintendent of Recreation,
and this Division shall:
K. Perform other related tasks as required.
A. Provide a year-round program of wholesome recreational activities for
all Town residents.
B. Cooperate with other municipal departments, service clubs and other
organizations in furthering and coordinating recreational, cultural and
leisure-time interests in the community.
C. Plan, develop and coordinate the use of recreational, playground, park
and other related facilities.
D. Enter into agreements and understandings with the Board of Education
for joint and cooperative program planning and use of facilities.
E. Provide for the maintenance of all Town parks, playgrounds and public
grounds, including trees, lawns and landscaping appurtenant to public
buildings and the recreational areas and facilities operated by the Town
government.
A. Division of Recreation.
A. Administer and operate indoor and outdoor sports and athletic,
recreational and cultural programs and activities within our parks,
playgrounds and other facilities for the residents of our community.
23.Editor's Note: Former § 5-113A, Division of Maintenance, and former § 5-114, Division of
Maintenance, of the 1981 Revised Code, which previously followed this section, were
repealed 10-13-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3131. This ordinance assigned the functions and
personnel of the Division of Maintenance to the Division of Public Property. See now
§ 7-136, Division of Public Property.
§ 7-102 IRVINGTON CODE § 7-106
1:64
B. Administer and operate community centers, social centers and
recreational functions and activities relating thereto.
C. Use and operate public school property to the extent that it is adaptable
and available for recreational programs and purposes of the Division.
D. Plan and develop public recreation areas and facilities.
E. Stimulate, promote and direct constructive leisure-time activities for
the residents of the Town.
F. Work toward the reduction of delinquency and the optimum
coordination and development of public and private recreational
facilities within the Town.
G. Sponsor, arrange and provide for the giving of indoor and outdoor
exhibitions, concerts, games and contests, employing the use of public
property for such purposes.
H. Charge and collect for the use of the Town a reasonable admission fee
where deemed advisable, for each person entering or using facilities,
exhibitions, concerts, games or contests provided under this article.24
24.Editor's Note: Former Art. XII of the 1981 Revised Code, Department of Property
Maintenance and Neighborhood Improvement, which previously followed this article,
added 6-10-1975 by Ord. No. MC 2451, as amended, was repealed 9-28-1982 by Ord. No.
MC 2668. Former Art. XII of the 1981 Revised Code, Department of Neighborhood
Services, which previously followed this article, added 3-10-2009 by Ord. No. 3392, was
repealed 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511. Ordinance No. MC 3511 abolished the
Department of Neighborhood Services and reestablished the Department of Health, the
Department of Housing Services and the Department of Public Works; see Articles XI, XII
and XIII of this chapter.
§ 7-106 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-106
1:65

ARTICLE XI
Department of Health
[Added 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
§ 7-107. Establishment.
There is hereby established a Department of Health.
§ 7-108. Director to head department.
The head of the Department of Health shall be the Director. The Health
Officer may be appointed as such Director.
§ 7-109. Powers and duties of Director.
§ 7-110. Health Officer.
There shall be within the Department of Health a Health Officer, who shall
administer the provisions of state law and this Code conferring functions,
powers and duties upon a local Health Officer.
A. The Director shall have all of the functions, powers and duties that are
hereby or may be hereafter conferred and imposed upon him by law,
this Code and other ordinances of the Township, and he shall:
(1) As chief administrative officer, be responsible for the proper and
efficient operation of the Department.
(2) Enforce the provisions of state law, this Code and ordinances of the
Township providing for the prevention and control of disease and
the protection of the environment.
(3) Administer the provisions of state law, this Code and ordinances of
the Township relating to vital statistics.
(4) Administer a public health nursing service, health education and
environmental protection programs.
(5) Administer public health clinics as authorized by law.
(6) Correlate all inspections performed by the Township relating to the
codes and ordinances for which the Department is responsible.
(7) Develop plans and submit recommendations for improving
programs consistent with N.J.S.A. 26:1A-15j and 26:3A2-21.
B. Unless provided, all inspections, regulations and enforcement
proceedings related to the laws, codes and ordinances for which the
Department is responsible shall be under his direction and supervision.
He may designate such other public officials or employees of the
Township to perform duties as may be necessary for the enforcement of
said laws, codes and ordinances.
§ 7-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-111
1:67
§ 7-111. Designation of Registrar of Vital Statistics.
The Health Officer shall designate an employee of the Department as the
Township Registrar of Vital Statistics.
§ 7-112. Powers, duties and authority of Department.
The Department of Health shall have all of the powers, duties and authority
formerly vested in the Department of Health and Environmental Control
and such additional authority as shall be necessary to enforce the health,
sanitary and environments laws of the State of New Jersey and ordinances
of the Township related thereto.
§ 7-113. Composition of Department.
Within the Department of Health there shall be the following divisions:
§ 7-114. Deputy Director of Health.
A. Division of Administration.
B. Division of Environmental Health.
C. Division of Public Health Nursing.
A. The schedule of Section 1 of Ordinance No. MC 2736 is amended and
supplemented to include the creation of the following position,
definition and examples of work: Deputy Director of Health.25
B. There is hereby established within the Department of Health the
position of Deputy Director of Health.
C. Under the direction of the Director, the Deputy Director of Health
assists in the management of the Department of Health, coordinates
work programs and does related work as required.
D. The duties and examples of the work of the Deputy Director of Health
are as follows. The Deputy Director of Health shall:
(1) Take charge of the operation of the department in the absence of
the Director.
(2) Set work schedules for sanitary inspectors.
(3) Review inspector reports and make recommendations to the
Director.
(4) Review plans, drawings and permit applications and make
recommendations to the Director.
25.Editor's Note: The currently effective ordinances establishing salaries and rates of
compensation of officers and employees of the Township are on file in the office of the
Municipal Clerk.
§ 7-111 IRVINGTON CODE § 7-114
1:68
(5) Supervise and, when necessary, make health-related inspections
and take required samples.
(6) Draft correspondence in the course of official duties; prepare clear,
sound, accurate and informative statistical and other reports.
(7) Supervise the creation and maintenance of essential records and
files required by the Department.
E. The qualifications and requirements of the position are as follows:
(1) Possession of a bachelor's degree in health or a related field and
first grade valid sanitary inspectors license and/or a health officer's
license plus three years of experience in a municipal health
department, including at least one year in a supervisory capacity.
(2) Ability to organize assigned work, analyze Department problems
and develop effective work methods; ability to interpret laws,
ordinances, regulations and rules and to enforce the same in
specific situations, ability to assign work to subordinates in a cost
effective and routine basis; make efficient use of personnel,
equipment, materials, supplies and space.
(3) Good health and freedom from disabling physical and mental
defects which would impair the proper performance of the required
duties or which might endanger the health and safety of oneself or
others.
F. The position of Deputy Director of Health shall be in the unclassified
service pursuant to N.J.S.A. 11:22-2.26
26.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 11:22-2 was repealed by P.L. 1986, c. 112. See now N.J.S.A. 11A:3-5.
§ 7-114 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-114
1:69

ARTICLE XII
Department of Housing Services
[Added 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
§ 7-115. Establishment.
There is hereby established a Department of Housing Services.
§ 7-116. Head of Department.
The head of the Department of Housing Services shall be the Director of
Housing Services.
§ 7-117. Director of Housing Services.
The Director of Housing Services shall, prior to his appointment, have
had at least five years' experience in the field of property maintenance
code enforcement and inspection and the ability to supervise and direct
personnel and administer the Department.
§ 7-118. Deputy Director.
The Deputy Director of Housing Services shall, prior to appointment, have
had at least five years of experience in the field of property maintenance
code enforcement and the ability to supervise and direct personnel and
administer the Department in the absence of the Director.
§ 7-119. Functions, powers and duties of Director.
A. The Director shall have all of the functions, powers and duties that are
hereby or may be hereinafter conferred upon him by law or ordinance
of the Township, and he shall:
(1) Be responsible for the proper and efficient operation of the
Department;
(2) Enforce the following sections of this Code: Chapter 355, Housing
Standards; Chapter 460, Property Maintenance; Chapter 449, Pest
Control; and Chapter 380, Littering;
(3) Coordinate all inspections performed by the Township relating to
codes and ordinances for which the Department is responsible;
(4) Develop plans and submit recommendations for improving code
enforcement programs and related inspection programs; and
(5) Develop programs for the improvement of the housing conditions of
the Township.
B. Unless otherwise provided, all inspections and enforcement
proceedings related to the laws, codes and ordinances for which the
Department is responsible shall be under his direction and supervision.
§ 7-115 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-119
1:71
§ 7-120. Functions, powers and duties of Deputy Director.
The Deputy Director shall:
§ 7-121. Functions, powers and duties of Department.
The Department of Housing Services shall have all of the powers, duties
and authority formerly vested in the Division of Housing and Property
Maintenance of the Department of Health and Housing and such additional
authority as shall be necessary to enforce the laws of the State of New
Jersey and the ordinances of the Township governing the maintenance,
appearance, condition and occupancy of residential and nonresidential
premises.
§ 7-122. Divisions.
Within the Department of Housing Services there shall be the following
divisions:
§ 7-123. Division of Building Inspection.
He may designate employees to perform duties as may be necessary for
the proper enforcement of said laws, codes and ordinances.
A. Have all the functions, powers and duties conferred upon the Director
in the absence of the Director pursuant to the provisions of § 7-119 of
the Revised Code of the Township of Irvington.
B. Perform such other functions, powers and duties as may be designated
by the Director.
A. The Division of Administration, which shall consist of the Director as
Administrator, the Deputy Director and an Administrative Secretary.
B. The Division of Housing Assistance, which shall consist of:
(1) One loan advisor/cost estimator.
(2) One housing counsellor.
(3) One clerk typist.
(4) The Housing Services Assistant.
C. The Division of Property Maintenance, which shall consist of:
(1) One chief field representative.
(2) Seven housing inspectors.
(3) Two clerk typists.
(4) Two plumbing inspectors.
§ 7-119 IRVINGTON CODE § 7-123
1:72
A. There shall be within the Department of Housing Services a Division of
Building Inspection, the head of which shall be the Chief Building
Inspector, and the Division shall:
(1) Be responsible for the enforcement of the State Uniform
Construction Code; Chapter 650, Zoning; Chapter 571, Swimming
Pools; and Chapter 513, Signs and Billboards.
(2) Supervise and direct the Irvington Construction Code Agency.
(3) Correlate all inspections performed by the Township relative to the
codes and ordinances for which the Division is responsible.
(4) Develop plans and submit recommendations for improving
inspections made by the Township pursuant to the State Uniform
Construction Code and related codes.
(5) Provide for the securing of abandoned buildings and premises.
B. The Chief Building Inspector, who shall be a qualified construction
official, is designated as the Township Construction Official. Unless
otherwise provided, all inspections, regulations and enforcement
proceedings related to the codes and ordinances for which the Division
is responsible shall be under his direction and supervision. He may
designate such other public officials or employees of the Township to
perform duties as may be necessary to the enforcement of said codes
and ordinances.
§ 7-123 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-123
1:73

ARTICLE XIII
Department of Public Works
[Added 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
§ 7-124. Establishment.
There is hereby established a Department of Public Works.
§ 7-125. Director to head Department.
The head of the Department of Public Works shall be the Director of Public
Works.
§ 7-126. Qualifications of Director.
The Director of Public Works shall, within one year from the date of
appointment, hold a public works manager certificate, issued pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-154.6c, and shall be qualified by training and experience of
at least five years in public works employment.
§ 7-127. Appointment, term and compensation of Director.
The Director of Public Works shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Council for a term of four years at such
compensation as may be fixed by ordinance.
§ 7-128. Composition of Department.
Within the Department of Public Works there shall be the following
divisions:
§ 7-129. Division of Engineering.
There shall be within the Department of Public Works a Division of
Engineering, the head of which Division shall be the Town Engineer. He
shall, prior to his appointment, hold a professional degree in civil or
mechanical engineering from a recognized school or college of engineering
and be qualified by further training and experience of at least five years in
responsible engineering work. His compensation shall be such sum as shall
be fixed by ordinance.
A. Division of Engineering.
B. Division of Streets and Sewers.
C. Division of Sanitation.
D. Division of Motorized Equipment.
E. Division of Public Property.
F. Division of Traffic Signals.
§ 7-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-130
1:75
§ 7-130. Powers and duties of Town Engineer.
The Town Engineer shall:
§ 7-131. Division of Streets and Sewers.
There shall be within the Department of Public Works a Division of Streets
and Sewers, the head of which shall be the Superintendent of Streets and
Sewers, and this Division shall:
§ 7-132. Division of Sanitation.
There shall be within the Department of Public Works a Division of
Sanitation, the head of which shall be the Superintendent of Sanitation, who
shall be responsible for the collection and disposal of garbage and refuse
and shall, when so directed by the Director of Public Works, assist in the
removal of snow on Town streets and parking lots.
A. Be responsible for the preparation of all plans and specifications for
public works and improvements undertaken by the Town.
B. Supervise the performance of all contracts for public works and certify
the amounts due and payable thereunder.
C. Provide and maintain surveys, maps, specifications and operating
records with respect to all public property, works and facilities owned
or operated by the Town government.
D. Supervise and direct the installation and administration of
departmental records, payroll and inventory controls and cost analysis.
E. Provide for Town traffic engineering needs.
F. Provide for all engineering and mechanical services required by any
department, office or agency of the Town government except the
communications systems of the Police Division and Fire Division in the
Department of Public Safety and as otherwise directed by the Mayor.
[Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
A. Provide for construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of all
public streets in the Town.
B. Regulate street openings and the construction, alteration and repair of
sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
C. Clean all Town streets and parking lots.
D. Remove snow from all Town streets and parking lots.
E. Provide for the construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of
all sanitary and storm sewers in the Town.
§ 7-130 IRVINGTON CODE § 7-133
1:76
§ 7-133. Division of Motorized Equipment.
There shall be within the Department of Public Works a Division of
Motorized Equipment, the head of which shall be the Garage
Superintendent. This Division shall:
§ 7-134. Division of Public Property.
There shall be within the Department of Public Works a Division of Public
Property, the head of which shall be the Maintenance Superintendent, who
shall be in charge of playgrounds and public property. This Division shall:
§ 7-135. Division of Traffic Signals.
There shall be within the Department of Public Works a Division of Traffic
Signals, headed by the Director of Public Works, which shall be responsible
for the installation, care and maintenance of all traffic signals within the
Township.
A. Supervise the work done in all Town garages or elsewhere for the
storage, repair, servicing and maintenance of Town-owned motorized
equipment.
B. Operate garages for the storage, servicing, repair and maintenance of
all Town-owned motorized equipment.
C. Set up a car pool.
D. Control the use of motorized equipment and maintain cost records for
operation, maintenance and replacement, in such manner as may be
prescribed by the Director of Public Works.
A. Care for the pruning, trimming, removal and planting of shade trees in
the streets and all other public places in the Town.
B. Provide custodial and janitorial services for all public buildings and
places under the jurisdiction of the Town government, exclusive of
firehouses.
C. Operate and maintain Town-owned properties, including tax-foreclosed
property and veterans' temporary housing.
D. Care for and maintain all Township playgrounds, recreational areas and
facilities operated by the Department of Parks and Recreation within
the Township.
§ 7-133 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-135
1:77

ARTICLE XIV
Department of Public Safety
[Added 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
§ 7-136. Establishment. [Amended 1-12-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3562;
12-28-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3594]
There is hereby established a Department of Public Safety, the head of
which shall be the Director of Public Safety. The Department of Public
Safety shall consist of the Division of Police, the Division of Fire, and the
Division of Parking. The Director of Public Safety shall be subordinate to the
Business Administrator and the Mayor and execute the powers and duties
described in this article (Ordinance No. MC 3553). The Director of Public
Safety shall set forth the organizational structure, staffing levels, budget,
rules and regulations and the policies of all of the divisions which comprise
the Department of Public Safety. The Department of Public Safety shall
consist of the functions, duties, responsibilities, authority and personnel
enumerated in this article (Ordinance No. MC 3553).
§ 7-137. Director of Public Safety qualifications.
The Director shall, prior to his appointment, have had at least 10 years'
experience in public safety administration or such other education,
specialized training, experience or qualifications as may be deemed by the
Municipal Council to be in the best interests of the Township of Irvington.
§ 7-138. Division of Police. [Amended 1-12-2016 by Ord. No. MC
3562; 12-28-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3594]
There shall be a Division of Police, the head of which shall be the Director
of Public Safety. The position of Chief of Police is hereby abolished. The
Director of Public Safety shall direct the routine day-to-day operations of
the Division of Police.
A. The Division of Police shall:
(1) Preserve the public peace; protect life and property; prevent crime;
detect and arrest offenders against the provisions of this Code and
other penal laws and ordinances effective within the Town;
suppress riots, mobs and insurrections; disperse unlawful or
dangerous assemblages; and preserve order at all elections and
public meetings and assemblages.
(2) Administer and enforce the provisions of this Code and other laws
and ordinances to regulate, control, direct and restrict the
movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic and the use of the
streets by vehicles and persons, to protect the safety and facilitate
the convenience of motorists and pedestrians, and to make and
enforce rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the state law,
the Charter, this Code and other ordinances, for such purposes.
§ 7-136 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-138
1:79
(3) Remove or cause to be removed all nuisances in the public streets,
parks and other public places, inspect and observe all places of
public amusement or assemblages and all places of business
requiring any state or Town license or permit and report thereon to
the appropriate department.
(4) Provide proper law enforcement attendance and protection at fires.
(5) Provide for the attendance of its members in court as necessary for
the prosecution and trial of persons charged with crimes and
offenses, and cooperate fully with the law enforcement and
prosecuting authorities of federal, state, county and municipal
governments.
(6) Operate a training program to maintain and improve the efficiency
of the members of the Public Safety Department.
(7) Make, administer and enforce rules and regulations for the
disposition, conduct and discipline of the public safety.
(8) Operate a Juvenile Aid Bureau dealing with the problems of
juveniles.
B. Organization and functions.
(1) Within the organization of the Division of Police there shall be
appointed, as determined, the following sworn officer positions:
(a) Deputy Chief(s) of Police.
(b) Police Captain(s).
(c) Police Lieutenant(s).
(d) Police Sergeant(s).
(e) Detective(s).
(f) Law enforcement personnel in the Department of Public Safety.
(2) The organization shall also consist of the civilian, nonsworn,
positions as determined by the Mayor.
(3) The organization of the Division and duties of the subdivisions
therein shall be prescribed by the Director of Public Safety.
(4) The Division of Police shall be responsible for the functions and
duties prescribed in this § 7-138.
C. Personnel. The Division of Police shall consist of such superior officer,
officers, civilians and support services authorized by ordinance or the
annual budget(s).
§ 7-138 IRVINGTON CODE § 7-138
1:80
§ 7-139. Division of Fire. [Amended 1-12-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3562;
12-28-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3594]
There shall be a Division of Fire, the head of which shall be the Director of
Public Safety. The position of Fire Director is hereby abolished. The Director
of Public Safety shall direct the routine day-to-day operations of the Division
of Fire. The Mayor, as authorized by ordinance, may appoint the positions
of Chief of Fire and/or Chief Engineer, and those positions, if appointed by
the Mayor, shall be subordinate to the Director of Public Safety.
(1) All members of the Division of Police shall adhere requirements
enumerated for personal and professional conduct in this article
(Ordinance No. MC 3553).
(2) The Chaplain(s) and Surgeon(s) for the Police/Fire services shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Township Council. The terms and compensation of Chaplains and
Surgeons shall be set by ordinance.
(3) The policies for promotion, transfer, assignment and the disposition
of resources shall be established and authorized by the Director of
Public Safety.
A. The Division of Fire, under the administrative direction and supervision
of the Director of Public Safety, shall have jurisdiction over the control
and extinguishment of any conflagration which requires its attention
and shall:
(1) Make, administer and enforce rules and regulations for the control
and discipline of its officers and employees, as well as the
maintenance, use, care and disposition of its equipment, apparatus
and fire stations.
(2) Within the limits of available appropriations, provide for the care
and maintenance of its own equipment, apparatus and fire stations.
(3) Provide firefighting service for the extinguishment of fires and the
necessary and incidental protection of life and property throughout
the Township.
(4) Designate and fix the location of fire alarm telegraph and signal
stations in the Township.
(5) Investigate the cause, circumstances and origin of fires and report
to the Public Safety Department and to the County Prosecutor
every case of suspicion of arson.
(6) Have power to inspect and test any automatic or other fire alarm
system or fire-extinguishing equipment.
(7) Be authorized to enter upon, without fee or hindrance, all premises,
ground structures, buildings and passages, whenever necessary in
the performance of its duties.
§ 7-138 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-139
1:81
(8) Operate a training program to maintain and improve the
firefighting efficiency of the members of the Department of Public
Safety.
(9) Maintain a Bureau of Fire Prevention and administer the provisions
of this chapter and other ordinances of the Township relating to fire
safety and the New Jersey Uniform Fire Safety Code.
B. The Director of Public Safety shall appoint the persons to serve as fire
prevention subcode officials pursuant to the State Uniform
Construction Code, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-126.1.
C. The Director of Public Safety shall appoint the person to serve as Fire
Official pursuant to the Uniform Fire Safety Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et
seq.
D. The Bureau of Combustibles, as heretofore constituted, shall be located
in the Division of Fire.
E. All requests for searches or photocopies of such certain information
contained in official files of the Division of Fire shall be made to the
Bureau of Fire Prevention in the Division of Fire of the Town during
reasonable hours of the weekday when such Bureau is open in
accordance with its schedule of working hours.
F. Organization and functions.
(1) The Director of Public Safety shall administer the Division of Fire
and shall perform such duties as may be required for the efficient
operation of the Division, and the Director shall:
(a) Supervise the Chief of Fire and be responsible for all the
personnel of the Division of Fire;
(b) Enforce the rules, regulations and policies set forth by the
Department of Public Safety;
(c) Provide monthly reports to the Business Administrator, the
Mayor and Township Council concerning the operations of the
Department of Public Safety and Division of Fire; and
(d) Perform the duties prescribed in this article (Ordinance No.
MC 3553) and all other duties placed upon the Director of
Public Safety by the Township Council.
(2) The Division of Fire shall have jurisdiction over the control,
fighting, suppression and extinguishment of any conflagration
which occurs and requires the attention of the Division and its
personnel in a manner described and prescribed in this article
(Ordinance No. MC 3553).
§ 7-139 IRVINGTON CODE § 7-139
1:82
§ 7-140. Division of Parking. [Amended 1-12-2016 by Ord. No. MC
3562; 12-28-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3594]
Within the Department of Public Safety there shall be a Division of Parking,
the head of which shall be the Director of Public Safety. Within the Division
of Parking there shall be a Bureau of Parking which shall oversee the
management of the Township's parking system, including the operation of
on-street and off-street parking facilities and the consequent promotion of
the free movement of traffic and relief of congestion on the streets and
improvement of conditions affecting the public safety and welfare of the
Township. The head of the Bureau of Parking shall be the Director of the
Department of Public Safety, who shall appoint a Parking Superintendent
who shall be responsible for the day-to-day operations. The Director of
Public Safety shall furnish a monthly report of income, expenses, personnel
and performance to the Municipal Council, the Mayor and Business
Administrator as defined in this article (Ordinance No. MC 3553). All of
the functions, powers and duties of the Division of Parking within the
Department of Revenue and Finance as heretofore established shall be
transferred and assigned to the Bureau of Parking within the Department of
Public Safety. The duties of the Division and the personnel assigned thereto
shall be established by the Director of Public Safety as authorized by the
Mayor and Municipal Council.
(3) The bureaus, sections and offices previously under the authority of
the Department of Fire shall remain as subsections within the
Division of Fire.
G. Personnel.
(1) The Division of Fire shall consist of such superior officers,
firefighting personnel in the Department of Public Safety and
civilian support staff as designated by the Director of Public Safety
and authorized by the Mayor or municipal ordinance.
(2) The positions, titles and functions of the Division of Fire shall be
established and proscribed by the Director of Public Safety in
accordance with requirements set forth by the Mayor and Township
Council.
(3) The Chaplain(s) and Surgeon(s) for the Police/Fire services shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Township Council. The terms and compensation of the Chaplains/
Surgeons shall be set by ordinance.
(4) The policies for promotion, transfer, assignment and disposition of
resources shall be established and authorized by the Director of
Public Safety.
§ 7-139 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-141
1:83
§ 7-141. Personnel.
The Department of Public Safety shall consist of such officers and men and
women as shall be authorized by this Code or by ordinance for the law
enforcement force within the Department of Public Safety.
§ 7-142. Solicitation by Public Safety employees.
No member of the Department of Public Safety shall solicit or accept
anything of value as consideration for or in connection with the discharge of
his official duties; nor shall any member of the Department of Public Safety
solicit the sale of tickets in connection with any fund-raising campaign nor
request contributions directly or indirectly for same, nor solicit anything
of value for the benefit of himself or any other person or any Department
of Public Safety member, group or organization, without the written
permission of the Public Safety Director.
§ 7-143. Powers and duties of the Public Safety Director.
A. The Public Safety Director shall be the administrator and head of the
Public Safety Department subordinate to the Business Administrator
and Mayor.
B. The Public Safety Director shall give reports to the Mayor and Irvington
Municipal Council twice a month or as requested by the Council. In
addition, the Public Safety Director shall provide said reports to the
Irvington Municipal Council at the Council caucus meeting and/or
Council meetings.
C. The Public Safety Director shall attend the pre-Council Director's
meetings twice a month, unless sick or on vacation.
D. The Public Safety Director shall be responsible for drafting and
submitting an annual budget for the Public Safety Department.
E. The Public Safety Director shall supervise the Deputy Public Safety
Director, Chief of Police and Chief of Fire.
F. The Public Safety Director, or his designee, shall officiate COMSTAT.
G. The Public Safety Director shall conduct and participate in training or
instruction of, to or with any Public Safety personnel.
H. The Public Safety Director shall supervise the Public Safety Department
and be responsible for all other personnel therein.
I. The Director of Public Safety shall be responsible for the
administration, regulation and as the appropriate authority the
discipline of the Division of Police and the Division of Fire.
J. The Mayor can appoint a Deputy Director of Public Safety. The Director
of Public Safety shall assign such person duties as desired. The person
appointed as Deputy Director of Public Safety shall be qualified by
§ 7-141 IRVINGTON CODE § 7-143
1:84
training and experience for the duties of the position. The person
shall not be appointed unless he or she meets the following minimum
qualifications, unless said qualifications are waived by affirmative vote
of at least 2/3 of the entire Council: a minimum of 10 years’ experience
as a member of a police department, fire department or other public
safety agency, five years of which shall have been in a supervisory and
administrative capacity.
K. The Director of Public Safety shall report directly to the Business
Administrator and the Mayor concerning conditions of the Department
and its improvements and needs.
L. The Director may employ special law enforcement officers in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.8 et seq., Special Law
Enforcement Officers' Act.
M. The Director of Public Safety may promulgate rules and regulations for
the Division of Police and the Division of Fire.
N. The Public Safety Director, or his designee, shall serve as the hearing
officer in disciplinary matters and have all of powers prescribed in
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118.
O. The Director of Public Safety shall:
(1) Keep abreast of the public safety requirements of the Township and
formulate policies, directives, orders, plans and procedures to
determine needs;
(2) Develop organization, manpower and resource recommendations
and affect their implementation;
(3) Establish performance criteria for the Department as a whole as
well as its individual members and conduct periodic evaluations to
assure compliance with those criteria;
(4) Establish and maintain relations with school, civil and private
organizations to assure a full understanding of the public safety
effort;
(5) Conduct public relations and public information programs on
behalf of the Department in order to maintain the required
relationship between the Department and the citizens of Irvington;
(6) Promote a close liaison with the various agencies located in
Irvington, and to attend meetings of the Town Council as needed to
better coordinate the functioning of the Division of Police and
Division of Fire.
(7) Regularly review the ordinances of the Township of Irvington
dealing with public safety.
§ 7-143 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-143
1:85
§ 7-144. Safekeeping of stolen property.
The Public Safety Director shall provide by rules and regulations for the
custody and safekeeping of all property alleged to be found abandoned,
stolen or embezzled, all property taken from the person of any prisoner and
all other property alleged to have been acquired or possessed unlawfully
which shall come into the possession of any member of the Public Safety
Department. All such property and money shall be promptly described and
registered and be accounted for in detail in such manner as the Public
Safety Director shall prescribe with the approval of the Comptroller.
(8) Meet with any police and fire personnel he deems appropriate to
ascertain information necessary to formulating policy, directives,
general orders, or any other matters concerning the effective and
efficient operation of the Division of Police and the Division of Fire.
(9) Be responsible for the deployment of all police and fire personnel
as well as all resources and equipment.
(10) Be responsible for the routine day-to-day operations of the Police
Division and Fire Division when the Chief of Police and Chief of Fire
are on vacation, sick leave, family medical leave, military leave or
any other approved leave of absence for more 14 consecutive days.
(11) Be responsible for the routine day-to-day operations when there is
no Chief of Police or Chief of Fire by ordinance.
P. In the absence of the Public Safety Director due to illness, vacation or
vacancy, the day-to-day operations will fall to the Business
Administrator.
Q. Powers and duties of Public Safety Director related to Division of Police.
The Director of Public Safety shall administer the Division and shall
perform such duties as may be required for the efficient operation of
the Division, and the Director shall: [Added 1-12-2016 by Ord. No.
MC 3562]
(1) Supervise the operations of the Division, delegate law enforcement
duties and be responsible for all the personnel and functions
therein;
(2) Formulate such rules, regulations and policies as are necessary for
the efficient and effective operation of the Division;
(3) Provide monthly reports to the Business Administrator, the Mayor
and Township Council concerning the operations of the Department
of Public Safety and Division of Police; and
(4) Perform the duties prescribed in this article (Ordinance No. MC
3553) and all other duties placed upon the Director of Public Safety
by the Township Council.
§ 7-143 IRVINGTON CODE § 7-145
1:86
§ 7-145. Release of official public safety information.
The Director of the Department of Public Safety of the Township is hereby
authorized to prescribe rules and regulations governing the release of
certain information contained in the official files of the Public Safety
Department of the Township. Unless ordered to do otherwise by a court of
competent jurisdiction, he or she may refuse to issue any such information
when, in his or her judgment, the interest of public safety requires, and
he or she may refuse to issue any such information which he or she has
classified as confidential.
§ 7-146. Hours for requesting information.
All requests for information in official files, authorized for release by the
rules and regulations established pursuant to § 7-145, shall be made to
the Bureau of Records and Identification of the Public Safety Department
during such hours as are set forth in the working schedule of such
Department.
§ 7-147. Fees for copies and other services.27
A. The following fees shall be charged by the Public Safety Department,
Division of Police:
(1) For clearance visas and letters of good conduct, the fee shall be
$27.
(2) For fingerprints, the fee shall be $85. For any application that
requires a police investigation, the individual shall get a refund of
$60 if that applicant is selected for employment.
(3) For a photograph, the fee shall be $39.
(4) For each search to verify information authorized for release by the
rules and regulations established pursuant to § 7-145, the fee shall
be $27.
(5) For the copies of motor vehicle accident reports, the fee shall be $1
per page if obtained in person. For copies of all other reports
authorized for release by the rules and regulations established
pursuant to § 7-145, the fee shall be $9 if obtained in person. For
copies of such reports requested other than in person, the fee shall
be $26 per report. A fee of $24 will be charged for each report
searched for and not found.
(6) Fees for special detail assignments for off-duty law enforcement
personnel in the Department of Public Safety shall be as follows:
(a) The rate is $40 per hour, and with a patrol car is an additional
$10 per hour, gross before taxes.
27.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 462, Records.
§ 7-145 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-147
1:87
(b) The rate of compensation for a law enforcement personnel in
the Department of Public Safety for construction is $85 per
hour, and with a patrol car is an additional $10 per hour, gross
before taxes.
(c) The rate for traffic duty with a patrol car is $50 per hour, gross
before taxes.
(d) The rate for strike duty is $40 per hour, gross before taxes.
(e) Any detail involving the services of four or more officers will
require a supervisor who shall receive compensation at an
additional $2 per hour, gross pay before taxes, above the
hourly rate of law enforcement personnel in the Department of
Public Safety assigned to said details.
(f) An additional fee of 10% per officer hour is hereby established
to cover the administrative costs, overhead and out-of-pocket
expense of the Township of Irvington. This fee shall not apply
to the Township of Irvington Board of Education.
(7) The fees provided herein are exclusive of fees charged by other
authorities.
B. The following fees shall be charged by the Public Safety Department,
Division of Fire. The following fees for searching or obtaining
photocopies of certain information authorized to be released are hereby
established:
(1) For search or verification of certain information, the fee shall be $9
for each such search or verification.
(2) For a photocopy of the first page or portion thereof, the fee shall be
$9 for the first page and $2.50 for each page thereafter, to a
maximum fee of $64.
(3) No fee shall be charged for any requested search or photocopy by a
federal, state, county or municipal duly constituted agency or
department.
(4) Any person having a lawful interest in the subject matter shall be
allowed to hand-copy such released information under the
supervision of a Bureau employee without charge.
(5) A receipt shall be given in triplicate for all moneys received in
connection with the making of a search or for such photocopies
aforesaid. The original of such receipt shall be given to the person
making the payment for such search or photocopies, the duplicate
to be attached to the form made out for all such services performed
or rendered and the triplicate to remain in chronological order in
the Bureau of Fire Prevention for audit. The aforesaid receipt shall
be identified by a corresponding number on the original and both
§ 7-147 IRVINGTON CODE § 7-147
1:88
§ 7-148. Services for which no charge is made.
§ 7-149. Receipts for fees.
A receipt shall be prepared in triplicate for all money received in connection
with the services provided pursuant to §§ 7-145 to 7-147, the original to be
given to the person making the payment for such services, the duplicate
to be attached to the form made out for all such services performed and
the triplicate to remain in chronological order in the Bureau of Records
and Identification for audit. The aforesaid receipt shall be identified by
corresponding number on the original and both copies. All money so
received shall be forwarded monthly to the Department of Revenue and
Finance.
§ 7-150. Registration of security individuals and companies.
Any individual or company rendering service as private security within the
Township of Irvington, either armed or unarmed, shall first register with the
Irvington Public Safety Department at least 24 hours prior to the start of
such operation. The twenty-four-hour notice clause may be waived by the
Public Safety Director, or the appropriate designee, for good cause shown
but in every event notice must be given before the start of said service. At
that time, the individual shall be required to provide adequate proof that he,
she or it, as the case may be, is the possessor of an appropriate license.
§ 7-151. Special detail assignments for off-duty officers. [Amended
3-13-2018 by Ord. No. MC 3635; 6-26-2018 by Ord. No. MC 3658]
copies of such receipt. All such moneys shall be forwarded monthly
to the Department of Revenue and Finance.
A. A resident of the Township who is a defendant in a judicial proceeding
arising out of a motor vehicle accident shall be allowed to copy the
report of such accident without charge therefor.
B. No fee shall be charged for fingerprints for law enforcement,
firefighting personnel, civil defense and special law enforcement
officers (formerly special police) applicants. Fees charged by other
authorities shall be paid by the applicant.
C. No fee shall be charged for any information requested by the Irvington
Board of Education.
A. For the convenience of those persons and entities which utilize the
services of off-duty law enforcement officers of the Township of
Irvington Department of Public Safety, Division of Police, and to
authorize the outside employment of municipal police while off duty, the
Township of Irvington hereby establishes a policy regarding the use of
said officers in compliance with N.J.S.A. 45:19-9 et seq., as amended by
the Security Officers Registration Act, P.L. 2004, c. 134.28
§ 7-147 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-151
1:89
(1) Members of the Township of Irvington Police Division, at their
option, shall be permitted to accept police-related employment for
private employers, who are separate and independent from the
Township of Irvington, only during off-duty hours and at such time
as will not interfere with the efficient performance of regularly
scheduled or emergency duty of the Township.
(2) Any person or entity wishing to employ off-duty police shall first
obtain the approval of the Director of Public Safety or his or her
designee, which approval shall be granted if, in the opinion of the
Director of Public Safety or his or her designee, such employment
is necessary and would not be inconsistent with the efficient
functioning and good reputation of the Police Division and would
not unreasonably endanger or threaten the safety of the officer or
officers who are to perform the work.
B. Trust account.
(1) To assure the timely payment of wages to police officers who
perform off-duty services, and to meet the requirements of the Fair
Labor Standards Act,29 the Township of Irvington has established a
trust fund known as the "Outside Employment for Police Officers
Trust Account," which trust fund is dedicated for the receipt of fees
collected from private persons or entities for payment to police
officers for off-duty or outside employment services. The Outside
Employment for Police Officers Trust Account shall be
administered by the Department of Revenue and Finance of the
Township of Irvington, which shall make a report to the Township
Council every 90 days regarding said account.
(2) Any person or entity requesting the services of an off-duty law
enforcement officer in the Township of Irvington shall estimate the
number of hours such law enforcement services are required,
which estimate shall be approved in writing by the Director of
Public Safety, or his or her designee, and upon the Director's
approval, a copy of said approval shall be forwarded to the Jobs in
Blue Office of the Township of Irvington. The person or entity
requesting the services shall then forward payment for services for
the total estimated hours of service, the rates of compensation and
administrative fees as set forth in § 7-151D to the Jobs in Blue
Office which, upon review, will forward to the Department of
Revenue and Finance for deposit in a trust account within the
Outside Employment for Police Officers Trust Account.
(3) In any instance where the number of hours required is unknown
and cannot be reasonably estimated, or is anticipated to be in
excess of 10 days, the person or entity requesting the services of an
off-duty law enforcement officer shall deposit an amount sufficient
28.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 45:19a-1 et seq.
29.Editor's Note: See 29 U.S.C. § 201.
§ 7-151 IRVINGTON CODE § 7-151
1:90
to cover the rate of compensation and administrative fees set forth
in § 7-151D for the equivalent of 10 days prior to the
commencement of any work. Any unused portion of the deposit
shall be returned or credited against the final amount owed.
(4) Prior to posting any request for services of off-duty law
enforcement officers, the Director of Public Safety or his or her
designee shall verify that the balance in the trust account of the
person or entity requesting services is sufficient to cover the
compensation and fees for the number of hours specified in the
request for services. The Director of Public Safety or his or her
designee shall not post a request for services from any person or
entity unless all fees and compensation required in the manner
described above have been deposited in the Off-Duty Employment
for Police Officers Trust Account. All payments must be paid
directly to the Township for said account. No officer shall be paid
directly by any employer for requested services nor provide any
such services for more hours than are specified in the request for
services.
(5) In the event the funds in such a trust account should become
depleted, services of off-duty law enforcement officers shall cease,
and further requests for further or future services shall not be
performed or posted until additional funds have been deposited in
the trust account in the manner prescribed above. In the event of
an unforeseen emergency situation that would require an officer to
remain beyond the time for which funds have been posted, the
Director of Public Safety or his or her designee may waive the
requirement for posting additional funds after the first 10 hours for
any person or entity exhibiting a previous satisfactory payment
history. However, the person or entity requiring the extended
service within 48 hours shall make payment for the additional
hours.
(6) The person or entity requesting such services shall be responsible
for ensuring that sufficient funds remain in the trust account in
order to avoid any interruption of services.
(7) Exemption. All public utility companies that are under the
jurisdiction of, and regulated by, the New Jersey Board of Public
Utilities, and state, county and other quasi-government agencies
will be exempt from the provisions set forth in this section
requiring advance payment to the trust account; provided,
however, that there are no amounts previously due that are
outstanding for a period in excess of 30 days. Any such delinquent
balances shall require advance payment of the amount outstanding
prior to any officer engaging in any further off-duty assignments.
C. Requests for services.
§ 7-151 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-151
1:91
(1) All requests to the Township for services of off-duty law
enforcement officers in the Township of Irvington Police Division
for a period of one week or longer shall be forwarded to the
Director of Public Safety or his or her designee for posting at least
10 days before such services are required. Any law enforcement
officers, when so employed by private employers, shall be
compensated at the rate set forth in § 7-151D, hereafter.
(2) All requests to the Township for services of off-duty law
enforcement officers in the Township of Irvington Police Division
for a period of less than one week shall be forwarded to the
Director of Public Safety or his or her designee for posting as soon
as practicable, but in no event less than 24 hours before such
services are required, except in emergency situations. Any law
enforcement officers, when so employed by private employers,
shall be compensated at the rates set forth in § 7-151D hereafter.
(3) In emergency situations, requests to the Township for the services
of off-duty law enforcement officers in the Township of Irvington
Police Division shall be made as necessary to the Director of Public
Safety or his or her designee, who shall make every effort to
accommodate such request in a reasonable manner in his or her
discretion. Any law enforcement officers, when so employed by
private employers, shall be compensated at the rates set forth in
§ 7-151D hereafter.
(4) Traffic control for street construction and maintenance operations.
(a) Adoption of Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. The
Township of Irvington does hereby adopt the current Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, hereafter known as
"M.U.T.C.D.," together with any supplements and amendments
thereto, as it controls and regulates whatever construction
maintenance operations of utility work obstructs the normal
flow of traffic. Any person, contractor, or utility who fails to
comply with the provisions of the M.U.T.C.D. while performing
such work is in violation of this section.
(b) Preconstruction meetings. It shall be the responsibility of the
person, contractor, or public utility wishing to conduct work
on, under or above the roadway to do the following:
[1] Contact the Division of Police, Director of Public Safety or
his or her designee in order to arrange a preconstruction
meeting; and
[2] To submit plans for the safe movement of traffic during
such period of construction of work, which plans are to be
submitted and reviewed before work begins.
(c) Hazardous conditions. Prior to the start of any work, the
person, contractor, or utility shall provide the Division of
§ 7-151 IRVINGTON CODE § 7-151
1:92
Police, Director of Public Safety or his or her designee with
at least two emergency contact phone numbers to be called
in case of emergency problems at the construction or
maintenance site. If for any reason the emergency contact
person cannot be reached, or if the emergency contact person
does not respond to the call from the Police Division to correct
a hazardous condition, the Township may respond to correct
such hazardous conditions. The reasonable fees for such
emergency service by the Township shall be charged to the
person, contractor, or utility responsible for such conditions.
(d) Road closings and detours. Road closings and/or traffic detours
shall not be permitted unless approved by the Division of
Police, Director of Public Safety or his or her designee.
(e) Traffic directors. Traffic director(s) shall be posted at all
construction or maintenance sites when determined by the
Division of Police, Director of Public Safety or his or her
designee that same is necessary to provide for the safe and
expeditious movement of traffic.
(f) Stop work. The Division of Police, Director of Public Safety or
his or her designee shall have the authority to stop work,
including the removal of equipment and vehicles, stored
material within the street right-of-way, backfilling of open
excavations and/or other related work, in order to abate any
nuisance and/or safety hazard or for any violation of this
section.
(g) Site preparation. It is expressly understood that no materials,
vehicles or equipment are to be placed in the roadway or
sidewalk area until all construction signs, lights, devices, and
pavement markings are installed.
D. Rate of compensation. Rates of compensation for contracting the
services of off-duty law enforcement officers of the Township of
Irvington Public Safety Department shall be established as set forth by
negotiated contractual obligations. [Amended 2-11-2019 by Ord. No.
MC 3689]
E. Cancellation. In the event that the person or entity requesting the offduty
law enforcement officers fails to contact the Township of Irvington
at least two hours prior to the scheduled start time to cancel the job, or
the officer works fewer than four hours and the job is completed, the
officer is entitled to be paid for the minimum of four hours at the rate of
compensation set forth in § 7-151D.
F. Public emergencies. The Director of Public Safety or his or her designee
shall have the authority to order any police officer engaged in off-duty
assignments within the Township to respond to an emergency situation
within the Township of Irvington. The Director of Public Safety or his or
§ 7-151 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-151
1:93
§ 7-152. Auxiliary law enforcement officers of the Township of
Irvington Public Safety Department.
§ 7-153. Arson Investigation Unit.
her designee shall also have the right to order any off-duty assignment
to be terminated whenever said assignment creates an unacceptable
risk to the health, safety and welfare of the off-duty officer and/or the
citizens of the Township of Irvington. In the event that a police officer
is assigned to an emergency situation, the Director of Public Safety
or his or her designee shall make note of said off-duty assignment. In
any situation where an off-duty police officer is called to an emergency
situation, said person shall not be responsible for the payment of the
officer's hourly rate, administrative fee or any other fees to the
Township of Irvington until such time as said police officer and/or
equipment returns to the assignment of the off-duty employer.
G. Exclusion. All outside agencies except State Police and Essex County
Sheriffs are excluded from Jobs in Blue in Irvington. For all Township
projects the Township is excluded from paying the Jobs in Blue rate.
H. Policies and procedures. The Department of Public Safety Policy and
procedures shall be revised to be in compliance with this section and
N.J.S.A. 45:19-9 et seq., as amended by P.L. 2004, c. 134.30
I. Violations and penalties.
(1) Any person, contractor or utility who commits a violation of this
section shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in § 1-17 of the
Revised Code.
(2) A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
A. Establishment. There is hereby established auxiliary law enforcement
officers of the Public Safety Department Township of Irvington.
B. Training and service. The above unit will be attached to the Township of
Irvington Public Safety Department for training purposes and will serve
pursuant to Title 58 (App. a.9)31 and other directives and orders of the
State Director of Emergency Management, the Governor and the State
Civil Defense Act.
A. Within the Division of Fire, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-7.1, there is
hereby established within the Public Safety Department of the
Township of Irvington an Arson Investigation Unit consisting of not
more than two firefighting personnel in the Department of Public
Safety, which shall be responsible for conducting investigations of
arson, suspicious fires and explosions within the Township of Irvington.
30.Editor's Note: See the Security Officers Registration Act, N.J.S.A. 45:19a-1 et seq.
31.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. App. A:9-33 et seq.
§ 7-151 IRVINGTON CODE § 7-153
1:94
§ 7-154. Changes in titles.
§ 7-155. Ratification of rules and orders of Department of Police
and Department of Fire.
B. Before any member of the Public Safety Department shall be assigned
to the Arson Investigation Unit, he/she shall have successfully
completed a course of training approved by the Law Enforcement
(formerly Police) Training Commission and an arson investigation
training course approved by the Department of Law and Public Safety.
C. Members of the Arson Investigation Unit shall have the same powers
and authority as law enforcement officers within the Township of
Irvington while engaged in the actual performance of arson
investigation duties, specifically including the right to carry firearms
pursuant to regulations promulgated by the Director of the Public
Safety Department of the Township of Irvington. Firearms shall be
carried only while members of the unit are on duty and engaged in the
actual performance of their duties.
A. All references in the Revised Code referencing the Police Department,
Fire Department, Department of Fire, Department of Police are
hereinafter referred to as the Department of Public Safety/Public Safety
Department.
B. All references in the Revised Code referencing fireman, firemen and/or
firefighters are hereinafter referred to as firefighting personnel in the
Department of Public Safety.
C. All references to police officers, and/or police personnel are hereinafter
referred to as law enforcement personnel in the Department of Public
Safety.
D. The position of Chief of Police is abolished. The Director of Public
Safety shall direct the routine day-to-day operations of the Division of
Police. [Added 1-12-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3562]
E. The position of Fire Director is abolished. The Director of Public Safety
shall direct the routine day-to-day operations of the Division of Fire.
[Added 12-28-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3594]
A. Any and all rules, regulations, policies, procedures, directives, orders
and general orders promulgated by and under the Department of Police
are hereby ratified, adopted and promulgated as the rules and
regulations governing the Department of Public Safety.
B. Any and all rules, regulations, policies, procedures, directives, orders
and general orders promulgated by and under the Department of Fire
are hereby ratified, adopted and promulgated as the rules and
regulations governing the Department of Public Safety.
§ 7-153 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-156
1:95
§ 7-156. Deputy Director of Public Safety.
The position of Deputy Director of Public Safety is hereby created. The
Deputy Director of Public Safety shall be appointed by the Mayor.
§ 7-156 IRVINGTON CODE § 7-156
1:96
ARTICLE XV
Housing Authority32
§ 7-157. Establishment.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Local Housing Authorities Law, as
amended, a body corporate and politic to be known as the "Housing
Authority of the Town of Irvington" is hereby created and established.
32.Editor's Note: Former Art. XIII of Ch. 5 of the 1981 Revised Code, Department of Building
Construction, which previously preceded this article, added 10-11-1978 by Ord. No. MC
2548, was repealed 8-24-1982 by Ord. No. MC 2666. Section 1 of said Ord. No. MC 2666
read as follows: "SECTION 1. The Department of Building Construction created pursuant
to Ordinance No. MC 2548 is hereby abolished. All of the functions, powers and duties of
the Department of Building Construction are hereby transferred and assigned to the
Department of Public Works, Division of Building Inspection. To effectuate such transfer,
all officers and employees, all appropriations, to the extent of remaining unexpended or
unencumbered balances thereof, and all books, papers and records of said Department of
Building Construction are hereby transferred to the Department of Public Works, Division
of Building Inspection." For current provisions regarding the Division of Building
Inspection, see Art. XII, Department of Housing Services, § 7-123, Division of Building
Inspection. Former Art. XIV of Ch. 5 of the 1981 Revised Code, Division of Welfare, as
amended, which previously preceded this article, and which superseded former Art. XIV,
Local Assistance Board, was repealed 5-28-1997 by Ord. No. MC 3068. (Said ordinance
was vetoed by the Mayor 6-4-1997 and overridden by a two-thirds vote of Council
6-24-1997.) This ordinance further provided that, as of 1-1-1998, the Division of Welfare is
abolished, and the Township will transfer its general assistance program to the County of
Essex for county administration of said program.
§ 7-157 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-157
1:97

ARTICLE XVI
Trustees of Free Public Library
§ 7-158. Trustees continued.
The Trustees of the Free Public Library as heretofore established and
empowered pursuant to law are continued.
§ 7-158 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-158
1:99

ARTICLE XVII
Local Historian
[Added 11-27-1979 by Ord. No. MC 2584]
§ 7-159. Position established.
The Town of Irvington does hereby establish the position of Local Historian,
who shall serve without compensation.
§ 7-160. Appointment.
The Local Historian shall be appointed by the Municipal Council and shall
serve at the pleasure of the Municipal Council.
§ 7-161. Annual appropriation.
The Municipal Council may annually appropriate such funds as may be
necessary to reimburse the Local Historian for expenses incurred in the
performance of the duties and responsibilities set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:10A-7(a) through 40:10A-7(e), and limited by provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:10A-8.
§ 7-162. Annual report.
The Local Historian shall make an annual report to the Mayor and the
Municipal Council, stating all the work performed and accomplished during
that year, and shall transmit a copy of such report to the New Jersey
Historical Commission.
§ 7-159 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-162
1:101

ARTICLE XVIII
Reports to Council
[Added 9-23-1980 by Ord. No. MC 2615]
§ 7-163. Time limit for submission of report.
Whenever required by the Town Council, the Mayor, the head of a
department or the Chairman or presiding officer of any board, division,
authority, commission or committee shall, within 180 days of the effective
date of any ordinance or resolution, report to the Town Council in writing
concerning the action taken by the said Mayor, head of a department
or Chairman or presiding officer respecting the implementation of said
ordinance or resolution.
§ 7-164. Provisions to be included in legislation.
In the event the Town Council requires a written report as set forth in
§ 7-163 hereof, the ordinance or resolution shall provide that the provisions
of § 7-163 of this chapter shall be complied with, and the title of the official
to render said report shall be specifically designated.33
33.Editor's Note: Former Art. XXIX of Ch. 5 of the 1981 Revised Code, Department of Housing
Services, which previously followed this article, added 2-13-1985 by Ord. No. MC 2769, as
amended, was repealed 3-10-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3394, which created the Department of
Neighborhood Services. For current provisions, see Art. XII, Department of Housing
Services.
§ 7-163 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-164
1:103

ARTICLE XIX
Background Checks for Nominees and Appointments
[Added 5-17-1994 by Ord. No. MC 2998]
§ 7-165. Information required; interview.
A. As a prerequisite to the confirmation of nominations made by the Mayor
or appointments to municipal boards, commissions and committees
made by the Municipal Council, the Municipal Council shall be
furnished with background information and/or interview such
nominations made by the Mayor or appointments to municipal boards,
commissions and committees made by the Municipal Council.
B. Said background information may be a resume or curriculum vitae or
any other information that provides a history of the qualifications of
nominations made by the Mayor or appointments to municipal boards,
commissions and committees made by the Municipal Council.
§ 7-165 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-165
1:105

ARTICLE XX
Timely Receipt of Documents Requiring Council Review
[Added 6-29-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3121]
§ 7-166. CDBG annual action plan.
The Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) annual action plan shall
be submitted to the Municipal Council at least 30 days prior to July 1 of each
year.
§ 7-166 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-166
1:107
Chapter 13
ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration — See Ch. 7. Commissions, committees, councils and other
agencies — See Ch. 22.
§ 13-1. Absences limited; written excuse required.
If any member of any local board, committee or commission shall fail to
attend three or more consecutive meetings of the local board, committee or
commission to which he or she was appointed by the Mayor or governing
body of the Town of Irvington, he or she shall present, in writing, to the
Chairman of said board, committee or commission good reason or excuse
for such absence from the meetings. The Chairman of said board, committee
or commission shall present the matter to the membership of the board,
committee or commission for a vote or determination whether to accept or
reject the reason given for the absence or to recommend to the appointing
authority of said membership the withdrawal, resignation and replacement
of the absentee member.
§ 13-2. Time limit for submission of excuse.
The letter of reason or excuse for the member's absence shall be made and
submitted within 10 days after the third consecutive meeting missed by
the particular member and shall be acted upon by the board, committee or
commission at its following meeting.
§ 13-3. Failure to submit excuse.
If the absentee member shall fail to submit any reason or excuse for
absence from meetings, the board, committee or commission shall vote to
recommend to the appointing authority that the membership of the absent
member be terminated and request a replacement.
§ 13-4. Report of attendance records.
All boards, committees or commissions shall notify, quarterly, the Municipal
Council or the Mayor, whichever is the appointing authority, by written
report as to the attendance record of its members of the board, committee
or commission and any recommendations relative thereto.
§ 13-5. Appointments subject to provisions.
All appointments to any local board, committee or commission by the Mayor
and/or the Municipal Council of the Town of Irvington shall be subject to the
§ 7-166 IRVINGTON CODE § 13-5
1:108
provisions of this chapter relating to attendance by the members appointed
thereto unless otherwise provided by statute.
Chapter 18
AUDIT REPORTS AND EXPENSE
§ 18-1. Statement of expenses required.
All organizations, agencies, individuals, corporations, etc., who received
funds from the Township of Irvington shall be required to submit a
statement of expenses to the Township.
§ 18-2. Submittal period.
Said statement must be submitted within 90 days after the end of the grant
period.
§ 18-3. Receipts.
Where possible, receipts evidencing expenditures should accompany the
statement of expenses.
§ 18-4. Reports required for grant recipients; submittal period.
All recipients of grants equal to or in excess of $20,000 must submit
audit reports prepared by independent certified public accountants or
independent registered municipal accountants within 90 days after the
termination of the grant period.
Chapter 22
COMMISSIONS, COMMITTEES, COUNCILS AND OTHER
AGENCIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration — See Ch. 7. Attendance at meetings — See Ch. 13.
§ 13-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-4
1:109

ARTICLE I
Municipal Alliance Committee
[Adopted 5-15-1990 by Ord. No. MC 2902 (Ch. 5, Art. XVII, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 22-1. Duties.
The Municipal Alliance Committee, in consultation with the Local Advisory
Committee on Alcoholism and Drug Abuse, shall identify alcoholism and
drug prevention, education and community needs. The Committee shall
institute Alliance programs formulated pursuant to Section 8 of P.L. 1989,
c. 51,34 established by the Local Advisory Committee on Alcoholism and
Drug Abuse and the County Alliance Steering Subcommittee in conjunction
with regulations adopted by the Governor's Council on Alcoholism and Drug
Abuse.
§ 22-2. Composition.
The Municipal Alliance Committee shall consist of:
A. Members of the Citizens Conference Committee on Narcotics, which
shall hereinafter consist of the following: [Amended 3-25-1997 by
Ord. No. MC 3061]
(1) The Legislative Research Officer or a designee.
(2) The Superintendent of Schools or a designee.
(3) The officer in charge of the Juvenile Bureau or a designee.
(4) The officer in charge of the Detective Bureau or a designee.
(5) The Health Officer or a designee.
(6) The Attendance Officer or a designee.
(7) Nine citizens appointed by the Municipal Council, who shall serve
for terms as follows:
(a) Three members appointed by the Council members at large for
terms of two years.
(b) Four members appointed by Council members representing
wards for one-year terms.
(c) Two local high school students appointed by the Council as a
whole for terms of one year.
(8) One citizen appointed by the Mayor, who shall serve for a term of
two years.
(9) The Director of Public Safety or a designee.
34.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 26:2BB-8.
§ 22-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-2
1:111
(10) The President of the School Board or a designee.
(11) The Presiding Municipal Court Judge or a designee.
(12) A Police and Fire Chaplain.
(13) A representative from the Irvington Housing Authority.
§ 22-2 IRVINGTON CODE § 22-2
1:112
ARTICLE II
Citizens' Advisory Commission
[Adopted 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622 as Ch. 5, Art. XIX, of the
1981 Revised Code]
§ 22-3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
COMMISSION — The Citizens' Advisory Commission established by this
article.
DISTRICT — Election District as designated by the County Board of
Elections pursuant to the statutes of the state.
DISTRICT COMMISSIONER — An appointed member of the Commission.
WARD — That territorial section of the Town which has been established
and designated for election purposes pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:44-15.35
§ 22-4. Establishment.
There is hereby created and established a Citizens' Advisory Commission,
which shall have such functions, powers and duties as may be delegated to
it by the Town Council and as may be otherwise provided by ordinance.
§ 22-5. Purpose.
The Town Council intends to promote, through the Citizens' Advisory
Commission, a truly representative liaison between the Town Council and
the citizenry it represents, and to obtain the thoughts and advice of a truly
representative group of citizens to promote the best interests of the Town.
§ 22-6. Composition; term and compensation of members.
[Amended 12-9-1969 by Ord. No. MC 2244]
§ 22-7. Appointment of members. [Amended 6-19-1967 by Ord. No.
MC 2165; 4-23-2013 by Ord. No. MC 3490]
A. The Commission shall be composed of residents appointed from each of
the districts in each ward in the Town, who shall be known as "District
Commissioners."
B. Each appointee shall serve without compensation for a term of two
years and until his successor is duly appointed.
C. Members of the Town Council shall serve ex officio but shall have no
vote.
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 22-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-7
1:113
§ 22-8. Organization; expenses; compensation of Secretary.
§ 22-9. Division of Commission into groups; meetings.
The Commission shall be divided into four basic groups representing each of
the four wards in the Town. Each basic ward group may meet as frequently
as is desirable. The Commission as a whole shall meet monthly in quarters
to be furnished by the Town.
§ 22-10. Meetings with Council.
The Commission shall meet quarterly with the Council in such quarters and
at such hour as the Council shall designate. In matters of great importance,
the Council may call for a meeting with the Commission; or, upon a majority
vote of the Commission, the Commission Chairman shall call for a meeting
with the Council at a mutually convenient date and time.
§ 22-11. Committees.
The Commission shall establish a legislative committee to propose
legislation beneficial to all citizens of the Town, a research committee and
a publicity committee, and may create such other committees as shall be
deemed necessary for the efficient functioning of the Commission.
A. Members of the Citizens' Advisory Commission shall be appointed by
the Township Council in the following manner:
(1) Each of the three Council members at-large shall appoint six
members to the Commission.
(2) Each of the four ward Council members shall appoint four members
to the Commission.
(3) Appointments shall be coordinated by the Council as a whole, to
provide representation from each district as provided in § 22-6.
B. The appointment of a member who shall miss more than three
consecutive meetings without being excused by the Chairman of the
Citizens' Advisory Commission shall become null and void and that
member's office shall be declared vacant. In the event such a vacancy
occurs, the Council member who makes such appointment shall make a
new appointment to fill the vacancy.
A. At its organizational meeting, the Commission shall select from its
membership a Chairman, one or more Vice Chairmen and a Secretary.
B. Subject to the approval of the Town Council, such expenses as are
necessary to the functioning of the Commission shall be provided by the
Town. The Secretary shall receive from the Town the sum of $50 per
meeting as full compensation for secretarial services. The Secretary
shall furnish copies of all minutes to the members of the Council.
[Amended 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. MC 3104]
§ 22-7 IRVINGTON CODE § 22-12
1:114
§ 22-12. Powers and duties.
The Commission shall:
§ 22-13. Cooperation of Town departments and officers.
All departments, agencies, officials and officers of the Town shall cooperate
with and assist the Commission in all respects.
A. Foster among the citizenry a better understanding of Town problems
and attempt to instill a sense of civic pride in the Town.
B. Bring to the attention of the proper Town officials those problems or
conditions which affect the health, safety or well-being of the citizens of
the Town.
C. Recommend to the Town Council legislation for community
improvement.
D. Carry on an educational program that will advise residents of the Town
of the various Town services, activities and facilities which are available
to them.
E. Keep the general public informed of all noteworthy action of the Town's
officers and elected officials.
F. Make such studies and surveys and issue such reports as in its
judgment will aid in effectuating its general purposes and in keeping
the public informed.
§ 22-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-13
1:115

ARTICLE III
Emergency Management Council
[Adopted 11-9-1971 by Ord. No. MC 2306; amended 9-28-1982 by
Ord. No. MC 2670 (Ch. 5, Art. XXI, of the 1981 Revised Code)]
§ 22-14. Name.
The Civil Defense and Disaster Control Council heretofore established is
hereby renamed the "Emergency Management Council."
§ 22-15. Chairman; duties.
The Coordinator of Emergency Management shall be the Chairman of the
Emergency Management Council, with the duties, powers and functions
prescribed by law.
§ 22-16. Powers and duties.
The Coordinator of Emergency Management and the Emergency
Management Council shall have and exercise the powers, duties and
functions prescribed by law or by any order or regulation promulgated
pursuant thereto.
§ 22-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-16
1:117

ARTICLE IV
Environmental Commission
[Adopted 9-9-1969 by Ord. No. MC 2237 (Ch. 5, Art. XXIII, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 22-17. Establishment; purpose.
There is hereby established an Environmental Commission for the purpose
of unifying efforts toward the solution of such diverse environmental
problems as pollution and litter control, waste disposal, open space and
historic sites preservation, aesthetic enhancement and beautification of the
community and outdoor recreational sites needs.
§ 22-18. Name of Commission. [Amended 11-27-1973 by Ord. No.
MC 2386]
The Commission shall be known as the "Irvington Environmental
Commission."
§ 22-19. Membership; organization; term. [Amended 4-23-1974 by
Ord. No. MC 2399; 7-12-1983 by Ord. No. MC 2704; 10-25-1988 by
Ord. No. MC 2871]
§ 22-20. Powers and duties.
The Environmental Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
A. The Commission shall consist of five members appointed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of the Municipal Council. One of the
members shall be a member of the Planning Board. The remaining
members shall be from the citizenry at large. Commission members
shall serve without compensation. The Mayor shall designate one of the
members to serve as Chairman and presiding officer of the Commission.
The full term of office of each Commissioner shall be three years,
provided that the terms of the Commissioners first appointed pursuant
hereto shall be as follows:
(1) Two members shall be appointed for three years.
(2) Two members shall be appointed for two years.
(3) One member shall be appointed for one year.
B. Thereafter, the successor of each member shall be appointed for the full
term of three years and until the appointment and qualification of his
successor. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of a term
shall be filled for the unexpired term only.
A. To conduct research into the use and possible use of any open land
areas of the municipality.
§ 22-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-20
1:119
B. To coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies which are or might be
organized for similar purposes.
C. To advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts, plans,
pamphlets, posters, etc., and conduct contests or promotional
campaigns which in its judgment it deems necessary to promote its
purpose as listed in § 22-17 and within the limits of funds appropriated
to the Commission by the Town Council or solicited by the Commission
from interested private or other sources.
D. To gain expertise in taking advantage of the many kinds of state, federal
and private grants and matching funds available for dealing with such
problems as open space and green acres acquisitions, local planning,
recreational needs and other problems related to the preservation and
betterment of our local environment.
E. To recommend from time to time to the Mayor, Municipal Council and
Town Planning Board plans and programs for promoting the purposes
and objectives of the Commission.
F. To hold meetings once monthly on a date and time to be selected by it.
G. To select a Secretary, either from its membership or from some other
source, who shall have the duty to keep its records and the minutes of
its meetings and to carry on its correspondence.36
H. To keep records of the meetings and activities of the Commission and to
make an annual report to the Municipal Council.
36.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 22-20 IRVINGTON CODE § 22-20
1:120
ARTICLE V
Student Advisory Council
[Adopted 11-12-1991 by Ord. No. MC 2932 (Ch. 5, Art. XXX, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 22-21. Establishment.
There is hereby established a Student Advisory Council which shall have
such functions, powers and duties as may herein or hereafter be delegated
to it by the Municipal Council by ordinance.
§ 22-22. Purposes.
The Municipal Council intends to promote, through the Student Advisory
Council, a representative liaison between the student body, Mayor,
Municipal Council and Board of Education for the purpose of obtaining the
thoughts and advice on matters related to teenagers from a representative
group of the student population; for the purpose of closing the gap between
adults and teenagers in the Township; for the purpose of allowing the
student population to add input into the processes involved with municipal
government and educational administration; and for the purpose of
receiving valuable input from the student population on various educational
and municipal policies and issues.
§ 22-23. Composition.
A. The Student Advisory Council shall consist of:
(1) The Student Council President of the high school.
(2) The Freshman Class President of the high school.
(3) Eight students appointed by the Student Advisory Council as a
whole, five of whom shall be students of the middle schools (eighth
grade), two of whom shall be students of the high school and one of
whom shall be a student at a private or parochial school who
resides in Irvington.
(4) One adult from the Township appointed by the Student Advisory
Council to serve as a nonvoting advisor to the Student Advisory
Council.
B. All terms shall be for one year, except that all initial terms shall expire
on June 30, 1992. In the event that the Freshman Class President
cannot serve, the next officer in succession to the Freshman Class
President who consents to serve shall serve for the remainder of the
original term. In the event that the Student Council President cannot
serve, the next officer in succession to the Student Council President
who consents to serve shall serve for the remainder of the original term.
Other vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as that of original
appointments. In the event that other vacancies occur prior to the
§ 22-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-23
1:121
§ 22-24. Powers and duties.
The Student Advisory Council shall give recommendations, thoughts and
advice on matters related to teenagers to the Board of Education, Municipal
Council and Mayor of the Township of Irvington for the purpose of allowing
the student population to add input into the process involved with municipal
government and educational administration. It is recognized that this is
a committee of the Municipal Council and, as such, the Student Advisory
Council shall report on a quarterly basis to the Municipal Council.
§ 22-25. Organization.
The Student Advisory Council shall meet after the second week from the
effective date of this article37 for organizational purposes. Said meeting
shall be convened by the Council President and/or her designee or
designees. At said meeting the Student Advisory Council shall appoint
the adult advisor, Chairman and Secretary. The Secretary need not be a
member of the Student Advisory Council. Thereafter, the Student Advisory
Council shall meet once a month. The Chairman shall preside over all
meetings of the Student Advisory Council but shall have no additional
powers or privileges. In the event of the absence of the Chairman, the
Student Advisory Council shall select a Chairman Pro Tem to preside over
the meeting. The Secretary shall take the minutes of all meetings of the
Student Advisory Council and perform such secretarial duties as may be
prescribed by the Student Advisory Council. The minutes of all meetings
and all recommendations affirmatively voted upon by a majority of the full
membership of the Student Advisory Council shall be distributed to the
Municipal Council, Mayor and Board of Education. Any other matters that
may come before the Student Advisory Council for a vote shall become
effective upon the affirmative vote of a majority of the full membership of
the Student Advisory Council. Except as otherwise provided in this article,
the conduct of business of the Student Advisory Council shall be governed
by Robert's Rules of Order. The municipality shall provide a meeting place
for Student Advisory Council meetings.
expiration of a member's term, a replacement appointment, appointed
in the same manner as that of the original appointment, shall serve for
the unexpired term.
37.Editor's Note: This article took effect November 12, 1991.
§ 22-23 IRVINGTON CODE § 22-25
1:122
ARTICLE VI
Redevelopment Agency
[Adopted 2-9-1993 by Ord. No. MC 2972 (Ch. 5, XXXI, of the 1981
Revised Code)]
§ 22-26. Designation of agency.
The Municipal Council of the Township of Irvington is hereby designated
as the redevelopment agency for the Township of Irvington pursuant to the
Redevelopment Agencies Law, P.L. 1949, c. 306 (N.J.S.A. 40:55C-1 et seq.),
as amended and supplemented.38
§ 22-27. Powers of Municipal Council.
The powers of the Municipal Council to perform its legislative functions
relating to the redevelopment of the Township of Irvington shall include but
not be limited to the following:
A. To dispose of land acquired in a redevelopment area to any person at its
fair value, as determined by the Municipal Council, for the uses
specified in the redevelopment plan and pursuant to law and in a
manner which will promote, encourage and assist the industrial,
commercial and economic development in the Township of Irvington.
B. To review, modify and approve contracts with and/or plans of registered
architects, licensed professional engineers or planners for the carrying
out of any redevelopment work.
C. To review, modify and approve contracts with public agencies or
redevelopers to provide, as part of any such contract, for extension of
credit or making loans to redevelopers to finance any redevelopment
work.
D. To review, modify and approve contracts with private parties or public
agencies for the opening, grading, improvement or closing of streets,
roadways, sidewalks, alleys or other places or the acquisition by the
Township of other public agencies of property rights or options,
including contracts for the furnishing of property or services in
connection with the redevelopment plan.
E. To review, modify and approve contracts with public agencies, to the
extent and within the scope of the agencies' functions, to cause the
services customarily provided by said agencies to be rendered for the
benefit of occupants of the redevelopment area and to have such
agencies provide and maintain related municipal facilities adjacent to
or in connection with the redevelopment area.
F. To conduct examinations and investigations, including the powers to
hear testimony and take proof under oath at public or private hearing of
38.Editor's Note: The Redevelopment Agencies Law was repealed by P.L. 1992, c. 79. See now
N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq., the Local Redevelopment and Housing Law.
§ 22-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-27
1:123
§ 22-28. Powers of Mayor.
The powers of the Mayor to perform his executive functions relating to the
redevelopment of the Township of Irvington shall include but not be limited
to the following:
any material matter, require attendance of witnesses and the
production of books and papers, take affidavits and issue commissions
for the examination of witnesses who are out of state, unable to attend
or excused from attendance.
G. To formulate policy decisions and undertake necessary or proper action
as to the settlement, compromise or other disposition of litigation
arising from the redevelopment area and project, including the
payment of claims and related activities.
H. To review, modify and approve the selection of the redevelopers to
perform redevelopment activities upon any project and all plans for the
redevelopment projects.
I. To formulate policy decisions relating to the design or construction of
public roadways which are a part of or affected by any project, retaining
walls included in any project area and off-site parking facilities.
J. To require any municipal officer, in its discretion, to prepare and submit
statements regarding said officer's official duties and the performance
thereof and otherwise investigate the conduct of any department, office
or agency of the municipal government as said conduct relates to any
redevelopment project.
K. To undertake any and all additional activities necessary or proper to
carry out its powers and functions.
A. To enforce the laws and ordinances applicable in the municipality as
they affect the redevelopment project.
B. To report to the Municipal Council and public on the status and
progress of the redevelopment project and on such applicable
conditions and requirements of any nature as may bear upon the
continuing redevelopment activities of the project.
C. To make such recommendations for action by the Municipal Council as
may be deemed to be in the public interest.
D. To supervise all activities of the departments of the municipal
government as said activities bear upon the functions and activities of
the redevelopment project.
E. To require each department of the municipal government to prepare
and submit reports with regard to those activities of any redevelopment
project.
§ 22-27 IRVINGTON CODE § 22-28
1:124
§ 22-29. Redevelopment Officer.
The office of Redevelopment Officer is hereby established. The
Redevelopment Officer shall be a Township officer appointed by the Mayor
and confirmed by the Municipal Council. The Redevelopment Officer shall
be a person who, by experience, education and training, is qualified to carry
out the duties assigned to the Redevelopment Officer.
§ 22-30. Duties of Redevelopment Officer.
Subject to applicable laws and ordinances, the Redevelopment Officer shall
exercise the following powers and duties under the supervision of the
Mayor:
F. To exercise those powers afforded by law to attend meetings of the
Municipal Council and take part in Municipal Council conferences as
such meetings and conferences relate to the redevelopment project.
G. To undertake any and all additional activities necessary or proper to
carry out his powers and functions.
A. To be the executive officer in charge of the redevelopment activities,
including the preparation and modification of the redevelopment plan
required by N.J.S.A. 40:55C-1 et seq.
B. To have full charge and management of the redevelopment office and of
the employees in said office.
C. To keep accurate records of books of account of all redevelopment
transactions.
D. To prepare budget recommendations for the redevelopment office.
E. To have full charge and management of the redevelopment properties
and equipment.
F. To prepare and present to the Mayor short- and long-range planning
recommendations for the improvement of redevelopment activities.
G. To coordinate redevelopment activities with the work of other
departments and officers of the Township of Irvington.
H. To keep the Mayor and Municipal Council apprised of the respective
obligations to the United States Government; to coordinate the
redevelopment activities of the municipality with those of the United
States Government; to coordinate the activities of redevelopment
planners and consultants; and to establish progress schedules of
redevelopment activity.
I. To prepare written reports of all redevelopment activities of the
Township of Irvington undertaken with regard to any redevelopment
project during the relevant period. Said reports shall be reviewed by
the Mayor and shall be provided to the Township Council on or before
§ 22-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-30
1:125
the 15th and the final day of each month. Said reports shall adequately
summarize and describe the redevelopment activities undertaken and
shall include a discussion of recommended future actions under
consideration. The reports shall also describe activities relating to
present or future tenants of the redevelopment area and activities
undertaken with the Housing Authority or other authority, board or
agency relating to the redevelopment project.
J. To undertake any additional activities necessary or proper to carry out
his powers and duties.
§ 22-30 IRVINGTON CODE § 22-30
1:126
ARTICLE VII
Youth Council
[Adopted 9-11-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3177 (Ch. 5, Art. XXXIV, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 22-31. Establishment.
There is hereby established an Irvington Municipal Youth Council which
shall have such functions, powers and duties as may be delegated to it by
the Municipal Council and as may be otherwise provided by ordinance.
§ 22-32. Purpose.
§ 22-33. Duties.
In addition to serving in the capacity as so defined in § 22-32 of this article,
the Youth Council shall have the following responsibilities:
§ 22-34. Appointment; failure to attend meetings.
A. The Municipal Council intends to promote, through the Youth Council, a
truly representative liaison between the Council, the Mayor and youth
they represent and to obtain their thoughts, advice and insight into
issues relative to the youth of the Township of Irvington.
B. "Youth" shall mean any person under the age of 18.
A. Assist to the extent needed in coordinating and carrying out community
plans, services and programs affecting the well-being of the youth of
the community. This includes programs and services addressing the
issues of violence, drug abuse, peer pressure, juvenile delinquency and
any other harmful influences that the Municipal Council, Mayor and
Youth Council may so determine to be in need of redress.
B. The Council may also make recommendations and devise and submit
plans to the governing body and Mayor addressing problems that they
have so identified as negatively impacting upon the youth of the
Township of Irvington.
C. They may request cooperation, assistance and data from various
municipal officials, departments and agencies that will assist them in
carrying out their purpose and objectives. Department directors shall
assist them as needed.
A. Members of the Youth Council shall be appointed by the Municipal
Council and Mayor in the following manner:
(1) One member appointed by each member of the Municipal Council.
(2) One member appointed by the Mayor.
§ 22-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-34
1:127
§ 22-35. Organization.
The Council shall select from its membership a Chairman, Vice President
and Secretary to serve for a two-year term.
§ 22-36. Meetings; expenses.
(3) One member selected by the Municipal Council as a whole. The
appointments shall run for a period of two years.
B. Any member who shall miss more than three consecutive meetings
without being excused by the Chairperson shall have his/her seat
declared vacant or null and void. In the event said occurs, the Council
member making such appointment shall make a new appointment to fill
such vacancy.
A. The Council shall meet once a month or at such times as a majority of
the membership shall so decide. The Chairman is empowered to call
special meetings if such is deemed necessary.
B. Subject to the approval of the Municipal Council, such expenses as are
necessary for the functioning of the Youth Council shall be provided by
the Township.
§ 22-34 IRVINGTON CODE § 22-36
1:128
ARTICLE VIII
Senior Citizen Committee
[Adopted 8-13-2002 by Ord. No. MC 3197 (Ch. 5, Art. XXXV, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 22-37. Creation; purpose.
§ 22-38. Membership.
§ 22-39. Terms of members.
The seven members shall each serve for a four-year term. Thereafter, each
member shall be appointed for a four-year term and shall serve until his/her
successor is duly appointed. Vacancies caused by resignation or otherwise
shall be filled for the unexpired part of the term thereof by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of the Municipal Council.
§ 22-40. Officers.
A. A Senior Citizen Commission is hereby established in the Township of
Irvington.
B. The objective of the Commission shall be to assist in establishing and
implementing a comprehensive system of coordinated health and social
services for senior citizens and residents of the community, and to
advise and assist the Department of Health in the preparation of an
annual plan for the enhancement of services available to senior citizens
and residents of the community, or private foundations, in obtaining
grants of monies to provide for the programs and activities of said
Commission, said applications for grants to be made with the advice
and consent of the Municipal Council. [Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord.
No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
A. The Commission shall consist of the following: seven members, five to
be appointed by the Mayor and two to be appointed by the Municipal
Council.
B. The Commission shall consist of representatives from various segments
of the community, preferably from the business and public sector, but
not limited thereto. They should be affiliated with senior citizen
organizations and groups that concern themselves with the health,
recreation, social and other needs, i.e., legal, housing and financial
needs of senior citizens.
A. The members shall designate a member to preside over the Commission
as a Chairperson.
B. The Commission shall elect a member to serve as Vice Chairperson who
shall serve at the pleasure of the Commission within the limitations of
his/her term.
§ 22-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-40
1:129
§ 22-41. Meetings.
A regular meeting of the Commission shall be held at least once every
month at a time to be fixed by the members of the Commission. Special
meetings shall be called by the Chairperson or, in his/her absence, the Vice
Chairperson.
§ 22-42. Duties.
The duties of the Commission shall be limited to:
§ 22-43. Services and provisions. [Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No.
MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
The Mayor shall, through the Director of the Department of Health, subject
to available appropriation, make and cause to be made services and
provisions that are necessary for the adequate function of the Commission.
§ 22-44. Cooperation with Commission.
All Township departments and agencies shall cooperate with the
Commission in all respects.
C. They shall elect a Secretary to the Commission.
D. All officers shall serve for a one-year period but may be reelected to
such position upon a majority vote of the Commission members.
A. Recommending policy and guidelines for the operation of the Township
of Irvington programs for seniors. The Senior Citizen Commission's
recommendations shall be limited to planning and programmatic
review and shall in no way affect the decisions concerning the Township
of Irvington Health Department's operational budget or personnel.
[Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No.
MC 3511]
B. Assist the Department of Health in the planning and implementation of
Township-wide comprehensive service programs for the senior citizens
and residents of the Township of Irvington. [Amended 7-14-2009 by
Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
C. Establish policies and procedures for its own governance.
D. Identify the unmet needs and services gaps which affect the elderly.
E. Make recommendations for legislative programs and actions on behalf
of the elderly.
§ 22-40 IRVINGTON CODE § 22-44
1:130
ARTICLE IX
Elizabeth River Flood Control Commission
[Adopted 4-8-1975 by Ord. No. MC 2443 (Ch. 17 of the 1981 Revised
Code)]
§ 22-45. Creation; membership; functions; costs; withdrawal.
The Municipal Council of the Town of Irvington, in the County of Essex,
agrees to participate in the creation of and operations of the Elizabeth River
Flood Control Commission, pursuant to Chapter 316, P.L. 1971,39 as follows:
A. The municipalities and county participating in said Commission are:
City of Elizabeth, Township of Union, Township of Hillside, Town of
Irvington and County of Union. Membership in said Commission is also
open to Essex County and all other municipalities with area in the
Elizabeth River Basin.
B. The Elizabeth River Flood Control Commission shall be established in
accordance with Chapter 316, P.L. 1971, of the State of New Jersey.40
C. The Elizabeth River Flood Control Commission shall:
(1) Collect, study and analyze data on flooding, past floods and the
causes of floods in the area.
(2) Make such data and studies available to the participating members,
to the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, the
United States Army Corps of Engineers, local and County Planning
Boards and officials and agencies concerned with subdivisions and
development of properties within the floodway and drainage areas.
(3) Keep itself informed as to the availability of state and federal funds
and grants and the procedures for applying therefor, and make
such information available to participating members.
(4) Coordinate the activities of the participating members relating to
flooding, flood prevention, stream maintenance and the like.
(5) Encourage the acquisition of lands within the floodway and
floodplain by appropriate County Park Commissions, counties or
participating municipalities.
(6) Publicize methods of flood control and flood prevention.
(7) Encourage its participating members and others to adopt
appropriate ordinances and regulations relating to stormwater
control and land use in floodplains.
(8) Encourage its participating members to support regional programs
designed or intended to alleviate flooding.
39.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:14-16 et seq.
40.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:14-16 et seq.
§ 22-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-45
1:131
(9) Perform such other acts and fulfill such other functions as may be
permitted by law and as determined by the members, subject to the
limitations in this article and subject to the limitations as set forth
in said Chapter 316, P.L. 1971.41
D. Appropriations.
(1) The general, administrative and other expenses of the Commission
affecting the Commission as a whole shall be apportioned among
the members as follows:
(a) One-fourth thereof to be borne by Union County. In the event
Essex County decides to join the Commission, the 1/4 amount
shall be apportioned among the two counties on the basis of
the total area of each county within the Elizabeth River Basin.
(b) Three-fourths thereof to be apportioned among the member
municipalities according to a formula taking into account total
area within the drainage basin and resulting in the following:
Municipality Percent of Apportionment
Elizabeth 30%
Union 36%
Hillside 16%
Irvington 18%
(c) In the event other municipalities with areas in the Elizabeth
River Drainage Basin decide to join, the formula used to obtain
the foregoing percentages shall be reapplied to determine the
apportionment among the remaining and participating
municipalities.
(2) Whenever a specific project is to be undertaken involving less than
the interests of all of the participating members, or of special
benefit to less than all of the participating members, the
apportionment of the costs thereof shall be agreed upon by the
participating members specially benefited thereby in advance of
authorization of such project.
(3) The apportionment set forth herein may be changed by agreement
among the participating municipalities and counties; provided,
however, that there shall be no increase in the percentage to be
contributed by any participant in the expenses set forth in
Subsection D(1) above without the consent of the governing body of
such participating member.
E. Budget. The tentative annual budget for the Commission shall be
adopted by the Commission no later than January 15 of each year, and
such adoption shall be by a vote of at least one representative from each
41.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:14-16 et seq.
§ 22-45 IRVINGTON CODE § 22-45
1:132
§ 22-46. Representatives to Commission.
county (regardless of the total number of counties represented thereby)
and at least one representative from each municipality (regardless of
the total number of municipalities represented thereby). A copy of
such tentative budget shall be sent to the governing body of each of
the participating counties and municipalities within one week of the
adoption thereof. Such notice shall include notification of the date
fixed by the Commission for final adoption of such budget, which shall
be at least three weeks after the date of tentative adoption by the
Commission.
F. Quorum. Any number of members of the Commission shall have the
right to meet at regularly scheduled meetings. Any action taken
involving the expenditure of funds, other than clerical and mailing
connected with the usual business of the Commission, shall be adopted
only at a meeting at which there is at least one representative from
each county and municipality.
G. Withdrawal. Each member municipality and county reserves the right,
pursuant to § 2d of said Chapter 316, Laws of 1971,42 to withdraw from
the Commission; provided, however, that at least 90 days' notice of such
intention is given to the Commission, and provided further that such
withdrawal after the adoption of the Commission budget for a given
year shall not abrogate the responsibility of the municipality or county
to meet its obligations under the budget for such year.
A. The Municipal Council of the Town of Irvington shall appoint two
representatives to the aforesaid Commission. One of said
representatives shall be a professional with a background related to the
area of storm drainage and flood control. The other of said
representatives shall be either a member of the Municipal Council or
one of the officials of the municipality.
B. Each regular representative shall serve for a term of five years or until
his successor has been appointed and has qualified, except that any
appointed representative who holds another elected or appointed
public office shall serve as such representative only so long as he shall
hold such other elected or appointed public office, notwithstanding his
term of appointment as such representative. Appointments to vacancies
caused by the death, resignation or other inability to serve of a
representative shall be filled for the balance of the term only. No
alternate representative shall automatically succeed to a regular
representative position upon a vacancy occurring in a regular position.
C. In addition to the aforesaid two representatives, the Municipal Council
may appoint two alternate representatives to the Commission, who
shall serve for a term of one year each or until the appointment and
qualification of their successors. Such alternates shall have the right to
42.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:14-17d.
§ 22-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-46
1:133
attend all meetings of the Commission and take part in all discussions.
The alternates shall be designated as "first alternate" and "second
alternate" and in such order may represent the municipality and vote
in the event of the absence or disability of one or both of the regular
representatives.
§ 22-46 IRVINGTON CODE § 22-46
1:134
ARTICLE X
Civilian Complaint Review Board
[Adopted 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3174 (Ch. 89, Art. III, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 22-47. Board established; purpose. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord.
No. MC 3553]
The Civilian Complaint Review Board (hereinafter referred to as the
"CCRB") is hereby established as an independent agency with the authority
to receive, investigate, hear, make findings, and recommend action upon
complaints by any member or members of the public against members of
the Irvington Public Safety Department that allege misconduct involving the
use of excessive or unnecessary force, abuse of authority, harassment, or
the use of offensive language. The Board shall have subpoena power.
§ 22-48. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABUSE OF AUTHORITY — A deviation from the ordinary powers and/or
authority bestowed upon law enforcement personnel in the Department of
Public Safety by state statute and municipal ordinances. This includes an
officer acting in a manner which is beyond the scope of his authority as
defined in law.[Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
HARASSMENT — Actions or words used to significantly or repetitively
restrain or restrict the freedom of movement of a person or to interrogate
a person, without reasonable suspicion that a crime, quasi-crime or act of
juvenile delinquency has been or is about to be committed by that person
or without reasonable suspicion that the person has knowledge of the
commission of any such crime, quasi-crime or act of juvenile delinquency.
USE OF ABUSIVE LANGUAGE — Use of profane or derogatory language,
including racial, ethnic or sexist slurs, which, if heard by a reasonable
person under the circumstances, would offend.
USE OF EXCESSIVE FORCE — In a situation which calls for the use
of force, greater physical force than is reasonably necessary under the
circumstances to repel an attacker or terminate resistance.
USE OF UNNECESSARY FORCE — Physical force used by law enforcement
personnel in the Department of Public Safety in a situation where the use of
such force is not justified under the circumstances.[Amended 10-14-2015
by Ord. No. MC 3553]
§ 22-49. Appointment of members; term.
The Municipal Council shall appoint four members of the Board. One
member shall be chosen by the Mayor and two from a random drawing
emanating from a pool of applicants desiring to sit as CCRB members. The
§ 22-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-49
1:135
Municipal Council shall select two alternates. Each member shall sit for a
two-year term.
§ 22-50. Budget; secretary and attorney.
Any budget created for the CCRB shall be approved by the Municipal
Council. The Board shall have a secretary, who shall be paid a stipend, and
an attorney.
§ 22-51. Qualifications of members; alternate members.
§ 22-52. Filing of complaints.
Any person claiming to be aggrieved pursuant to any of the acts of conduct
outlined in §§ 22-47 and 22-48 of this article shall sign a verified complaint
either on his or her own or through their attorney and file same with the
CCRB. The complaint must be in writing, shall set forth the name and/or
badge number of the person alleged to have committed the acts complained
of and must set forth in detail all facts which make up the content of the
complaint.
§ 22-53. Investigation of complaints.
After the receipt of such a complaint, the Board (CCRB) shall, within a
reasonable time, cause an investigation to take place regarding such
complaint.
§ 22-54. Review by Internal Affairs Division and Township Attorney;
action to be taken. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
Only upon a finding of probable cause, the CCRB shall refer the complaint
to the Internal Affairs Division of the Irvington Public Safety Department
and the Township Attorney for recommended action. The Internal Affairs
A. All regular and alternate members shall be chosen by the respective
appointing authority based upon their known and consistent reputation
for integrity, impartiality and fair-mindedness. They shall be residents
of the Township and may be officers or employees of the Township.
B. Alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings
but may not vote except in the absence, disqualification or vacancy in
office of a regular member. The appointing authority shall designate the
alternates as "No. 1" and "No. 2." In the event that a choice must be
made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall
vote.
C. The Director of Public Safety is authorized to submit applicant
fingerprint cards and receive state criminal history record information
from the Division of State Police, State Bureau of Identification, for use
in considering the suitability of all applicants covered under this article.
[Amended 1-12-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3562]
§ 22-49 IRVINGTON CODE § 22-54
1:136
Division and/or the Township Attorney may, after review and determination,
take appropriate legal action against the person or persons of whom such
complaint was filed. If deemed warranted, a referral by the CCRB may be
made to the appropriate county, state or federal law enforcement agency.
§ 22-55. Initiation of civil suit or criminal complaint. [Amended
10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
The CCRB's jurisdiction shall not become operative, or shall terminate
after it becomes operative, if, at any time the complainant initiates a civil
suit or criminal complaint against the law enforcement personnel in the
Department of Public Safety, alleging the same or similar misconduct
relating to the same transaction or occurrence.
§ 22-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-55
1:137

ARTICLE XI
Green Team
[Adopted 3-25-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3509]
§ 22-56. Establishment.
The Irvington Green Team be and is hereby established as an advisory
committee to the Irvington Municipal Council.
§ 22-57. Purpose.
The general purposes for the Green Team shall include but not be limited
to:
§ 22-58. Membership; term of office.
A. Managing Irvington's participation in the Sustainable Jersey program;
B. Encouraging the Township staff to pursue sustainable practices where
possible and implement the Municipal Council's environmental goals;
C. At the recommendation of the Municipal Council, work with the existing
groups within the Township whose actions effect environmental issues
so as to eliminate duplication and assure that important tasks are
covered;
D. Provide suggestions for further research and action to the Township
Council;
E. At the direction of the Municipal Council, provide advice and
suggestions to the Township Planning Board and the Township Board of
Adjustment to assure that environmental issues are considered in their
deliberations and actions;
F. Manage and organize various ad hoc environmental groups within the
Township;
G. Solicit and evaluate environmental ideas and suggestions from the
community;
H. Promote the causes of sustainability within the Township.
A. The Irvington Municipal Council shall appoint seven members to serve
as the Green Team. The Green Team shall elect from among its
members a Chair, Vice Chair and Secretary/Treasurer. Initially, three
members shall be appointed to a three-year term, two members to a
two-year term and two members to a one-year term. Thereafter, all
terms shall be for three years. Additionally, a member of the Municipal
Council and the Township Administrator shall serve as ex officio
members of the Green Team. Ex officio members shall not vote.
B. The Green Team shall select Township volunteers to work on Green
Team projects. The names of the Green Team volunteers shall
§ 22-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-58
1:139
§ 22-59. Meetings.
The Green Team shall meet monthly. Additional meetings of Green Team
may be scheduled by the Chair at his/her discretion.
periodically be submitted to the Township Council and the Green Team
committee reports, minutes, etc., shall also be submitted to the
Township Council.
§ 22-58 IRVINGTON CODE § 22-59
1:140
Chapter 24
CONSTABLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Service of warrants for property code
violations — See Ch. 460, Art. VIII.
§ 24-1. Appointment; quantity.
The governing body shall have the authority to appoint, by resolution, no
more than 50 Constables in the following manner, recognizing that there
are four wards, each represented by one Councilperson and three at-large
Councilpersons in the Township of Irvington:
§ 24-2. Term of office.
Constables will be appointed for a one-year term, which appointment shall
remain in effect until such time as it is amended or a resolution is adopted
changing the term of Constables. The Municipal Council may change the
term of appointment by resolution.
§ 24-3. Application for appointment.
The Constable shall complete a notarized, executed application, in a form
acceptable to the Township Clerk and the Department of Public Safety, in
conformity with state law.
§ 24-4. Annual charge.
The Constable, for initial application and for renewal, shall pay $50 for each
year of his or her term.
§ 24-5. Eligibility; requirements of appointment.
A. Each Ward (East, West, South and North) Councilperson shall have a
total of five appointments during his or her term of office;
B. Each at-large Councilperson shall have a total of six appointments
during his or her term of office;
C. The Council President shall have one additional appointment.
D. The total number of Constables appointed at one time shall not exceed
39.
E. Any Councilperson who at the time of the adoption of the amendments
to this chapter who has met their quota as detailed above will not be
able to make any new appointments.
§ 22-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-5
1:141
§ 24-6. Issuance of identification card and badge.
The Department of Public Safety shall issue a photo identification card and a
badge to the Constable, after he/she has taken the oath of office and posted
the required surety bond, which shall be filed in the Office of the Township
Clerk.
§ 24-7. Power and authority.
Constables shall only have such power and authority as outlined in this
chapter and in specific statutes, including but not limited to N.J.S.A.
2A:33-9, assisting with distraint (repossession) proceedings, and their
appointment is expressly limited to these powers and authorities,
notwithstanding any other prior or existing law or precedent. In particular,
Constables shall be authorized to serve judicial process, including
subpoenas and warrants, capias ad testificandum or other compulsory
process issued by any court of the state; assist with distraint proceedings
(repossession), including appraisal of property, as authorized by N.J.S.A.
2A:33-9; and serve a lock-out for a landlord.
§ 24-8. Prohibited activities.
Constables are expressly prohibited from acting in any manner contrary to
state law or this chapter. Constables are expressly forbidden from holding
themselves out as Constables to members of the public, or wearing any
paraphernalia or insignia identifying themselves as Irvington Constables,
when and if such individuals are acting as private security officers.
Constables are also expressly prohibited, when acting in their official
capacity as a Constable, from representing to others that they are or
otherwise acting as if they are sworn officers of the Township of Irvington
Department of Public Safety. The carrying or display of a firearm while
performing the duties of a Constable is prohibited.
A. A person is eligible for appointment as a Constable if he/she is a
resident and qualified voter of the Township of Irvington for at least
three years prior to their appointment and pass a background and
records check in accordance with current custom, practice and
procedures of local law enforcement agencies, specifically, the
Township of Irvington Department of Public Safety. A Constable
candidate or reappointee shall complete this process and be cleared for
appointment by the Department of Public Safety prior to being placed
on the Municipal Council agenda for a vote.
B. A Constable shall fulfill the following necessary requirements within 30
days of appointment: present himself or herself at the Office of the
Township Clerk; post the surety bond; and take the oath of office, in
accordance with this chapter and any applicable state law or
regulation, as amended. Failure to fulfill all of the necessary
requirements within 30 days of his or her appointment shall be cause to
rescind the appointing resolution.
§ 24-5 IRVINGTON CODE § 24-9
1:142
§ 24-9. Violations; notice of termination; removal from office.
If a Constable shall be found to have violated the scope of duties, the
rules and regulations established pursuant to this chapter or their statutory
duties, the Constable shall be removed by a notice of termination issued
by the Public Safety Director or the sponsoring Council member, pending
adoption of a resolution terminating the appointment. The Municipal
Council shall review and take action on the Public Safety Director's or
sponsoring Council member's recommendation at the first available Council
meeting following the notice of termination. If a Constable is removed
from office resulting from a finding of a violation of this chapter, he or
she shall be ineligible for future appointment in the Township of Irvington.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the Constable shall have failed to file
the report required by N.J.S.A. 40A:9-126.1 for any reason except physical
incapacity, and outlined in § 24-17 of this chapter, no rescinding resolution
shall be necessary, as provided by the statute.
§ 24-10. Apparel and insignia.
Constables are expressly prohibited, when acting in their official capacity as
a Constable, from wearing any insignia, clothing, hat or other paraphernalia
identifying them as Constables or as employees or representatives of the
Township of Irvington or the Department of Public Safety, except for the
wearing or exhibiting of the official identification card and official badge,
each issued by the Department of Public Safety. This chapter does not
intend or authorize and expressly prohibits the expenditure of public monies
to purchase apparel or insignia for any Constable (excluding the official
photo identification card and the official badge), including a firearm.
§ 24-11. Identification card and badge.
Once a constable application is approved by the Municipal Council and
the necessary requirements under §§ 24-3, 24-4, and 24-5 are met, the
Department of Public Safety shall issue a photo identification card and
badge to each Constable. A Constable shall not exhibit any identification
card or other documentation or a badge not in conformity with this chapter
while engaged in his or her official business or at any other time. In no
event shall the identification card or badge represent that the Constable
is a sworn law enforcement personnel in the Department of Public Safety
and shall not be utilized or exhibited if the Constable is acting as a private
security officer, acting independently or in the employ of a private security
company. The identification card and badge shall be returned to the
Department of Public Safety at the expiration of the Constable's term.
§ 24-12. Licensing or registration requirements not substituted.
This chapter is not intended to substitute for any licensing or registration
requirements for private security officers or private detectives.
§ 24-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-13
1:143
§ 24-13. Authority and rights not conferred.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, this chapter does not
confer on a Constable the authority to act in any capacity involving a
criminal proceeding or investigation. Neither this chapter nor the
appointment by the Municipal Council confers, nor are either intended to
confer, a right on behalf of the Constable to carry a firearm.
§ 24-14. Investigation of complaints.
Any complaint regarding a Constable lodged with the Township Clerk or
the Township of Irvington Department of Public Safety by any person,
including representatives of the County of Essex, shall be investigated by
the Township of Irvington Department of Public Safety or the Essex County
Prosecutors Office, and may result in a recommendation for termination.
§ 24-15. Constables not Township employees.
The appointment of the Constable does not and is not intended to establish
an employment arrangement between the Constable and the Township of
Irvington. Constables who would like to be considered for employment
with the Township must also undergo all training, background check and
physical and mental health screening required by the Department of Public
Safety.
§ 24-16. Oath of office.
Each person appointed as a Constable, before entering upon the duties of
his or her office, shall take and subscribe an oath of office which shall be
filed with the Township Clerk.
§ 24-17. Reporting requirements.
As required by N.J.S.A. 40A:9-126.1, each Constable shall on or before
the first Wednesday of every month, file with the Township Clerk a report
of his or her official activities, other than in connection with court or
judicial proceedings, for the month immediately past. The Township Clerk
shall forward a copy to the Public Safety Director. The report shall list
the names and addresses of all persons contacted by the Constable in
his or her official capacity, together with the date, time and purpose of
the contact. In addition, the report shall contain an accurate statement of
all fees collected by the Constable and from whom and for what service
each fee was collected. A template of the report shall be prepared by the
Township Clerk and provided to Constables for completion. Pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-126.1, a failure to comply with the reporting requirements of
this chapter for a period of two consecutive months, except only for physical
incapacity, shall result in his or her office being deemed vacant.
§ 24-13 IRVINGTON CODE § 24-18
1:144
§ 24-18. Surety bond.
As a condition of appointment, the Constable shall take an oath of office
and shall post a surety bond in the amount of $5,000, which bond shall be
approved as to form and legality by resolution, approved by the Municipal
Council as to form, amount and sufficiency. The bond must be issued by a
bond company licensed to do business in the State of New Jersey.
§ 24-19. Indemnification and hold harmless.
The Constable shall sign prior to appointment an agreement agreeing to
defend, indemnify and hold the Township of Irvington, its officers, officials,
employees and volunteers harmless from any and all claims, injuries,
damages, losses or suits including attorney fees, arising out of or resulting
from the acts, errors or omissions of the Constable in performance of his or
her duties as a Constable, except for injuries and damages caused by the
sole negligence of the Township.
Chapter 26
COURT, MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public Defender — See Ch. 7, Art. VI.
§ 26-1. Establishment.
There is hereby created and established in the Town a Municipal Court, to
be known as the "Municipal Court of the Town of Irvington."
§ 26-2. Seal.
The Municipal Court established by § 26-1 shall have a seal which shall bear
the impress of the name of the Court.
§ 26-3. Judges of the Municipal Court. [Amended 9-26-1978 by Ord.
No. MC 2543; 5-16-2000 by Ord. No. MC 314943]
The Municipal Judges of the Municipal Court shall be appointed according
to law and shall serve for terms of three years from the date of their
appointment and until their successors are appointed and qualified. They
shall possess the qualifications provided by law and receive an annual salary
in such amount according to law, which shall be in lieu of all fees, costs and
any other allowances whatsoever.
43.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 24-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-4
1:145
§ 26-4. Powers and duties of Court and Judges. [Amended
9-26-1978 by Ord. No. MC 254344]
The Municipal Court and the Municipal Judges thereof shall have, possess
and exercise all the functions, powers, duties and jurisdictions conferred by
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq., as amended and supplemented, or
by any other law.
§ 26-5. Sessions of Court. [Amended 9-26-1978 by Ord. No. MC
2543]
The Municipal Court shall be held at such times as in the reasonable opinion
of the Judges thereof the business of the Court may require, subject to rules
of court applicable to municipal courts.
§ 26-6. Municipal Court Director. [Added 9-29-1992 by Ord. No. MC
2956]
A. Office created. There is hereby created the office of Municipal Court
Director. The Municipal Court Director shall be appointed by the Mayor
and serve a term coterminous with the Mayor.
B. Duties. Subject to the provisions of the laws of the State of New Jersey
and the rules and regulations of the New Jersey Administrative Office of
the Courts, the duties of the Municipal Court Director are as follows
under the direction of the Presiding Judge:
(1) To supervise and have charge of office procedures and
administrative functions of the court.
(2) To supervise the work performed by the nonjudicial staff.
(3) To plan and oversee the in-service training of staff members.
(4) To supervise the collection of fines and disbursement of funds.
(5) To direct the preparation of or prepare a variety of statistical,
financial and progress reports related to the work of the court.
(6) To give suitable assignments and instructions to subordinate
employees.
(7) To prepare the budget for court operations.
(8) To direct the establishment and maintenance of records and files.
(9) To study and develop effective and improved methods of court
functioning, especially the mechanization and computerization of
court operations.
(10) To procure supplies and services for the court.
44.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 26-4 IRVINGTON CODE § 26-6
1:146
Chapter 32
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration — See Ch. 7. Commissions, committees, councils and other
agencies — See Ch. 22.
§ 32-1. Duty to defend and indemnify.
Except as provided in §§ 32-2 and 32-3, whenever any person holding or
formerly holding any office, position or employment with the Township
of Irvington, hereinafter referred to as an "employee," is a defendant in
any civil action or legal proceeding arising out of or incidental to the
(11) To perform other related duties as required.
C. Qualifications. The qualifications for the position of Municipal Court
Director are as follows:
(1) Graduation from a four-year course at an accredited college or
university or additional work experience as described in Subsection
B on a year-for-year basis.
(2) Two years of responsible supervisory and/or administrative
experience in varied phases of business, industrial, governmental
or military service which shall have involved the organization,
direction, planning, coordination or control of significant programs
or activities.
(3) Thorough knowledge of court procedures and modern office
methods and practices; knowledge of the problems involved in the
formulation of effective policies and procedures; knowledge of the
problems involved in preparing and supervising the preparation of
statistical and other reports containing findings, conclusions and
recommendations; and knowledge of supervising the establishment
and maintenance of records and files.
(4) Ability to analyze and interpret the laws, ordinances, rules,
regulations and procedures relating to the operation of a municipal
court; to give suitable assignments and instructions to others and
supervise their work; to prepare and supervise the preparation of
correspondence; to dispense information relating to court matters;
to prepare correspondence and other documents relevant to the
work of a court; to maintain financial records; to obtain, store,
record, distribute and supervise the use of needed equipment,
materials and supplies; to prepare clear, sound, accurate and
informative reports to establish and maintain pertinent records and
files.
§ 26-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-1
1:147
performance of the duties of such office, position or employment, the
Township shall provide the employee with the necessary defense or, at the
option of the Township Attorney, the means for the defense of such action
or proceeding and shall save and hold such employee harmless from any
payment, settlement or judgment resulting from such proceeding.
§ 32-2. Criminal actions.
The Township shall not provide a defense in any criminal action against any
employee except as may be authorized by state statute or other municipal
ordinance or resolution.
§ 32-3. Exceptions.
Chapter 37
EMPLOYMENT APPLICATIONS
§ 37-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMPLOYEE — A person who works for another in return for financial or
other compensation.
EMPLOYMENT APPLICATION — A form (either paper or online) that
candidates for employment complete to be considered for a job.
FEE — A fixed sum charged, as by an institution or by law, for a privilege.
A. The obligation of the Township to defend and indemnify an employee for
acts or omissions arising out of or incidental to the performance of the
duties of such office, position or employment shall be limited to those
circumstances under which the Township itself would be liable for the
acts of the employee under the doctrine of respondent superior.
B. The Township shall not defend or indemnify an employee committing an
intentional or willful act or willful omission arising out of or in the
course of the performance of the duties of such office, position or
employment.
C. The Township shall not defend nor indemnify an employee where the
action has been brought by the Township or in connection with any
claim brought about or contributed to by fraud or dishonesty.
D. Excluded from the provisions of this chapter is any employee providing
any form of professional medical services insofar as said proceeding
arises out of or is incidental to said professional medical services.
§ 32-1 IRVINGTON CODE § 37-2
1:148
§ 37-2. Purpose of charging fee for employment applications.
The purpose of allowing the Township to charge a fee for employment
applications is to implement an efficient employment application system for
the Township of Irvington.
§ 37-3. Supervision.
Supervision of the employment fee application process shall be under the
direction of the Business Administrator.
§ 37-4. Fee; enforcement responsibilities.
A fee of $25 shall be charged for all standard employment applications.
Enforcement of the employment fee application process shall be performed
by the Business Administrator's Office.
Chapter 49
FIRST SOURCE EMPLOYMENT LINKAGE PROGRAM
§ 49-1. Purpose and public policy.
§ 49-2. Designated administrative office.
A. It is hereby declared to be the public policy of the Township of Irvington
(hereafter the "Township") to recognize that it is in the best interests of
all citizens and residents of Irvington that there be full employment
within the Township.
B. The Township is committed to assisting those citizens and residents
who do not now enjoy full employment to achieve full employment
status.
C. The Township is also committed to assisting those citizens and
residents who are underemployed or whose employment does not use
their full potential to achieve employment which will be consistent with
the abilities and talents of each person.
D. The Township is also committed to assisting extremely low, low income
and moderately low income persons and/or other socioeconomically
challenged persons with securing full employment.
E. As such, the Township of Irvington does hereby establish a First Source
Employment Linkage Program "FSELP" to facilitate and encourage
private sector employment opportunities to qualified unemployed,
underemployed and/or socioeconomically challenged Irvington
residents by requiring that the recipient of any economic benefit
execute a first source agreement and make a good faith effort to hire
qualified Irvington residents for 30% of their workforce.
§ 37-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 49-2
1:149
§ 49-3. Qualifying projects.
A qualifying project is any of the following economic benefits approved by
the Municipal Council for a recipient:
A. The Irvington newly created Department of Economic Development and
Grants Oversight ("DEDGO") will be responsible for the
implementation, management and oversight of this First Source
Employment Linkage Program and shall:
(1) Develop all policies, procedures, forms, agreements and
operational documents to be used to implement, manage and
oversee the FSELP and to ensure compliance on the part of any
recipient;
(2) Design and implement a plan to educate employers about the First
Source Employment Job Linkage Program and the system
described above;
(3) Serve as intermediary between the business community, service
providers, and job training agencies, educational institutions and
community based organizations (collectively "network partners") to
best maximize the socioeconomic potential of this agreement;
(4) Prescreen applicants to ensure that businesses receiving economic
benefits receive only the most qualified candidates to interview;
(5) Maintain a first source registry of qualified Irvington residents who
reside in the Township;
(6) Maintain a database of vacancies and potential employment
opportunities; and
(7) Coordinate with Township departments to keep track of and
maintain a current list of all economic benefits awards that must
adhere to the requirements of the FSELP.
B. This chapter authorizes DEDGO to enforce the policy and require all
Township departments awarding economic benefits to work
cooperatively with the DEDGO to implement this chapter.
C. The DEDGO shall have oversight and facilitate the implementation of
any and all first source agreements executed prior to this amendment
taking effect.
A. Approval for any commercial development projects in excess of
$250,000;
B. Approvals for all multifamily residential development projects with 25
units or more;
C. Township-issued public works contracts in excess of $250,000;
D. Township contracts for goods and services in excess of $100,000;
§ 49-2 IRVINGTON CODE § 49-3
1:150
§ 49-4. First source agreement requirements.
E. Loans issued by Township departments in excess of $100,000;
F. Any federal, state, county or municipal grant or loan of $100,000 or
more;
G. Township-owned property or in rem tax lien which is conveyed at a
private sale for no or nominal consideration, which has an actual fair
market value of $100,000 or more; and/or
H. A tax abatement or exemption for a property which reduces the
cumulative amount of taxes otherwise due by $100,000 or more.
A. Binding agreement.
(1) Any recipient of an economic benefit shall enter into a binding
agreement with the Township wherein the recipient agrees to make
a good faith effort to hire qualified individuals who reside in the
Township of Irvington.
(2) Before executing a contract or receiving an economic benefit, the
recipient shall provide a list of anticipated employment
opportunities that the recipient, contractor and its subcontractors
estimate they will need to fill in order to perform the services under
the contract. The list shall include:
(a) The number of anticipated employment opportunities
throughout the term of the contract;
(b) The job title and description of each anticipated employment
opportunity; and
(c) The basic qualifications necessary for each anticipated
employment opportunity.
B. Prehiring notification and exclusivity period.
(1) At least 15 days prior to advertising for any employees outside of
the First Source Program, the recipient shall submit to Department
of Economic Development and Grants Oversight a written prehiring
notice of the qualifications of the prospective employees needed for
any long-term job, as well as a description of the job to be filled.
This description shall include work hours, wage scale, benefits, and
hiring schedule of the positions. This will enable the DEDGO to
refer qualified applicants to the recipient. During this period, the
recipient shall adhere to the above requirements of the exclusivity
period. If any of the information submitted to prospective
employees of the description of the job to be filled is modified, the
recipient may notify the DEDGO when such positions become
available so that the DEDGO can notify the community that such
opportunity exist.
§ 49-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 49-4
1:151
(2) The recipient shall interview any applicants referred to by the
DEDGO and provide proof of said interview, the hiring
determination after the review and the reason for the final
determination.
C. Mandatory bargaining agreement. All contracts entered into by the
recipient or the recipient's contractor shall be required to comply with
this chapter and any agreement executed thereunder. The recipient will
require the contractor or subcontractor to complete and provide the
DEDGO with a statement that it will comply with this chapter and the
agreement executed thereunder.
D. Collective bargaining agreement. The recipient will cause the
contractor to submit to DEDGO copies of any collective bargaining
agreements covering workers to be employed and any collective
bargaining agreements of any subcontractor.
E. Semiannual and other reports.
(1) The recipient will submit written semiannual employment reports
to DEDGO in the form to be provided by DEDGO. If the recipient
failed to fill any position with any qualified applicant referred by
DEDGO, the report will include the reasons why.
(2) The administration or Municipal Council may request any
additional reports from the recipient through the DEDGO.
F. Records and work places access.
(1) Records and files of the recipient shall be made available to the
DEDGO when necessary to check the accuracy of the information.
Additionally, the recipient shall insure that Community
Development has reasonable access to the project site to physically
visit the work site and to verify the accuracy of the information set
forth in the reports.
(2) The exclusivity period is the period of time commencing with the
prehiring notification of the position(s) to the DEDGO by the
recipient during which time the advertising, announcing,
recruiting, or interviewing takes place. The length of the exclusivity
period shall be determined by DEDGO after consultation with the
recipient, but in no event shall be less than 15 days.
G. Continued requirement to notify.
(1) During the term of the contract, the recipient must notify DEDGO
of any new job opportunities available at the recipient's place of
business. This notification must occur at least 15 business days
prior to making an announcement of a specific employment
opportunity outside of the First Source Hiring Program.
(2) The notification should include:
§ 49-4 IRVINGTON CODE § 49-4
1:152
§ 49-5. Monitoring and reporting.
Beginning in January 2017, the Irvington DEDGO shall send semiannual
reports to the administration and Municipal Council outlining:
§ 49-6. Damages; enforcement; penalties.
Because damages will not be capable of determination with any reasonable
degree or certainty, the Township will be entitled to liquidated damages
from the recipient in the amount of $5,000 for every worker hired where the
recipient failed to make a good faith effort to hire qualified individuals who
reside in the Township of Irvington as outlined above. This section relating
to damages is subject to the written default notice provisions and expiration
of a period to correct any violation, set forth in the first source agreement
to be entered into by the recipient.
(a) The number of vacancies per job classification offered as a
result of the economic benefit; and
(b) Qualifications necessary for each new job opportunity. This
may include, and are not limited to, expectations, salary, work
schedule, duration of employment, required standard of
appearance, and any special requirements (e.g., language
skills, driver's license, etc.). Job qualifications shall be limited
to skills directly related to performance of job duties.
A. How many individuals were referred through Irvington DEDGO to be
interviewed during that particular semiannual period.
B. How many individuals referred by any individual referred by the
Irvington DEDGO that was hired and the length of each individual's
employment.
C. If applicable, from which service provider, job training agency or
educational institution the hired individuals were referred to the
Irvington DEDGO, the ward in which the hired individual resides, and
the wages and benefits received by the hired individuals.
D. If a lack of good faith has been demonstrated on the part of any
recipient, this shall also be included in the reports.
E. The Irvington DEDGO shall also include recommendations and
suggestions about how this employment linkage program could be
improved.
A. Enforcement. If the DEDGO determines that a recipient violated its
agreement, the DEDGO may recommend that the Township and
awarding department take any of the following actions:
(1) Recommend termination of the contract or rescind the instrument
awarding the economic benefit;
§ 49-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 49-6
1:153
§ 49-7. Exemptions.
Businesses who can demonstrate, in writing, with supporting
documentation, in a form determined by the DEDGO that their staff is
already made up of 30% Irvington residents, or that the positions available
at their business require a unique set of skills, expertise, education and/or
license, making it necessary for them to consider candidates outside of the
Township of Irvington to identify a qualified candidate, may be eligible for
exemption from complying with this chapter.
§ 49-8. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ECONOMICALLY DISADVANTAGED INDIVIDUAL — Anyone who meets the
poverty guidelines as determined annually by the United States Department
of Health and Human Services or other designated department.
FIRST SOURCE AGREEMENT — A binding agreement between the
Township and any recipient of an economic benefits, wherein the recipient
agrees to make a good faith effort to hire qualified individuals who reside in
the Township of Irvington to fill 30% of the jobs created as a result of the
receipt of the economic benefits.
QUALIFIED RESIDENT — An individual who has been a resident of the
Township for three months prior to registering with the DEDGO and who
(2) The recipient may be precluded from applying for any future
economic benefit for a fixed period of time; or
(3) That penalties be assessed as detailed below.
B. Penalties.
(1) Township may be entitled to liquidated damages from any recipient
in the amount of $5,000 for every worker hired where the recipient
failed to make a good faith effort to hire qualified individuals who
reside in the Township of Irvington as outlined above.
(2) The Township reserves any other remedies it may have at law or
equity, including but not limited to the termination of any economic
benefit (such as the recalling of loans, repealing of tax abatements
or cancelling of contracts), if appropriate, for a material breach of
the recipient's obligation to make a good faith effort to hire
qualified individuals who reside in the Township of Irvington as
outlined above.
(3) This section relating to damages is subject to the written default
notice provisions and expiration of a period to correct any violation,
as set forth in the first source agreement to be entered into by the
recipient.
§ 49-6 IRVINGTON CODE § 49-8
1:154
meets the minimum bona fide occupational qualifications provided by the
prospective employer.
RECIPIENT — Any individual, partnership, association, organization, forprofit
or nonprofit corporation or other entity whether public or private,
which receives an economic benefit from the Township of Irvington as
defined within this chapter. This includes any contractor, subcontractor or
agent of the recipient.
TOWNSHIP OF IRVINGTON — Includes its employees, agents and
assignees.
§ 49-9. Limit on powers conferred.
This chapter shall not confer upon the Township of Irvington any power
not otherwise provided by law to determine the legality of any collective
bargaining agreement or to regulate any collective bargaining process.
Chapter 91
POLITICAL FUND-RAISING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration — See Ch. 7. Commissions, committees, councils and other
agencies — See Ch. 22.
§ 91-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as "An ordinance banning the use of
government buildings and government equipment for political fundraising."
§ 91-2. Findings and purpose.
A. Findings.
(1) Political contributions have a profound impact on government
decisionmaking; and
(2) Our laws in New Jersey do not presently ban solicitation or
acceptance of contribution by public office holders and employees
while on public property or by use of public facilities; and
(3) A conflict may arise between the business of political fund-raising
and the business of government in Town Hall and other
government-owned premises, and this may cause a distraction from
the people's business; and
§ 49-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-2
1:155
§ 91-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CANDIDATE — Any individual seeking election to a public office of the
federal government, state, county, municipality, school district or political
organization at an election.
CONTRIBUTION — Includes all loans and transfers of money or other thing
of value to or by any candidate, elected official or political organization and
all pledges or other commitments or assumptions of liability to make any
such transfer. Contributions shall be deemed to have been made upon the
date when such commitment is made or liability assumed.
MUNICIPAL OFFICIAL, EMPLOYEE AND APPOINTEE — Any person
holding elective municipal office or holding an appointed position in the
municipal government, or in any agency, commission, board, or office
thereof, whether the position is full-time or part-time, compensated or
uncompensated; and any employee of municipal government or in any
agency, commission, board or office thereof, whether the position is fulltime
or part-time.
MUNICIPALITY — This municipality and any officer, department, board,
commission, or agency thereof.
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION — Any two or more persons acting jointly, or
any corporation, partnership or any other incorporated or unincorporated
association which is organized to or does aid or promote the nomination,
election or defeat of any candidate or candidates for federal, state, county,
municipal or school board office. "Political organization" includes, but is not
limited to, organizations otherwise defined as "political committee," "joint
candidates committee," and "legislative leadership committee."
PROPERTY OF THE MUNICIPALITY — Buildings, land, vehicles, phones, fax
machines, computers or other office equipment or supplies and other real
or personal property owned, leased or controlled by the municipality, except
for public roads and open park land.
SOLICIT — To seek by oral or written communication a contribution as same
is defined herein.
§ 91-4. Prohibited actions.
(4) The most appropriate method to prevent this conflict and to ensure
the integrity of government decisions is the prohibition of political
fund-raising on or by use of public property.
B. Therefore, it is accordingly found and determined that the paramount
public interest in a clean and accountable government requires the
prohibition of political fund-raising on public property or by use of
public facilities.
§ 91-2 IRVINGTON CODE § 91-4
1:156
§ 91-5. Reporting requirements; protection of complying persons.
§ 91-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall be punished
by a period of community service not exceeding 90 days or imprisonment
in the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days or a fine not exceeding
$1,000.
A. Prohibition against soliciting or accepting political contributions on
public property.
(1) No municipal official, employee or appointee may solicit, commit to
pay, or receive payment of or a commitment to pay any contribution
for any candidate, elected official or political organization while in
or on the property of the municipality or utilizing the property of
the municipality.
B. Prohibited forms of fund-raising. Prohibited forms of fund-raising shall
include, but are not limited to:
(1) Soliciting or accepting contributions using municipal telephones,
fax machines or computers.
(2) Soliciting or accepting contributions using personal telephones
while on the property of the municipality.
(3) Soliciting or accepting contributions through the use of publicly
owned computers or privately owned personal computers while on
the property of the municipality.
(4) Using municipal letterhead to solicit or accept contributions.
(5) Sending correspondence from municipal buildings or by use of
municipal services, equipment or postage.
(6) Face-to-face soliciting of an individual or an owner or
representative of a business entity while on the property of the
municipality.
(7) Use of automobiles owned or leased by the municipality to accept
or solicit contributions.
A. Reporting requirements. It shall be the responsibility of any employee,
appointed or elected official who observes any prohibited forms of fundraising
to report such conduct to the municipal ethics board, if one
exists, or in the alternative, to the Municipal Prosecutor and the
Municipal Clerk who shall report same to the governing body.
B. Whistleblower provision. It shall be unlawful for any employee, elected
official or appointee to be dismissed, reprimanded, retaliated against or
otherwise intimidated for complying with the reporting requirements
mandated by this chapter.
§ 91-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-6
1:157
Chapter 96
PORTRAIT PHOTOGRAPHS
§ 91-6 IRVINGTON CODE § 91-6
1:158
ARTICLE I
Municipal Council and Clerk
[Adopted 3-14-2006 by Ord. No. MC 3313 (Ch. 37, Art. I, of the 1981
Revised Code)]
§ 96-1. Display upon taking office.
Upon taking office, portrait photographs of the members of the Municipal
Council and the Municipal Clerk shall be displayed in the Irvington
Municipal Council Chambers.
§ 96-2. Presentation upon leaving office.
Upon leaving office, the portrait photographs of the members of the
Municipal Council and the Municipal Clerk shall be presented to those
individuals as a tribute to their public service.
§ 96-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 96-2
1:159
Chapter 100
PURCHASING
§ 100-1. Purchases to be made in manner prescribed; exceptions.
[Amended 2-26-1967 by Ord. No. MC 2181; 6-9-1970 by Ord. No.
MC 2253; 1-26-1971 by Ord. No. MC 2277]
§ 100-2. Purchases by requisition. [Amended 2-26-1967 by Ord. No.
MC 2181]
All supplies, equipment, materials and all similar items referred to in
§ 100-1 shall be obtainable only by requisition, in writing, delivered to the
Purchasing Agent of the Town, issued by the director of the department
requiring such articles or by a person duly authorized in writing by such
director to issue such request. Such requisition shall describe the article
desired, the quantity and quality needed, as well as the date when delivery
is required. Such requisition shall also contain the specifications prepared
by the department issuing same or reference to standard specifications of
such department and other identifying features of such article and shall
require the submitting of samples thereof wherever possible.46
A. All supplies, materials and equipment, as hereinafter defined, and all
other similar items required for the operation or transaction of the
business of all departments of the Town shall be purchased for the Town
in a manner prescribed by the following sections of this chapter, except
the following:45
(1) Perishable food products.
(2) Construction of any pavement, sewer or other project requiring
engineering plans, specifications and supervision.
(3) Educational supplies for the Board of Education.
(4) Library purchases.
B. "Equipment," as used in Subsection A of this section, shall mean and
include all business machines and fixtures such as desks, typewriters,
accounting machines, etc., and shall exclude such equipment or
apparatus as:
(1) Garbage trucks.
(2) Dump trucks.
(3) Street sweepers.
(4) Police radio cars.
(5) All other similar motorized vehicles or mechanical machinery.
45.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 96-2 IRVINGTON CODE § 100-3
1:160
§ 100-3. Adjustment of threshold amount.47
The Township quote, pay to play and bid threshold shall follow the statutory
increase pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq. When the Governor, in
consultation with the Department of the Treasury, no later than March 1
of every fifth year beginning in the fifth year after the year in which P.L.
1999, c. 440, takes effect, shall adjust the threshold amount, the Township
threshold shall adjust accordingly.
§ 100-4. Inspections and tests of articles purchased.
The Purchasing Agent shall make proper check and inspection of all articles
purchased pursuant to this chapter when he deems it necessary, to
ascertain whether the aforesaid articles purchased comply with the
specifications, and cause laboratory or other tests to be made whenever
in his opinion it is necessary to determine whether the aforesaid article
furnished is of the quality and standard required. This section shall not
preclude the right of the departments of the Town to make their own
laboratory tests which they may be equipped to conduct, and to reject
any materials or equipment not meeting the requirements of any such
department.
§ 100-5. Payment procedure. [Amended 2-26-1967 by Ord. No. MC
2181; 1-26-1971 by Ord. No. MC 2277]
The Purchasing Agent shall not pay for purchases but shall approve or
refer recommendations regarding the same to the Director of Revenue and
Finance and Comptroller, the payment of all bills to be passed upon by the
Town Council and payment finally made in the manner and form prescribed
by this Code and other ordinances of the Town.
§ 100-6. Sale of obsolete equipment and unused supplies.48
The Purchasing Agent is hereby empowered to sell or exchange obsolete
equipment or unused supplies and materials of the Town in accordance with
the provisions of statute or as may otherwise be provided by law, and for
such purposes he shall be the substitute and agent of any person named by
law in specific instances and shall exercise such powers, where necessary,
as the deputy of the named authority, obtaining written order to do so. All
such sales of goods, supplies, materials or equipment shall be had at public
bidding after advertisement as to the time and place of sale and the things
to be sold.49
46.Editor's Note: Original § 5-179, Purchases when purchase price is under $4,500; § 5-180,
Purchases when purchase price exceeds $4,500; and § 5-181, Purchases when price is
more than $500 and less than $4,500, amended 2-26-1967 by Ord. No. MC 2181;
1-26-1971 by Ord. No. MC 2277; and 3-25-1980 by Ord. No. MC 2602, which previously
followed this section, were deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
47.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
48.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 100-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-7
1:161
§ 100-7. Purchasing Committee established.
There is hereby created and established a Purchasing Committee of the
Town.
§ 100-8. Composition of Purchasing Committee.
The Purchasing Committee shall consist of three members, namely, the
Purchasing Agent, the Municipal Clerk and the Business Administrator.
§ 100-9. Authority of Purchasing Committee as to bids.
The Purchasing Committee shall be authorized to receive such bids as
may be presented and immediately proceed to unseal them and publicly
announce the contents in the presence of the parties bidding or their
agents, if they choose to be then and there present, and shall also make
proper record of the prices and terms upon the minutes of the body.
§ 100-10. Record of bids; compliance with state law.
The Purchasing Committee shall keep full, complete and accurate minutes
on all bids received and shall comply with the applicable provisions of state
law.
§ 100-11. Advertisement for bids.50
All advertisements for bids shall designate the time and place of the
meeting at which the Purchasing Committee shall receive the bids. All
contracts shall be advertised for bids pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-23.
§ 100-12. Disposition of bids.
After bids are received, read and recorded as provided by this chapter,
they shall be turned over to the Purchasing Agent for tabulation and
recommendation to the Council.
§ 100-13. Limitation of powers of Purchasing Committee.51
The Purchasing Committee established by this chapter shall not be
authorized to purchase materials and supplies pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1
et seq., but shall exercise only those powers enumerated in this chapter.
49.Editor's Note: Original § 5-185, Printing and stationery to have union label, which
previously followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I).
50.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 100-7 IRVINGTON CODE § 100-14
1:162
§ 100-14. Joint Purchasing Commission established. [Added
1-26-1998 by Ord. No. MC 308852]
There is hereby created and established a Joint Purchasing Commission.
§ 100-15. Composition of Joint Purchasing Commission. [Added
1-26-1998 by Ord. No. MC 3088]
The Joint Purchasing Commission should consist of the Township's Business
Administrator, the Township's Purchasing Agent, the Chief Financial Officer
and depending upon their consent to so participate as members of the
Commission, a Board of Education member, the Superintendent of Schools
or his/her designee, the Assistant Superintendent For Business/Board
Secretary and the Executive Director of the Irvington Housing Authority or
his/her designee.
§ 100-16. Records of purchases by Joint Purchasing Commission;
state law compliance. [Added 1-26-1998 by Ord. No. MC 3088]
This Commission shall keep complete and accurate records of all purchases
made, the manner or method used to make such purchases and comply with
all provisions of state law.
§ 100-17. Public bidding process. [Added 1-26-1998 by Ord. No. MC
3088]
Any purchases made or authorized through the public bidding process
shall be conducted in strict compliance with state statutes relevant to the
process.53
§ 100-18. Compliance required.54
The Township shall comply with N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq., N.J.A.C. 5:34-5,
the Township Purchasing Manual and all laws and regulations promulgated
by the Division of Local Government Services.
Chapter 105
RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration — See Ch. 7. Commissions, committees, councils and other
agencies — See Ch. 22.
52.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. MC 3088 was vetoed by the Mayor; said veto was overridden
by a two-thirds vote of the Council 2-24-1998 by Res. No. MC 98-0224-7.
53.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:11-20 et seq.
54.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 100-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-18
1:163

ARTICLE I
Residence of Officers and Employees
[Adopted 9-25-1979 by Ord. No. MC 2581; amended 6-12-1990 by
Ord. No. MC 2904 (Ch. 5, Art. XXVI, of the 1981 Revised Code)]
§ 105-1. Officers and employees to be residents; terminology.
Unless otherwise provided by law, all officers and employees employed by
the Township of Irvington after the effective date of this article shall be bona
fide residents therein. A bona fide resident for the purpose of this act is a
person having a permanent domicile within the local unit and one which
has not been adopted with the intention of again taking up or claiming a
previous residence acquired outside of the local boundaries.
§ 105-2. Civil service applicants to be residents.
Unless otherwise provided by law, all applicants for positions and
employments in the Classified New Jersey Department of Personnel area
shall be bona fide residents of the Township of Irvington after the effective
date of this article subject to the exceptions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-1.4.
§ 105-3. Maintenance of residence.
It shall be the duty of the hiring authority to ensure that all employees
hired after the effective date of this article shall remain bona fide residents
of the Township of Irvington. Failure of any such employee to maintain
residency in the Township of Irvington, unless otherwise exempted from
the provisions of this article, shall be cause for removal or discharge from
service.
§ 105-4. Unavailability of qualified residents.
A. When the appointing authority of the Township of Irvington has
determined that there cannot be recruited a sufficient number of
qualified residents for available specific positions or employment, the
appointing authority shall advertise for other qualified applicants.
Classification of qualified applicants in such instance shall be
determined in the following manner:
(1) Other residents in the county in which the municipality is situate.
(2) Other residents of counties contiguous to the county in which the
municipality is situate.
(3) Other residents of the state.
(4) All other applicants.
B. All appointments shall be made in the order of preference established
hereinabove, except subject to preferences granted pursuant to any
other provisions of the law.
§ 105-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-5
1:165
§ 105-5. Special talent positions.
§ 105-6. Preference in promotion.
Promotion preference shall be given to a bona fide resident of the Township
of Irvington. When promotions are based upon merit, as properly
determined, a bona fide resident shall be given preference over a
nonresident in any instance when all other measurable criteria are equal.
Such preference under this section shall in no way diminish, reduce or
effect the preference granted pursuant to other law.
§ 105-7. Statutory provisions to control.
Nothing contained in this article shall require residency of a person
exempted from the provisions of this article or where a state statute would
allow otherwise.
A. Whenever the appointing authority shall determine that there are
certain specific positions and employments requiring special talents or
skills which are necessary for the operations of the Township of
Irvington and which are not likely to be found among residents of the
Township of Irvington, such positions or employments so determined
shall be filled without reference to residency.
B. Such provisions shall set forth the formal criteria pursuant to which
such positions and employments shall be determined. The criteria shall
be established by the appointing authority as the need shall so exist
from time to time.
§ 105-5 IRVINGTON CODE § 105-7
1:166
ARTICLE II
Residence of Law Enforcement and Firefighting Personnel
[Adopted 1-11-1977 by Ord. No. MC 2479 (Ch. 5, Art. XXVII, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 105-8. Classification of applicants.
§ 105-9. Appointments by classification. [Amended 10-14-2015 by
Ord. No. MC 3553]
In making such appointments, the Director of the Public Safety Department
shall first appoint all those in Class I and those in each succeeding class in
the order above listed and shall appoint a person or persons in any such
class only to a vacancy or vacancies remaining after all qualified applicants
in the preceding class or classes have been appointed or have declined an
offer of appointment.
§ 105-10. Lists to be separate and successive.
The classes of qualified applicants defined in § 105-8 shall be considered as
separate and successive lists of eligibles, and the Civil Service Commission
shall, when requested to certify eligibles for positions specified in this
section, make such certifications from said classes separately and
successively and shall certify no persons from any such class until all
persons in the preceding class or classes have been appointed or have
declined offers of appointment.
A. Before any person shall be appointed as a member of the Public Safety
Department as law enforcement personnel or firefighting personnel,
the Director of the Public Safety Department shall classify all the duly
qualified applicants for the position or positions to be filled in the
respective departments, in the following classes: [Amended
10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
(1) Class I: residents of the municipality.
(2) Class II: other residents of the county in which the municipality is
situate.
(3) Class III: other residents of the state.
(4) Class IV: all other qualified applicants.
B. Within each such classification, duly qualified applicants who are
veterans shall be accorded all such veterans' preferences as are
provided by law. Persons discharged from the service within six months
prior to making application to such municipality, who fulfill the
requirements of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-10.1 and who thereby are entitled to
appointment notwithstanding their failure to meet the New Jersey
residency requirement at the time of their initial application, shall be
placed in Class III.
§ 105-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-11
1:167
§ 105-11. Provisions applicable to initial appointments. [Amended
10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
This article shall apply only to initial appointments and not to the
promotional appointments of persons already members of the Public Safety
Department.
§ 105-12. Temporary appointments. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord.
No. MC 3553]
In making temporary appointments, the Director of the Public Safety
Department shall utilize the classifications set forth in § 105-8 and shall
classify accordingly all duly qualified applicants for the position or positions
to be temporarily filled.
§ 105-13. Special law enforcement personnel. [Added 2-13-1985 by
Ord. No. MC 2769; 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
All persons appointed special law enforcement personnel shall be bona
fide residents in the Township of Irvington; provided, however, that the
residency requirement may be waived where the applicant for renewal of
appointment as a special law enforcement personnel had been a special law
enforcement personnel in the Township of Irvington and a resident of the
Township of Irvington for a period of at least 10 years prior to July 1, 1984.
§ 105-11 IRVINGTON CODE § 105-13
1:168
Chapter 110
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration — See Ch. 7.
Commissions, committees, councils and other
agencies — See Ch. 22.
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 32.
§ 105-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-13
1:169

ARTICLE I
Salary Ranges; Increments; Leaves of Absense; Retirement
[Adopted 5-28-1985 by Ord. No. MC 2782 (Ch. 44 of the 1981
Revised Code)]
§ 110-1. Salary ranges to be set. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No.
MC 3553; 1-12-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3562]
The salary ranges of all officers and employees exclusive of law enforcement
and firefighting personnel below the rank of Public Safety Director or Fire
Chief shall become effective on the dates set forth in their respective salary
ordinances.
§ 110-2. New employees to be paid lowest rate within range;
exceptions.
All new employees in the Township's departments and offices affected by
this chapter shall be paid at the lowest rate within the salary range of pay
established for those positions except as follows:
§ 110-3. Salary increments.
A. A person having three years of experience as a full-time sanitary
inspector in a state, county or local health department may be hired at
the minimum salary provided for the position of sanitary inspector, plus
one increment as defined in § 110-3 of this chapter.
B. A person having four years of experience as a full-time sanitary
inspector in a state, county or local health department may be hired at
the minimum salary provided for the position of sanitary inspector, plus
two increments as defined in § 110-3 of this chapter.
C. A person having seven years of experience as a full-time sanitary
inspector in a state, county or local health department may be hired at
the minimum salary provided for the position of sanitary inspector, plus
three increments as defined in § 110-3 of this chapter.
D. A person having 10 years of experience as a full-time sanitary inspector
in a state, county or local health department may be hired at the
minimum salary provided for the position of sanitary inspector, plus
four increments as defined in § 110-3 of this chapter.
E. Unless a salary above the minimum rate, but within the range, is
authorized by resolution of the Municipal Council.
A. "Increment," as recited in this chapter, shall apply to the particular
positions hereinabove referenced and shall mean an annual increase of
salary equal to 20% of the difference between the minimum and
maximum pay rate of the salary ranges established for such position or
classification.
§ 110-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-3
1:171
§ 110-4. Construal.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed as affecting the status of
employees now in the employ of the Township of Irvington not specifically
provided for by the terms of this chapter so long as they continue to remain
employees of the Township of Irvington.
§ 110-5. Longevity pay. [Amended 2-25-2014 by Ord. No. MC 350855]
Managerial and nonunion employees shall not be entitled to receive
longevity pay. Any payments previously designated or due as longevity have
already been included in the administrative officer's salary.
§ 110-6. Leaves of absence for servicemen. [Added 1-15-1991 by
Ord. No. MC 2917; amended 2-15-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3013]
B. The increment herein mentioned shall be paid as of January 1 of each
year to those eligible employees in the positions and classifications
hereinabove referenced who have completed the designated period of
satisfactory service and provided, further, that the increment payments
described in this chapter are contingent upon the availability of funds
to be appropriated by the Municipal Council.
C. All new employees shall complete at least six months' satisfactory
service in the position or classification appointed to prior to January 1 of
the effective year in order to qualify or be eligible for the salary
increment herein provided. Any person employed under another title
who, with the consent of the Department of Civil Service, is transferred
to another title having the same salary ranges, shall also qualify for the
salary increment if said employee has completed a combined six months
of satisfactory service in both positions prior to January 1 of the
effective year.
D. An employee who is promoted to a new title or position shall receive the
minimum salary for the new title; or the present salary, plus one normal
increment of the new title, whichever is greater.
E. An employee who is eligible and qualified under this chapter and who
has not reached the maximum salary rate set forth in the salary range
hereinabove listed for the particular position or classification shall
receive the annual increment hereinabove mentioned until the
maximum salary rate has been attained, provided that no increment
shall be granted that will give said employee a total salary in excess of
the maximum salary rate herein established for the position or
classification.
A. All officers and employees of this municipality who are members of the
National Guard, Military Reserve or other form of organized militia
55.Editor's Note: This ordinance froze longevity payments at existing levels for current
employees and eliminated longevity pay for all existing managerial and nonunion
personnel who commenced employment on or after 12-31-2013, effective 12-31-2013.
§ 110-3 IRVINGTON CODE § 110-6
1:172
§ 110-7. Separation of services. [Added 11-13-1996 by Ord. No. MC
3046]
§ 110-8. Employees seeking elected office. [Added 11-13-1996 by
Ord. No. MC 305056; amended 6-14-2005 by Ord. No. MC 3292;
12-27-2007 by Ord. No. MC 3365]
ordered into active duty by the President or other authorized
representative of the United States Government shall be entitled to a
leave of absence from their respective duties without loss of pay or
time or other benefits on all days during which they shall be engaged
in active duty, active duty for training or other duty ordered by the
President or other authorized official; provided, however, that
compensation while on such military leave shall be calculated as the
difference between the salary to which an official or employee shall
be entitled in the course of his or her employment by the Township of
Irvington and the amount provided to the official or employee out of
federal funds.
B. Leaves of absence for such military duty shall be in addition to the
regular vacation allowed such officers and employees by municipal
ordinance, resolution or regulation.
A. Every municipal employee who plans to retire must notify his/her
immediate supervisor and department director in writing.
B. The department director must submit in writing to the Business
Administrator and the Director of Revenue and Finance, three months
prior to the start of the new fiscal budget year, the employee's intention
to retire from his/her employment service to the Township.
C. Failure to submit the letter of intent three months prior to the start of
the new fiscal budget year will automatically forestall payment of final
compensation to the employee until the beginning of the next
succeeding fiscal budget year.
A. Any full-time Township employee working for the Township of Irvington
shall be required to take an unpaid leave of absence upon the filing date
for the petition of nomination for the elected office which he or she is
seeking, expiring on the day following the election for said elected
office. This section shall apply only to elected offices represented by
election districts wholly or partially within the Township of Irvington
and shall exclude candidates for the County Committee. For the
purposes of candidates seeking elected office in a primary election for
the general election, said leave of absence shall take effect on the
primary election filing date for petitions of nomination for said elected
office and shall expire on the day after the primary election. For the
purposes of this section, in the event that there is no opposing
56.Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor; said veto was overridden by a twothirds
vote of the Council 12-10-1996 by Res. No. 96-1210-109.
§ 110-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-8
1:173
§ 110-9. Overtime pay for directors or department heads. [Added
1-23-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3163]
No director or department head in a yearly salaried position shall be paid
overtime or extra compensation of any kind for hours worked beyond his/
her regularly scheduled work day. The Municipal Clerk's salaried
employees, pursuant to its election duties only, are hereby exempt from the
above provision.
candidate for the same elected office in the general election for either
candidate nominated in a primary election, or for independent
candidates, the provisions of this section requiring a leave of absence
shall not apply. Such unpaid leave of absence from full-time
employment must be approved by the Township's administration.
B. Persons exempted from the above prohibition shall include the Mayor,
sitting members of the Municipal Council or any other incumbent
elected official seeking the same elected office.
§ 110-8 IRVINGTON CODE § 110-9
1:174
ARTICLE II
Non-Union Elected Officials and Employees
[Adopted 9-25-2018 by Ord. No. MC 3666]
§ 110-10. Limits on compensation.
All non-union elected officials, depatment directors, deputy department
directors and statutory officers be compensated pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:9-165.
§ 110-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-10
1:175
Chapter 114
SEXUAL HARASSMENT
§ 114-1. Policy.
The Township of Irvington expressly prohibits any form of sexual
harassment. Improper interference with the ability of employees to perform
their expected job duties will not be tolerated. It is Township of Irvington
policy that all employees have a right to work in an environment free of
discrimination, which encompasses freedom from sexual harassment. The
Township of Irvington strongly disapproves of sexual harassment of its
employees, in any form, and states that all employees at all levels of the
Township of Irvington must avoid offensive or inappropriate sexual and/
or sexually harassing behavior at work and will be held responsible for
ensuring that the workplace is free from sexual harassment.
§ 114-2. Responsibility.
The Township of Irvington strongly disapproves of and does not tolerate
sexual harassment of any kind. It is the responsibility of each supervisor
to create an atmosphere free from sexual harassment and to communicate
the Township of Irvington's policy on this subject to all subordinates, to
promptly investigate complaints and to take corrective action as necessary.
It is the responsibility of each employee of the Township to respect the
rights of coworkers. All employees must avoid offensive or inappropriate
sexual behavior at work and are responsible for assuring that the workplace
is free from sexual harassment at all times.
§ 114-3. Guidelines.
The Township of Irvington policy prohibits unwelcome sexual advances;
requests for sexual acts or favors with or without accompanying promises,
threats or reciprocal favors or actions; or other verbal or physical conduct
of a sexual nature which has the purpose or effect of adversely affecting
an employee's performance or which creates a hostile or offensive working
environment. Examples of prohibited conduct include but are not limited
to lewd or sexually suggestive comments; off-color language or jokes of
a sexual nature; commentary about an individual's body; slurs and other
verbal, graphic or physical conduct relating to an individual's sex; or any
display of sexually explicit pictures, greeting cards, articles, comic books,
magazines, photos or cartoons. Such behavior and displays are prohibited
anywhere in the Township of Irvington, including locker rooms and
bathrooms, and in any public place, including any off-duty encounters
among Township of Irvington employees.
§ 114-4. Complaint procedure.
The Township of Irvington will endeavor to investigate all complaints as
expeditiously and as professionally as possible. Where investigations
§ 110-10 IRVINGTON CODE § 114-4
1:176
confirm the allegations, appropriate corrective action will be taken. The
Township of Irvington will make every attempt to maintain the information
provided to it in the complaint and investigation process as confidentially as
possible. Any employee who has a complaint of sexual harassment at work
by anyone, including supervisors, coworkers or visitors, should immediately
bring the problem to the attention of his or her immediate supervisor.
If the complaint involves supervisory personnel in the employee's line of
command, then the complaint should be brought to the Business
Administrator. All complaints should be in writing and should specify the
acts of sexual harassment complained of. As part of its investigation, the
Township of Irvington will conduct interviews with all relevant persons,
including the complainant, the accused and other potential witnesses. The
Township of Irvington will review its findings with the complainant at
the conclusion of its investigation. If the investigation reveals that the
complaint appears to be valid, immediate and appropriate corrective action,
up to and including seeking a discharge, will be taken to stop the
harassment and prevent its recurrence. If the validity of the complaint
cannot be determined, immediate and appropriate action will be taken to
assure that all parties are reacquainted with the sexual harassment policy
so as to prevent sexual harassment in the future.
§ 114-5. Retaliation.
There will be no retaliation against employees for reporting sexual
harassment or assisting the Township of Irvington in the investigation of a
complaint. However, if after investigating any complaint of harassment or
unlawful discrimination the Township of Irvington learns that the complaint
is not bona fide or that an employee has provided false information
regarding the complaint, disciplinary action may be taken against the
individual who provided the false information.
§ 114-6. Distribution of policy.
A copy of the sexual harassment policy will be distributed to all Township
employees and will be posted in a prominent place in the Irvington
Municipal Building.
Chapter 122
TOWNSHIP-OWNED VEHICLES
§ 114-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 114-6
1:177

ARTICLE I
Use by Employees and Elected Officials
[Adopted 2-25-1997 by Ord. No. MC 305857 (Ch. 47, Art. I, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 122-1. Use by employees restricted.
Unless otherwise provided herein, Township-owned motor vehicles shall
only be available for use by Township employees during regular business
hours and in the course of the normal and necessary operations of the
Township and/or its departments or agencies.
§ 122-2. Use by employees after business hours. [Amended
3-25-1997 by Ord. No. MC 306358]
No Township employee may take home a Township-owned vehicle after
regular business hours unless its use falls within any of the hereinafter set
forth exceptions:
A. The animal control vans may be taken home by the Animal Control
Officers.
B. The Business Administrator may, for good cause, grant permission to
any employee to take home a Township-owned motor vehicle, provided
that such permission is given in writing and it is in the furtherance of
Township business. The Mayor and Township Council shall be notified
in writing of the reasons for granting such permission within seven
business days thereof.
C. Township-owned motor vehicles which are taken home, after regular
business hours, during emergencies such as snow storms, rain storms
and public health crises. The Business Administrator shall notify, in
writing, the Mayor and Council of such emergency use within three
business days thereof. The Business Administrator shall also prepare
and distribute to all employees written criteria for determining the
appropriateness of taking home a Township-owned motor vehicle
during emergencies.
D. The Fire Chief's Township-owned motor vehicle may be taken home by
the Fire Chief only.
E. The Public Safety Director's Township-owned motor vehicle may be
taken home by the Public Safety Director only. [Amended 1-12-2016
by Ord. No. MC 3562]
57.Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor 3-5-1997 and overridden by a twothirds
vote of the Council 3-11-1997.
58.Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor 3-26-1997 and overridden by a twothirds
vote of the Council 4-8-1997.
§ 122-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-3
1:179
§ 122-3. Use by elected officials.
No elected official may take home or use a Township-owned motor vehicle
except in an emergency such as a snow storm, rain storm or public health
crisis or when, in furtherance of Township business, such official must travel
outside the boundaries of the Township of Irvington.
§ 122-3 IRVINGTON CODE § 122-3
1:180
ARTICLE II
Control of Emissions
[Adopted 11-9-2006 by Ord. No. MC 3328 (Ch. 47, Art. II, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 122-4. Township initiatives.
The Township of Irvington shall, to the best of its ability:
A. Take proactive steps to encourage and monitor compliance with the
idling regulations by drivers of Essex County, Township of Irvington
owned vehicles as well as by drivers of other vehicles operating within
the Essex County Township of Irvington;
B. Implement best management practices to minimize exposure of
children to diesel emissions from school buses;
C. Utilize ultra-low-sulfur diesel in Essex County, Township of Irvington
owned equipment prior to the September 2006 federal mandate; and
D. Identify opportunities for cost-effective retrofitting of diesel vehicles
within Essex County, Township of Irvington owned fleets.
§ 122-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-4
1:181
Chapter 128
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONE
§ 122-4 IRVINGTON CODE § 122-4
1:182
ARTICLE I
Urban Enterprise Zone Development Corporation
[Adopted 9-13-1994 by Ord. No. MC 3004 (Ch. 48, Art. I, of the 1981
Revised Code)]
§ 128-1. Approval of designation.
The Township of Irvington hereby approves the designation of the nonprofit
Irvington Urban Enterprise Zone Corporation, pursuant to the provisions of
Title 15 of the Revised Statutes, as authorized in § 3f of P.L. 1983, c. 303, as
amended,59 to act as the zone development corporation for the Township.
§ 128-2. Board of Directors. [Amended 11-13-1996 by Ord. No. MC
304960]
A. Any appointments to the Urban Enterprise Zone Board of Directors
shall be subject to the advice and consent of the Municipal Council as
the governing body for the Township.
B. The Irvington Municipal Council is hereby vested with the authority to
nominate a member to the Board of Directors.
C. At least one seat on the Board of Directors shall be reserved and/or
designated for a member of the Irvington Chamber of Commerce.
59.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27H-62, Subsection f.
60.Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor; said veto was overridden by a twothirds
vote of the Council 12-10-1996 by Res. No. MC 96-1012-108.
§ 128-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 128-2
1:183

ARTICLE II
Acceptance of Designation
[Adopted 5-7-1996 by Ord. No. MC 3035 (Ch. 48, Art. II, of the 1981
Revised Code)]
§ 128-3. Acceptance of areas and plan.
The Municipal Council of the Township of Irvington does hereby accept the
designation of certain areas contained in its resolution.61 The Municipal
Council accepts this designation from the Urban Enterprise Zone Authority
and accepts the designation of the Zone Development Plan as formulated
and approved in the aforesaid resolutions.
61.Editor's Note: Resolution No. OCDP94-0809-5, adopted 8-9-1994, is on file in the office of
the Township Clerk.
§ 128-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 128-3
1:185
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 140
ABANDONED PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Housing Services — See Ch. 7,
Art. XII.
Urban Enterprise Zone — See Ch. 128.
Uniform construction code — See Ch. 240.
Housing Standards — See Ch. 355.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 365.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 460.
Special Improvement Districts — See Ch. 544.
Taxation — See Ch. 577.
Tax liens — See Ch. 586.
§ 128-3 IRVINGTON CODE § 128-3
1:186
ARTICLE I
Rehabilitation
[Adopted 5-4-2004 by Ord. No. MC 3262 (Ch. 51, Art. I, of the 1981
Revised Code)]
§ 140-1. Abandoned property defined.
An "abandoned property" is hereby defined as one that has not been legally
occupied for a period of six months and meets one of the following criteria:
§ 140-2. Procedures for Township's acquisition of abandoned
property. [Amended 3-13-2018 by Ord. No. MC 3635]
The procedures for the Township's acquisition of the abandoned property
shall be that which is set forth in N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq. (P.L. 2003, Ch.
210). This shall include the filing of a complaint in the Superior Court of
New Jersey with a certification by the public officer that the property is
abandoned. Thirty days' notice must be provided to the owner prior to the
filing of a complaint.
§ 140-3. Rehabilitation plan.
The owner may defend against the complaint by submitting a plan for
the rehabilitation and reuse of the property and by posting a bond equal
to 125% of the amount determined by the public officer (Business
Administrator or his designee) to represent the projected cost of
rehabilitation. The plan requires a financial feasibility analysis, a budget
and timetable for rehabilitation of the property and documentation of
qualifications of those who will perform the rehabilitation.
A. The property is in need of rehabilitation and has not been rehabilitated
during the unoccupied period;
B. Construction has been initiated on the property in the past, but not for
the six-month period;
C. The property has been in tax arrearage for at least one installment
period; or
D. The property has been determined to be a nuisance by the Business
Administrator, the Construction Official, the Health Officer, the Fire
Subcode Official, the Director of Housing Services or other public
official charged with condemnation responsibilities and granted the
appropriate authority (nuisance includes a finding that the property is
unfit for human habitation and/or is determined to be a fire hazard or
potential health and safety hazard). [Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord.
No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
§ 140-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-4
1:187
§ 140-4. Rehabilitation plan approval.
The Court shall approve the plan if the plan is realistic and likely to
result in the expeditious rehabilitation and reuse of the property and,
correspondingly, the Court shall disapprove of the plan if unrealistic. If the
Court approves the owner's plan, it may appoint the Business Administrator
to act as monitor of the owner's compliance. If the owner fails to carry
out any step in the approved plan, the Business Administrator officer shall
notify the Court, which may order the bond forfeit, grant the Township
possession of the property, and authorize the Township to use the proceeds
of the bond for rehabilitation of the property.
§ 140-5. Quarterly progress reports required.
The owner shall provide quarterly reports to the Township and the Court on
the owner's progress toward rehabilitation and reuse of the property.
§ 140-6. Alternate entities for implementation of rehabilitation
plan.
If an owner fails to successfully defend against a complaint, a mortgage
holder or lien holder may seek to be designated in possession for the
property by submitting a plan and posting a bond meeting the same
conditions described above. If no mortgage holder or lien holder meets
these conditions, the Township of Irvington shall submit a plan which shall
designate an entity that shall implement the plan. This entity may be the
Township or a qualified rehabilitation entity, organized or authorized to do
business under New Jersey law, which shall have as one of its purposes the
construction or rehabilitation of residential or nonresidential buildings, the
provision of affordable housing and the restoration of abandoned property,
among others.
§ 140-7. Possession of property by Township.
If the Township of Irvington is granted possession of a property under this
article, the Township shall be deemed to have an ownership interest in the
property for the purpose of filing plans with public agencies and any state
program of grants or loans. Where the Township borrows funds for the
express purpose of rehabilitating the property, the Court may authorize the
Township to grant a lien or security interest with priority over all other liens
or mortgages other than Township liens.
§ 140-8. Owner responsibilities while under Township possession.
With the granting of possession by the Court to the Township of a property
determined to be abandoned, the owner shall continue to be responsible
for all taxes or other municipal liens and charges, or mortgages or liens
to any party, incurred on the property, whether those taxes, charges or
liens are incurred before or after the granting of possession; nor shall the
owner be relieved of any operating or maintenance expense associated
with the property. Similarly, although the Township is required to maintain,
§ 140-4 IRVINGTON CODE § 140-8
1:188
safeguard, and maintain insurance on the property, the owner shall not be
relieved of any civil or criminal liability or any duty imposed by reason of
acts or omissions of the owner relating to the property.
§ 140-9. Township authorized to seek approval to assign rights to
another entity.
The Township is authorized to seek Court approval to assign its rights to
another entity, which may be granted under the circumstances enumerated
in this article.
§ 140-10. Reinstatement of owner's rights.
An owner may petition for reinstatement of the owner's control and
possession of the property. The petition's requirements and conditions shall
be determined by the Court for reinstating the owner's rights.
§ 140-11. Township sale of property.
If the Township sells the property, this article sets forth the order of
distribution of the proceeds of such a sale. This article authorizes the
Business Administrator, with the approval of the Court, to place a lien on
the property to cover any costs the Township incurred prior to the granting
by the Court of an order of possession, which may include costs incurred to
stabilize or secure the property.
§ 140-12. Special tax sales.
This article authorizes the Township of Irvington to hold special tax sales
with respect to those properties eligible for tax sale under N.J.S.A. 54:5-19
which are also on an abandoned property list and sets forth procedures
governing those special tax sales. In the case of any eminent domain
proceeding carried out under Section 37 of P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A.
55:19-56), this article establishes the parameters for establishing fair
market value.
§ 140-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-12
1:189

ARTICLE II
Abandoned Property List
[Adopted 12-28-2004 by Ord. No. MC 3281 (Ch. 51, Art. II, of the
1981 Revised Code); amended in its entirety 5-15-2018 by Ord. No.
MC 3654]
§ 140-13. Establishment of list.
The Director of the Department of Economic Development and Grant
Oversight as "public officer" is hereby directed to identify abandoned
properties within the municipality, place said properties on an abandoned
property list established as provided in Section 36 of P.L. 1996, c. 62
(N.J.S.A. 55:19-55), as amended by Section 28 of P.L. 2003, c. 210, and
provide such notices and carry out such other tasks as are required to
effectuate an abandoned property list provided by law.
§ 140-14. Applicability.
The abandoned property list shall apply to the Township of Irvington as a
whole.
§ 140-15. Public officer's responsibilities and powers.
The public officer, for the purpose of carrying out the responsibilities
established by this article, shall have all the responsibilities and powers
provided by law and shall exercise the authority granted the public officer
of a municipality pursuant to P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-20 et seq.).
§ 140-16. Designee
The public officer shall exercise the authority granted the municipality
pursuant to Section 13 of P.L. 2003, c. 210,62 to designate qualified
rehabilitation entities to act as the designee of the municipality with respect
to the provisions of that section.
62.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 55:19-90.
§ 140-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-16
1:191

ARTICLE III
Qualified Rehabilitation Entity Application Fee
[Adopted 9-11-2018 by Ord. No. MC 3663]
§ 140-17. Fee established.
There shall be a qualified rehabilitation entity application fee in the amount
of $100 to be paid by any entity who is applying to be designated as a
qualified rehabilitation entity by the Abandoned Property Public Officer.
§ 140-18. Fee nonrefundable.
The qualified rehabilitation entity application fee is nonrefundable under
any circumstances.
§ 140-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-18
1:193
Chapter 149
AIR POLLUTION
§ 149-1. Short title.
The code hereby adopted may be known and cited as the "Air Pollution Code
of the Town of Irvington, 1973 Edition."
§ 149-2. Adoption of standards.
There is hereby adopted by the Municipal Council of the Town, pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1, an air pollution code for the purpose of controlling
and reducing atmospheric pollution, establishing standards governing the
installation, maintenance and operation of equipment relating to
combustion, known as the "Air Pollution Code of the Town of Irvington,
1973 Edition." Said code permits access to make inspections and provides
penalties for violation of the provisions thereof.
§ 149-3. Copies to be filed. [Amended 9-28-1982 by Ord. No. MC
2668; 2-13-1985 by Ord. No. MC 2769; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC
3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
Upon final adoption and approval hereof, three copies of the Air Pollution
Code of the Town of Irvington, 1973 Edition, shall be placed on file and
remain on file in the office of the Department of Housing Services and in the
office of the Clerk of the Town for use and examination by the public so long
as this chapter shall continue in effect.
§ 149-4. Amendments. [Added 6-28-1977 by Ord. No. MC 2499]
Section 3 of the Air Pollution Code of the Town of Irvington, 1973 Edition, is
hereby supplemented by adding the following sections:
A. Section 3.1. No person shall engage in or permit the work of
sandblasting exteriors of buildings and structures unless and until such
person has applied for a permit therefor and such permit has been
issued by the Director of the Department of Housing Services to the
applicant. [Amended 9-28-1982 by Ord. No. MC 2668; 2-13-1985
by Ord. No. MC 2769; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014
by Ord. No. MC 3511]
B. Section 3.2. Before issuing the permit required by Section 3.1 of the Air
Pollution Code, the applicant shall submit proof to the Director of the
Department of Housing Services that the applicant owns or will provide
and install sufficient safety equipment such as windbreaks and/or
source enclosures to reduce surface wind speed and contain or limit the
emission of dust particles and such other safety measures necessary to
safeguard all persons and property affected and in the vicinity of the
building or structure being sandblasted. [Amended 9-28-1982 by
§ 140-18 IRVINGTON CODE § 149-4
1:194
Chapter 154
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 307.
§ 154-1. Purpose. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards and regulations for
various types of intrusion, burglar, fire and other emergency alarm devices,
whether by direct line, radio, telephone or other means, actuating a device
at the police or fire headquarters of the Town and requiring response
thereby by the Public Safety Department or other municipal agency.
§ 154-2. Applicability. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any person who operates,
maintains or owns any alarm device or local alarm designed to summon
the Public Safety Department or other municipal agency to any location
in response to any type of alarm signal. The terms of this chapter shall in
no way prohibit alarm companies from providing service by private source
to other offices within or without the Town so long as such activity is not
connected to the alarm console; except, however, that any person having
a premises protected by an alarm device shall still be responsible for the
registration thereof in accordance with § 154-6A without fee.
§ 154-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM CONSOLE — The console or control panel of devices giving a visual
or audible response, or both, and located within the confines of the Public
Safety Department of the Town.[Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC
3553]
Ord. No. MC 2668; 2-13-1985 by Ord. No. MC 2769; 7-14-2009 by
Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
C. Section 3.3. The hours during which sandblasting operations may be
conducted are limited between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. and the days
limited to Monday through Friday.
D. Section 3.4. The fee for the annual permit required under the provisions
of Section 3.1 shall be $50.63
63.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 149-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-3
1:195
ALARM DEVICE — Any type of alarm system actuating equipment in the
alarm console providing warning of intrusion, fire, smoke, flood or other
peril.
ALARM INSTALLATION — Any alarm device or combination of devices
installed for one or more buildings at a location other than the alarm
console.
DESIGNATED REPRESENTATIVE — Limited to a member of the Public
Safety Department of the Town.[Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC
3553]
DIAL ALARM — That type of device using telephone lines, transmitting an
alarm directly through the police or fire switchboard.
FALSE ALARM — Any alarm actuated by inadvertence, negligence, or
unintentional act of someone other than an intruder, and shall include as
well alarms caused by malfunctioning of the alarm device or other relevant
equipment, but shall not include alarms created by malfunction of the alarm
console.
LICENSEE — The person obtaining the license to maintain the alarm
console as hereinafter set forth.
LOCAL ALARM — Any alarm or device which when actuated produces a
signal not connected to the alarm console, such as store burglar alarms
actuating bell devices.
PERMITTEE — Any person owning an alarm device or a local alarm within
the scope of this chapter.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, corporation or association.
§ 154-4. Licensing procedure.
A. There is hereby established a police alarm console license or a fire
alarm console license, which shall be granted upon recommendation of
the Director of Public Safety as set forth in § 154-5. Any such license
shall have exclusive use and control of the alarm console, except for use
by the Public Safety Department of the Town, and such licensee will be
responsible at no cost to the Town for the establishment, construction
and installation of such console containing equipment and being of a
design approved by the Director of Public Safety and for the care,
maintenance and management thereafter of such console; such
licensee shall locate such console and relocate such console if
necessary under the supervision of the Director of Public Safety or the
Chief of Fire at no cost to the Town. For any such license granted
hereunder, the licensee will assume all liability and agree to indemnify
and save harmless the Town, its agents and the Town Public Safety
Department for any acts in conjunction with the operation of such
police or alarm console, and in conjunction therewith he shall furnish
annually to the Town Clerk a noncancelable insurance certificate
indicating public liability coverage in an amount no less than:
§ 154-3 IRVINGTON CODE § 154-4
1:196
[Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553; 1-12-2016 by Ord.
No. MC 3562]
(1) Five hundred thousand dollars for each person and $1,000,000 for
each accident.
(2) Property damage: $250,000 for each accident.
B. Any connection to the police alarm or fire alarm console shall be of a
type inspected and approved by the Director of Public Safety or the
Chief of Fire of the Town or his designated representative, and any
person aggrieved by such decision may appeal such decision in writing
within 10 days to the Director of Public Safety. [Amended 10-14-2015
by Ord. No. MC 3553; 1-12-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3562]
C. All alarms existing as of the date of the adoption of this chapter64
(except dial alarms) shall be connected hereunder to the alarm console
by the licensee and no connection cost for such transfer shall be
permitted; provided that such alarms qualify as to type of alarm or
equipment under the other provisions or requirements of this chapter.
D. The licensee for the police or fire alarm console shall be permitted to
charge subscribers a maximum installation fee of $70 and a maximum
monthly retainer or maintenance fee of $10, except, however, that no
fee shall be charged to the Town or the Board of Education, Free Pubic
Library, the tax office in the Municipal Building or other public
buildings for monthly charges or console connection charges for any
existing or future systems in public buildings, and any equipment or
alarm devices installed by the alarm console licensee in such public
buildings shall be at wholesale cost, exclusive of labor charges.
[Amended 10-26-1971 by Ord. No. MC 2303; 6-9-1981 by Ord.
No. MC 2829]
E. The licensee shall install initially an annunciator or display console
having no less than 1,000 zones available for present systems and
future connections, which console shall be approved by the
Underwriters' Laboratories or pending approval. [Amended 6-9-1981
by Ord. No. MC 2829]
F. Except as provided in § 154-7, any license issued hereunder shall be for
a term of three years from date of approval by the Mayor and Council of
the Town; such licensee shall post with the Town Clerk a performance
bond in the amount of $5,000, noncancelable without notification to the
Town Clerk of the Town, guaranteeing performance for three years of
the obligation of the licensee and ensuring maintenance of such console
and alarm system during such period when the license is in force.
[Amended 6-9-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2829]
G. Such licensee, for the privilege of obtaining such license, shall pay to
the Town a minimum annual sum of no less than 15% of the gross rental
64.Editor's Note: The chapter was adopted 9-28-1971 by Ord. No. MC 2296.
§ 154-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-4
1:197
§ 154-5. Application for license.
earned annually by such licensee from subscribers connected to said
alarm console, which payment shall be made within 30 days of the close
of each fiscal year in which said license is in force, and such licensee,
by acceptance of said license, shall be deemed to have agreed to having
the books and accounts of said licensee open to inspection by the Town
Auditor or other designated representative of the Town, selected by the
Mayor, with approval of the Council, to verify the annual account which
shall be submitted by said licensee coincidental with the fee described
aforesaid. [Amended 10-26-1971 by Ord. No. MC 2303]
H. Prerequisite for issuance and continuation of licenses and permits.
[Added 8-13-1991 by Ord. No. MC 292965]
(1) No license or permit shall be issued or renewed, as the case may
be, to any applicant who is the owner of property wherein a
business or activity for which a license or permit is sought or
wherein a business or activity is to be conducted unless and until
any delinquent property taxes or assessments on such property are
paid and current. This subsection shall not apply to licenses issued
pursuant to the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act of the State of New
Jersey.66
(2) The applicant shall supply a certificate from the Township Tax
Collector that all property taxes and assessments are paid and
current on the subject property.
(3) In addition, a license issued pursuant to this chapter may be
revoked or suspended when any licensee who is the owner of the
property upon or within which the licensed activity is conducted
has failed to pay the taxes due on the property for at least three
consecutive quarters.
A. Prequalification. Persons desiring to bid for such license shall make
application to the Public Safety Director of the Town, which application
shall disclose whatever information may be required by the Public
Safety Director concerning the ability of the proposed applicant to
comply with the requirements of this chapter, and shall indicate, in any
event, that: [Amended 6-9-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2829; 1-12-2016
by Ord. No. MC 3562]
(1) Such applicant has satisfactory financial and personal references
indicating his ability to comply with the terms of this chapter.
65.Editor's Note: Section 4 of this ordinance provided as follows: "The issuance or
maintenance of licenses or permits under any provision of this ordinance will not be
withheld or denied if such action will jeopardize the health and safety of the citizens of
Irvington."
66.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.
§ 154-4 IRVINGTON CODE § 154-5
1:198
§ 154-6. Registration of local alarms and alarm devices.
(2) Such applicant has an office in the Town of Irvington or within a
fifty-mile radius thereof, with adequate personnel available on a
twenty-four-hour basis to serve such equipment.
B. Upon receipt by the Council of a list of those persons or corporations
who prequalified, the Municipal Council then shall, by resolution,
designate the time and place for receiving sealed bids by those eligible
to submit bids as set forth in Subsection A of this section, which bids
shall indicate the bond and other requirements of this chapter and shall
offer the gross rental prescribed by this chapter or greater amount and
the maximum installation and monthly charges prescribed by this
chapter or a lesser amount. Upon the return of the sealed bids, the
Council may award such license to the person whose bid, taken as a
whole, is the most advantageous to both the subscribers to the system
and the Town from a cost and revenue standpoint, and in conjunction
therewith the Council reserves the right to reject any and all bids.
C. Renewals of such license or award of new licenses should any license be
terminated in accordance with § 154-7 shall be accompanied by
following the procedures of Subsections A and B of this section.
A. Any person, firm or corporation which owns or operates a police or fire
alarm device or a local alarm shall make application for the continuance
thereof in writing to the Director of Public Safety or Chief of Fire, which
application shall contain at least the location of the device, the name of
the installer of such device, the type of device, provisions relating to
false alarms and testing procedures, a list of persons to be contacted in
the event of an alarm and other information as may be required by the
Director of Public Safety. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC
3553; 1-12-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3562]
B. Local alarms shall be registered, but no fee shall be charged therefor.
The signal shall be equipped with a timing device to restrict duration of
the signal to no more than 30 minutes. [Amended 6-9-1981 by Ord.
No. MC 2829]
C. For alarm devices, the permittee shall pay whatever charges are
required by any alarm company making such installation and, in
addition thereto, such connection and monthly maintenance charges as
hereinabove provided for to the licensee for the alarm control; the
permittee shall also pay to the Township $146 for the initial installation
and connection to the console of alarm devices which are required to be
registered with the Township. Per year thereafter, the fee shall be $109.
This fee shall be payable by January 15 of each year so long as the
permit is in force. Any permit issued between January 15 and December
31 shall require the same fee for the initial installation and the same
yearly fee per year thereafter, no portion of which shall be prorated or
refundable. Should any such fee be delinquent for 30 days, the Public
Safety Director shall notify the permittee in writing that such system
§ 154-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-6
1:199
§ 154-7. Nonliability of Town; revocation of permit. [Amended
10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
The Town shall be under no duty or obligation or be responsible for
damages to any permittee hereunder or to any alarm console licensee
hereunder. The alarm console and allied equipment is maintained at will
and is subject to termination at any time or cancellation of the system
by resolution duly adopted by the Municipal Council of the Town, and
any individual permit issued hereunder may be revoked at any time by
the Municipal Council upon recommendation of the Public Safety Director;
provided that 30 days' notice is given in writing to such permittee.
§ 154-8. Regulation of dial alarm devices; fines for false alarms.
has been disconnected from the alarm consoles. [Amended 8-11-1987
by Ord. No. MC 2834; 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3027;
12-14-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3134; 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC
3176; 10-12-2005 by Ord. No. MC 3306; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No.
MC 3413; 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
D. Any permit granted hereunder shall be accepted upon the express
condition that the permittee shall indemnify and hold the Town
harmless from and on account of any and all damages arising out of the
activities of the permittee, its alarm contractor or the alarm console
licensee of the Town.
A. Dial alarm devices shall not be permitted except as provided as follows:
(1) No automatic telephone dialing police or fire alarms attachments
or recording devices shall be installed within the Town without first
obtaining approval of the Public Safety Director of the Town. The
installation of such devices in municipal buildings shall also require
the approval of the Public Safety Director of the Town. [Amended
10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
(2) Any private fire or police alarm equipment arranged to
automatically transmit a voice or coded signal to the Public Safety
Department through commercial facilities shall be required to have
available a separate unlisted telephone or mechanical device to
receive such signals. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC
3553]
(3) Private police or fire alarm equipment arranged to automatically
transmit a voice or coded signal over commercial telephone
facilities shall be so designed and installed that the equipment shall
be disconnected automatically from the telephone line after the
signal has been received by the Public Safety Department.
[Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
(4) Private alarm equipment arranged to automatically transmit a
signal over commercial facilities shall be so designed that it will not
§ 154-6 IRVINGTON CODE § 154-8
1:200
seize and hold the commercial telephone line, thereby making
the line unavailable for the receipt of signals from other private
equipment.
(5) No direct call system shall be connected to a primary emergency
Public Safety Department telephone number or to Public Safety
Department business number. Private direct call systems shall
transmit alarms over receiving equipment or through telephone
numbers provided by the lessee. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord.
No. MC 3553]
(6) All receiving equipment located at police or fire headquarters shall
be the responsibility of the lessee. Maintenance, repairs,
installation expenses and other costs incidental to the operation of
such alarm systems shall be the sole responsibility of the lessee.
(7) Any person, firm or corporation seeking to install the
aforementioned devices within the Township shall pay an annual
license fee of $1,094. [Amended 8-11-1987 by Ord. No. MC
2834; 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. 3027; 12-14-1999 by Ord. No.
MC 3134; 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by
Ord. No. MC 3306; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413]
B. All fire alarm devices shall be installed in accordance with the
requirements of the Town Fire Prevention Code, as amended,67 or
higher authority, and with approval of the Public Safety Director.
[Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
C. Any licensees for the alarm console and any permittee utilizing the
services of any other alarm company connected to such console shall
provide for a representative to be on call at all times, and such service
shall be provided within eight hours of notification by the Public Safety
Department of any malfunctions of any equipment. [Amended
10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
D. In case of a false alarm involving fire and/or police, any person having
knowledge thereof shall immediately notify the Public Safety
Department in a manner to be prescribed by rules and regulations in
accordance with § 154-9. In addition, in the case of false alarms, the
Director of Public Safety shall cause an investigation to be made and
shall keep a record of such alarms on file. For such false alarms, the
Municipal Council prescribes the following penalties: For the first false
alarm in any given calendar year, a warning shall be issued; for the
second, third, fourth and fifth false alarms in the same calendar year, a
fine of $100 shall be paid to the Township; and for the sixth and
subsequent false alarms, a fine of $530 per false alarm shall be paid to
the Township. Where the investigation of the Public Safety Department
discloses continued abuse of the privilege of connection to the alarm
console and a disregard by the permittee for taking remedial steps to
67.Editor's Note: See Ch. 307, Fire Prevention.
§ 154-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-8
1:201
§ 154-9. Authority of Public Safety Director. [Amended 10-14-2015
by Ord. No. MC 3553]
The Public Safety Director may from time to time promulgate rules and
regulations supplementing this chapter in order to provide for
recordkeeping and efficient management of such system; provided,
however, that the Municipal Council must first approve such rules or any
changes thereto.
§ 154-10. Violations and penalties.69
Any person, firm or corporation found guilty in the Municipal Court of the
violation of the terms of this chapter shall be subject to the penalty set forth
in Chapter 1, Article III, Penalties.
Chapter 158
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dances and dance halls — See Ch. 253.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 428.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 439.
Poolrooms and billiard rooms — See Ch. 455.
Signs and billboards — See Ch. 513.
avoid false alarms, the Municipal Council reserves the right to require
disconnection from the alarm console for a limited or permanent time,
provided that no such permit shall be revoked or suspended without
giving the permittee an opportunity to show cause before the Municipal
Council why such action should not be taken. If the levied fines are not
paid, the Township retains the right to refuse to issue any licenses that
may be necessary and/or place a lien on the premises. In the event that
the Public Safety Department determines that the cause of the false
alarm was an act of God, then and in that event no fine shall be levied.
[Amended 8-11-1987 by Ord. No. MC 2834; 12-12-1995 by Ord.
No. MC 3027; 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3134; 8-14-2001 by
Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by Ord. No. MC 3306; 12-29-2009
by Ord. No. MC 3413; 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 355368]
68.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
69.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 154-8 IRVINGTON CODE § 154-10
1:202
ARTICLE I
In General
§ 158-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the words and terms used herein and in
N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 to 33:1-96 shall be deemed to have the meanings ascribed to
them in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1.
§ 158-2. Purpose.
This chapter is for the purpose of regulating the sale and transportation
of alcoholic beverages in the Town, in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 to 33:1-96, as amended, and in accordance with the rules
and regulations issued or to be promulgated by the State Commissioner of
Alcoholic Beverage Control applicable thereto.
§ 158-3. Hours of sale.70 [Amended 12-14-1971 by Ord. No. MC
2309; 4-9-1991 by Ord. No. MC 2923; 12-10-1991 by Ord. No. MC
2933; 8-11-1998 by Ord. No. MC 309471]
No person shall sell or serve any alcoholic beverages between the hours
of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Mondays, Tuesdays and Wednesdays nor
between 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Thursdays, Fridays and Saturdays,
nor between 2:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sundays, and no place or
establishment licensed under the provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 to 33:1-96
and any amendments thereof and supplements thereto shall be open during
the above prohibited hours, except that restaurants, drugstores and
establishments where the principal business is other than the sale of
alcoholic beverages may remain open during the above prohibited hours for
such other purposes only and except, further, that on New Year's Eve, the
licensee may remain open an additional three hours from 2:00 a.m. to 5:00
a.m. The hours mentioned refer to Eastern standard time or daylight saving
time, whichever time shall be then in effect and shall apply hereto.
§ 158-4. Views of interior and exterior; violations and penalties.
A. Every premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall admit
a view of the interior from the entrance of the licensed premises;
provided, however, that a curtain or other means of screening may be
used on the windows or doors of the premises to a height of five feet
from the floor of such premises, provided that the same does not
prevent an examination of the interior from the entrance by a law
enforcement personnel in the Department of Public Safety, inspector or
other officer of the law. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC
3553]
B. View of the exterior. [Added 7-10-2007 by Ord. No. MC 3347]
70.Editor's Note: See also § 158-31, Hours of sale.
71.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 158-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-4
1:203
§ 158-5. Persons under legal age entering premises. [Amended
1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622]
It shall be unlawful for a person under the legal age for purchasing alcoholic
beverages to enter any premises licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic
beverages for the purpose of purchasing or having served or delivered to
him any alcoholic beverage.
§ 158-6. Consumption on premises by persons under legal age.
[Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622]
It shall be unlawful for a person under the legal age for purchasing alcoholic
beverages to consume any alcoholic beverage on premises licensed for the
retail sale of alcoholic beverages, or to purchase, attempt to purchase or
have another purchase for him any alcoholic beverage.
§ 158-7. Misrepresentation of age. [Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord. No.
MC 2622]
It shall be unlawful for a person to misrepresent or misstate his age or the
age of any other person for the purpose of inducing any retail licensee or an
employee of a retail licensee to sell, serve or deliver any alcoholic beverage
to a person under the legal age for purchasing alcoholic beverages.
§ 158-8. Furnishing to persons under legal age. [Amended 9-9-1969
by Ord. No. MC 2236; 8-14-1973 by Ord. No. MC 2374; 1-13-1981 by
Ord. No. MC 2622]
It shall be unlawful for any person of the legal age for purchasing alcoholic
beverages to obtain or purchase for any person under the legal age for
purchasing alcoholic beverages, or furnish to or sell to any such person, any
alcoholic beverage in the Town for the use or benefit of any such person.
(1) Any establishment holding an Alcoholic Beverage Control license
which permits it to sell alcoholic beverages shall place and
maintain a security camera that covers the front entrance and exit
of its establishment as well as the front perimeter of same
extending to the curbline. Said camera shall be in working order 24
hours, seven days a week. Any tape contained therein shall be
made available to the Irvington Public Safety Department and the
Township's Alcoholic Beverage Control Inspector pursuant to any
investigation being conducted regarding activity at the particular
establishment. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
(2) Any owner in violation of the provisions of § 158-4B(1), regarding
cameras to view the exterior of establishments licensed to sell
alcoholic beverages, shall be subject to a fine of no less than $500
and not more than $1,000.
§ 158-4 IRVINGTON CODE § 158-9
1:204
§ 158-9. Prohibited sales.
No sales of alcoholic beverages for consumption on any premises licensed
under this chapter shall be made on credit, nor shall sales of any alcoholic
beverages be made to any minor, mental defective or habitual drunkard;
provided that such prohibition against sales on credit shall not apply to club
licenses.
§ 158-10. Service in back rooms.
No person shall be served in any back room or side room of any premises
licensed under this chapter which is not open to the use of the public
generally, except that guests may be served in public dining rooms;
provided, also, that this prohibition shall not apply to club licenses.
§ 158-11. Purchasing illicit beverages.
No person, except an officer or other person authorized by and acting
pursuant to instructions from such officer, so doing in the course of and for
the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter or of the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 to 33:1-96, shall knowingly purchase, receive or procure
any illicit beverage.
§ 158-12. Selling or possession of illicit beverages.
No person shall sell, possess, distribute or transport any illicit beverage
within the Town.
§ 158-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-12
1:205

ARTICLE II
Licenses
§ 158-13. Applications and licenses subject to state law.
All applications for licenses under this chapter and all licenses issued
hereunder and proceedings in connection therewith shall be subject to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 to 33:1-96 and the rules and regulations of the
State Commissioner of Alcoholic Beverage Control applicable thereto, and
shall be subject to any other statutes of the state or of the United States
now existing or hereafter enacted affecting such subject matters.
§ 158-14. Authority of Municipal Council.
The Municipal Council, being the governing body of the Town, shall
constitute the authority for the administration of issuance of licenses under
this chapter and shall forthwith report the issuance of all such licenses to
the State Commissioner of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 158-15. Selling alcoholic beverages without license.
It shall be unlawful to sell or distribute alcoholic beverages in the Town
without a license previously applied for and granted, pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 to 33:1-96.
§ 158-16. Plenary retail consumption license. [Amended 4-27-1971
by Ord. No. MC 2284; 3-28-1972 by Ord. No. MC 2315; 1-13-1981 by
Ord. No. MC 2622; 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3027; 1-9-1996 by
Ord. No. MC 3030; 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3134; 6-28-2001 by
Ord. No. MC 3173; 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by
Ord. No. MC 3306]
A. The fee for plenary retail consumption license shall be $1,899 and the
holder of such license shall be entitled, subject to rules and regulations,
to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the licensed premises
and alcoholic beverages in original containers for consumption off the
licensed premises. Such license shall not permit the sale of alcoholic
beverages in or upon any premises in which a grocery, delicatessen,
drugstore or other mercantile business is carried on, except the
keeping of a hotel or restaurant or the sale of cigars and cigarettes, at
retail, as an accommodation to patrons or the retail sale of nonalcoholic
beverages as accessory beverages to alcoholic beverages. [Amended
12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 341372]
B. No plenary retail consumption license, except renewals for the same
licensed premises as heretofore have been licensed, and transfers from
person to person, shall be granted or transferred to other premises
within a distance of 750 feet from existing licensed premises covered by
a plenary retail consumption license. In the event a licensee desires to
72.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 158-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-16
1:207
§ 158-17. Seasonal retail consumption license. [Amended 4-27-1971
by Ord. No. MC 2284; 3-28-1972 by Ord. No. MC 2315; 1-13-1981 by
Ord. No. MC 2622; 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3027; 1-9-1996 by
Ord. No. MC 3030; 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3134; 6-28-2001 by
Ord. No. MC 3173; 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by
Ord. No. MC 3306; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 341373]
The fee for a seasonal retail consumption license shall be $1,424 and such
license shall entitle the holder, subject to rules and regulations, to sell
during the summer season, from May 1 until November 1, inclusive, or
during the winter season, from November 15 to April 15, inclusive, for
consumption on the licensed premises, any alcoholic beverage by the glass
or other open receptacle, and also to sell all alcoholic beverages in original
containers for consumption off the licensed premises. This license shall
not permit any sale that would not be permissible under a plenary retail
consumption license.
§ 158-18. Plenary retail distribution license. [Amended 4-27-1971
by Ord. No. MC 2284; 3-28-1972 by Ord. No. MC 2315; 1-13-1981 by
Ord. No. MC 2622; 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3027; 1-9-1996 by
Ord. No. MC 3030; 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3134; 6-28-2001 by
Ord. No. MC 3173; 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by
Ord. No. MC 3306]
transfer to other premises, he may be permitted to do so, at the
discretion of the local issuing authority, within 750 feet of the premises
where he is located at the time of such transfer. He shall comply with
the provisions aforementioned when transferring to premises more
than 750 feet from the premises from which transfer is sought.
C. Where the seven-hundred-fifty-foot distance is referred to in this
section, the same shall be measured in the same manner as required by
the statute for the measuring of 200 feet relative to schools and
churches.
D. The term "renewal" when used in this chapter shall be construed in the
manner as set forth in N.J.S.A. 33:1-96 of the Revised Statutes of New
Jersey.
A. The fee for a plenary retail distribution license shall be $1,330 and the
holder of such license shall be entitled, subject to rules and regulations,
to sell any alcoholic beverages for retail consumption off the licensed
premises, but only in original containers. [Amended 12-29-2009 by
Ord. No. MC 341374]
B. No plenary retail distribution license, except renewals for the same
premises as heretofore have been licensed, and transfers from person
to person, shall be granted or transferred to other premises within a
73.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
74.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 158-16 IRVINGTON CODE § 158-18
1:208
§ 158-19. Club license. [Amended 4-27-1971 by Ord. No. MC 2284;
3-28-1972 by Ord. No. MC 2315; 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622;
12-12-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3027; 1-9-1996 by Ord. No. MC 3030;
12-14-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3134; 6-28-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3173;
8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by Ord. No. MC 3306;
12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 341375]
The fee for a club license shall be $188 and the holder of such license
shall be entitled, subject to rules and regulations, to sell only to bona fide
club members and their guests alcoholic beverages intended for immediate
consumption on the licensed premises. Club licenses shall be issued only
to such corporations, associations and organizations as are operated solely
for benevolent, charitable, fraternal, social, religious, recreational, athletic
or similar purposes and not for private gain, and such licenses shall be
subject to the qualifications, conditions and restrictions imposed by the
State Commissioner of Alcoholic Beverage Control. Each application for
a club license shall set forth the names and addresses of all officers,
trustees, directors or other governing officials, together with the names
and addresses of all the members of the applying club, corporation or
association.
§ 158-20. Limitation on number of licenses. [Amended 3-26-1968 by
Ord. No. MC 2188]
distance of 750 feet from an existing licensed premise covered by
a plenary retail distribution license. In the event a licensee desires
to transfer to other premises, he may be permitted to do so, at the
discretion of the local issuing authority, within 750 feet of the premises
wherein he is located at the time of such transfer. He shall comply with
the provisions aforementioned when transferring to premises more
than 750 feet from the premises from which the transfer is sought.
C. Where the seven-hundred-fifty-foot distance is referred to in this
section, the same shall be measured in the same manner as required by
statute for the measuring of 200 feet relative to schools and churches.
D. The term "renewal" when used in this chapter shall be construed in the
manner as set forth in N.J.S.A. 33:1-96 of the Revised Statutes of New
Jersey.
A. No new alcoholic beverage license of any class authorized to be issued
by the Town, except club licenses, shall be issued, the result of which
will be to increase the number of licenses issued and outstanding over
the number existing up to the date of the issuance of such new license
until the number issued and outstanding is less than 60.
B. Upon the sale or transfer of a business and application made therefor in
the same manner as for any other new license, qualification of the
applying licensees and surrender of the license under which the seller
75.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 158-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-20
1:209
§ 158-21. Contents of application for license. [Amended 7-12-1983
by Ord. No. MC 2705]
All applications for licenses under this chapter shall set forth in full answers
to questions prescribed by N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 to 33:1-96 of the Revised Statutes
and by the rules and regulations of the State Commissioner of Alcoholic
Beverage Control, and shall include declarations called for by such
provisions. All new applications for such licenses shall have attached
thereto the fingerprints of the applicant or applicants.
§ 158-22. Certain premises not to be licensed.
No premises shall be licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages at retail,
to be consumed on the premises, which shall contain less than 400 square
feet of floor space.
§ 158-23. Licenses not to be issued to unqualified persons.
No license under this chapter shall be issued to any person not fully
qualified under the provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 to 33:1-96 of the Revised
Statutes and the rules and regulations of the State Commissioner of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 158-24. Distance of premises from churches and schools.
[Amended 11-13-1996 by Ord. No. MC 3047]
transacted business, a license may be issued to the purchaser or
transferee of such licensed beverage business.
C. No new licenses authorized to be issued by the Town shall be issued
except to those now holding licenses and those acquiring licenses as
provided in this chapter unless after the adoption of this chapter76 the
number of licenses issued and outstanding shall have been reduced by
revocation or surrender to less than 60, in which case licenses may be
issued until the total number of licenses issued and outstanding shall
number 60.
D. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the issuance of a new plenary
retail consumption license to a person who operates a hotel or motel
containing at least 100 sleeping rooms; provided, however, that there
shall be no renewal or transfer of a newly issued license except for or to
a hotel or motel containing at least 100 sleeping rooms.77
A. No license shall be issued for the sale of alcoholic beverages within 200
feet of any church, public schoolhouse, private schoolhouse, day-care
center or any place of religious worship, except to manufacturers,
wholesalers, hotels or clubs which owned or actually possessed the
76.Editor's Note: The ordinance from which this chapter was derived was adopted August 14,
1934.
77.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 158-20 IRVINGTON CODE § 158-24
1:210
§ 158-25. Effect of waiver of distance provision.
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 158-24 and N.J.S.A. 33:1-76, if a club
license has been or shall be granted on a waiver of its protection granted
on authority of a church or school, the holder of such license shall be
entitled to apply for renewal thereof without further or renewed authority
or waiver of the church or school; but the renewal or reissuance of the club
license after a revocation or subsequent transfer of the club license shall
not be permitted without a new waiver granted on authority of the church
or school.
§ 158-26. Term of license; when fees payable; refunds.
All licenses under this chapter shall be for a term of one year from the
first day of July in each year, and all fees shall be paid in advance, upon
presentation of the application; provided, however, that any licensee, except
a seasonal retail consumption licensee, who shall voluntarily surrender his
license and who shall not have committed any violation of this chapter
or of any rule or regulation and who shall have paid all taxes, setoffs or
counterclaims that may have become due to the state or to the Town shall
be entitled, after deduction of 50% of such fee as a surrender fee, to the
prorated fee for the unexpired term.
§ 158-27. Suspension or revocation of license.
Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked for
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or any of the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 to 33:1-96 or such other statutes mentioned in this chapter,
or any of the regulations and rules prescribed by the State Commissioner of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 158-28. Proceeding for suspension or revocation.
Proceedings for suspension or revocation of any license issued pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter shall be in accordance with the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 to 33:1-96, by service of a five-day notice of charges
preferred against the licensee, as provided in such provisions, and affording
of a reasonable opportunity for a hearing, and such suspension or
licensed premises prior to the enactment of this chapter. The nearest
entrance of a licensed premises shall be measured from the actual
doorway which leads into the facility mentioned herein.
B. This prohibition may only be waived at the issuance of the license and
at each renewal thereafter, by the duly authorized issuing authority
with the consent of such school or church.
C. The prohibition referred to herein shall not apply to the renewal of any
licenses where no such church, school, day-care center or other house
of worship was in a location within 200 feet at the time of the issuance
of the license to be renewed.
§ 158-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-28
1:211
revocation shall carry the penalties and prohibitions provided for in N.J.S.A.
33:1-1 to 33:1-96.
§ 158-28 IRVINGTON CODE § 158-28
1:212
ARTICLE III
Alcoholic Beverage Control Board
[Amended 5-23-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3017]
§ 158-29. Board constituted.
The members of the Municipal Council shall constitute the Alcoholic
Beverage Control Board of the Township of Irvington, (hereinafter referred
to as "the Board") and shall exercise and perform all of the functions,
powers, duties and rights conferred upon it by the provisions of Title 33 of
the New Jersey Revised Statutes. The Board shall meet as follows:
A. For transfers and renewals of liquor licenses and other routine matters
that may from time to time come before the Board, the Board shall
meet, as necessary, immediately proceeding the regular meetings of the
Municipal Council, at the discretion of the Municipal Clerk.
B. For disciplinary proceedings, appeals and other hearings of a similar
nature which may from time to time come before the Board, the Board
shall meet, as necessary, immediately following the regular meetings of
the Municipal Council, at the discretion of the Municipal Clerk.
C. The Municipal Council, acting as the Alcoholic Beverage Control Board
of the Township of Irvington, may, by a majority vote of the full
membership thereof, change the aforementioned schedule, provided
that the requirements of the Sunshine Law (N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.) are
met.
§ 158-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-29
1:213

ARTICLE IV
Warning Labels
[Added 12-29-1992 by Ord. No. MC 2967]
§ 158-30. Display of Fetal Alcohol Syndrome (FAS) warning signs;
violations and penalties. [Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407;
7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
All licensees under this chapter who sell alcoholic beverages shall
prominently post on their premises a warning of the dangers to the unborn
children of women who consume alcoholic beverages while pregnant. The
nature and type of warning sign shall be determined by the Irvington Health
Department, which shall prepare and distribute warning signs. Any licensee
violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine as provided
in § 1-17A of the Revised Code of the Township of Irvington.
§ 158-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-30
1:215

ARTICLE V
Retail Establishments
[Added 6-24-1997 by Ord. No. MC 3070]
§ 158-31. Hours of sale.78
No alcoholic beverages of any kind, including beer, wine and malt liquors,
may be sold by any retail establishment other than one which sells alcohol
by the drink after 10:00 p.m. in the Township of Irvington.
78.Editor's Note: See also § 158-3, Hours of sale.
§ 158-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-31
1:217

ARTICLE VI
Moratorium on Go-Go Bars
[Added 7-11-2000 by Ord. No. MC 3151]
§ 158-32. Establishment of moratorium. [Amended 11-12-2008 by
Ord. No. MC 3387]
A moratorium is hereby placed on the opening of any new alcoholic
beverage establishments, which as part of their operation, employ go-go
dancers for the purposes of providing such entertainment.
§ 158-33. Interpretation. [Amended 11-12-2008 by Ord. No. MC
3387]
Such a moratorium shall be understood to mean that there shall be no
approvals granted or go-go activity permitted until further decision by the
Irvington Municipal Council.
§ 158-34. Notification of application; notification of moratorium.
[Amended 11-12-2008 by Ord. No. MC 3387]
The Division of Licensing of the Township of Irvington shall advise the
Municipal Clerk, serving as secretary of the ABC Board, when a license or
license transfer is applied for, who may subsequently advise any new license
applicants that such a moratorium exists.
§ 158-35. Go-go dancers. [Added 6-28-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3173;
amended 3-26-2002 by Ord. No. MC 3190]
A. All go-go dancers who are to provide entertainment at any
establishment under the jurisdiction of the Alcoholic Control Beverage
Board must meet with following requirements:
(1) They are at least 18 years of age or older before they begin
employment with the ABC establishment in the Township.
(2) The establishment employing said go-go dancers shall remit a fee
to the Township of $1,067 no matter how many dancers are
employed. [Amended 7-15-2003 by Ord. No. MC 322679]
B. All licensees that employ go-go dancers must maintain a separate work
sheet which must be completed in detail prior to any performance by an
individual listing the full name, age, date of birth, social security
number, address and stage name of every go-go dancer. The list is to be
maintained current (on a daily basis) and kept on the premises of the
licensee for the period of one year. The licensee shall keep on file a
photographic identification of each go-go dancer at his or her licensed
premises. This file is to be maintained on the premises and available to
79.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 158-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-35
1:219
the appropriate authorities upon demand. [Amended 7-15-2003 by
Ord. No. MC 3226]
§ 158-35 IRVINGTON CODE § 158-35
1:220
ARTICLE VII
Fines and Penalties
[Added 9-13-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3582]
§ 158-36. Violations and penalties; schedule of fines.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in state statute, the
penalties for violations of this chapter are as follows:
Section
Short
Description 1st Offense
2nd
Offense
3rd
Offense
4th Offense
Maximum Fine;
Court Appearance
Required
§ 158-3 Hours of sale $100 $500 $750 $1,500
§ 158-4 Views of interior
and exterior
$100 $250 $500 $1,500
§ 158-5 Persons under
legal age entering
premises
$250 $500 $750 $1,500
§ 158-6 Consumption on
premises by
persons under
legal age
$250 $500 $750 $1,500
§ 158-7 Misrepresentation
of age
$250 $500 $750 $1,500
§ 158-8 Furnishing to
persons under
legal age
$250 $500 $750 $1,500
§ 158-9 Prohibited sales $250 $500 $750 $1,500
§ 158-10 Service in back
rooms
$250 $500 $750 $1,500
§ 158-11 Purchasing illicit
beverages
$250 $500 $750 $1,500
§ 158-12 Selling or
possession of illicit
beverages
$250 $500 $750 $1,500
§ 158-15 Selling alcoholic
beverages without
license
$500 $1,000 $1,500 $2,000
§ 158-30 Display of fetal
alcohol syndrome
(FAS) warning
signs
$100 $250 $500 $1,500
§ 158-31 Hours of sale $250 $500 $750 $1,500
§ 158-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-36
1:221
Section
Short
Description 1st Offense
2nd
Offense
3rd
Offense
4th Offense
Maximum Fine;
Court Appearance
Required
§ 158-35 Go-go dancers $250 $500 $750 $1,500
B. Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of a violation of any other
terms of this chapter shall be subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter
1, Article III, Penalties, of the Township Code.80
80.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 158-36 IRVINGTON CODE § 158-36
1:222
Chapter 163
AMUSEMENT GAMES IN AMUSEMENT PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Automatic amusement devices — See Ch. 229,
Art. I.
Licensing procedure — See Ch. 290, Art. I.
Games of chance — See Ch. 331.
Miniature golf courses — See Ch. 336.
Poolrooms and billiard rooms — See Ch. 455.
§ 163-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
AMUSEMENT GAME — A game played for amusement or entertainment in
which the person or player actively participates and the outcome of which
is not in the control of the operator, and which is so conducted that the sale
of a right to participate, the event which determines whether a player wins
or loses and the award of the prize all occur as a continuous sequence at
the time when and the place where the players are all present.
AMUSEMENT GAMES LICENSING LAW — N.J.S.A. 5:8-100 to 5:8-120, as
amended and supplemented.
RECOGNIZED AMUSEMENT PARK — A commercially operated permanent
business, open to the public at least 31 consecutive days annually, whose
acreage is designed and themed for the primary purpose of providing
participatory amusements incorporating rides or water slides licensed in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 5:3-31 et seq., and food and merchandise
concessions in permanent structures.81
§ 163-2. License required.
No person shall own or operate within the Town any amusement game,
whether such game is of skill or chance, or both, or whether such game
be played and operated with or without numbers or figures, without first
having obtained a license from the Municipal Council to do so. Such license
shall be issued pursuant to and subject to the provisions of the Amusement
Games Licensing Law.
§ 163-3. Application for license.
Each applicant for a license required by this chapter shall file with the
Division of Licensing of the Town a written application in such form as
prescribed by and in accordance with the Amusement Games Licensing
81.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 158-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-3
1:223
Law and the rules and regulations promulgated by the Amusement Games
Control Commissioner of the state.
§ 163-4. Fees.82 [Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622;
12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413]
§ 163-5. License not transferable; term.
No license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be
transferable, and such license shall continue in force and effect until the
first day of January next ensuing the date of granting thereof unless
previously suspended or revoked.
§ 163-6. License to be displayed.
Each license issued under this chapter for the conduct of any amusement
game shall be conspicuously displayed at the place where the same is to be
conducted at all times during the conduct thereof.
§ 163-7. Certain places not to be licensed.
No license shall be issued for the holding or operating of any amusement
game in any place within the Town other than a recognized amusement
park.
§ 163-8. Revocation of license.
In the event of the violation of any of the provisions of the Amusement
Games Licensing Law or of the rules and regulations of the Amusement
Games Control Commissioner or of this chapter, a license issued pursuant to
this chapter may be revoked after a hearing before the Municipal Council,
A. A licensing fee of $76 is hereby established for the holding, operation
and conduct of each amusement game during the period of the license,
for such amusement games as are permissible under Permissible
Amusement Games Certification No. 1, No. 3 and No. 6 of Regulation
No. 7 of the Amusement Games Regulations issued by the Amusement
Games Control Commissioner, which regulations were promulgated on
March 25, 1960.
B. A licensing fee of $130 is hereby established for the holding, operation
and conduct of each amusement game during the period of the license,
for such amusement games as are permissible under Permissible
Amusement Games Certification No. 2, No. 4 and No. 5 of Regulation
No. 7 of the Amusement Games Regulations issued by the Amusement
Games Control Commissioner, which regulations were promulgated on
March 25, 1960; except, however, that pinball machines shall be
excluded from the provisions of this chapter.
82.Editor's Note: For a description of permissible amusement games certifications, see
N.J.A.C. 13:3-7.9.
§ 163-3 IRVINGTON CODE § 163-8
1:224
upon charges filed with the Council and a time for hearing fixed of which the
holder of the license shall have at least one week's notice by mail addressed
to the address of the holder of such license as the same appears on his
application. The penalty of revocation provided in this section shall be in
addition to any other penalties provided for such violation in such law or in
this chapter. No person shall hold, conduct or operate any amusement game
for which a license has been issued after revocation thereof.
§ 163-9. Supervision and control.
The Municipal Council shall have and exercise control and supervision over
all amusement games held, operated or conducted under a license issued
pursuant to this chapter with all of the powers granted to it under the
Amusement Games Licensing Law and the rules and regulations of the
Amusement Games Control Commissioner.
Chapter 167
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing procedure — See Ch. 290, Art. I.
Noise — See Ch. 397.
Parades — See Ch. 415.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 428.
Feeding of animals in the open; storage of
feed — See § 449-6.
Pool regulations — See Ch. 571.
§ 163-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163-9
1:225

ARTICLE I
Horses and Fowl
[Adopted 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622 as Ch. 65, Part 1, Art. I, of
the 1981 Revised Code]
§ 167-1. Horses not permitted on sidewalks.
No person shall drive or lead a horse upon or along any sidewalk or footpath
within the Town.
§ 167-2. Keeping fowl not permitted.
No person shall keep or house chickens, geese, ducks or other fowl within
the Town.
§ 167-3. Violations and penalties; schedule of fines.83
The penalties for violations of this article are as follows:
Section
Short
Description 1st Offense
2nd
Offense
3rd
Offense
4th Offense
Maximum
Fine;
Court
Appearance
Required
§ 167-1 Horses on
sidewalks
$50 $250 $500 $1,000
§ 167-2 Keeping
fowl
$50 $250 $500 $1,000
83.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 167-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-3
1:227

ARTICLE II
Dogs and Cats
[Adopted 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622 as Ch. 65, Part 1, Art. II,
of the 1981 Revised Code]
§ 167-4. License required; compliance. [Amended 4-12-1983 by Ord.
No. MC 269384]
No person shall keep, own or harbor any dog, or cat which runs at large,
of the age of seven months or older or which possesses a permanent set of
teeth, within the Township without first obtaining a license therefor, to be
issued by the Division of Licensing of the Township upon application by such
person and the payment of the prescribed fee, and no person shall harbor
or keep any such dog or cat in the Township except in compliance with the
provisions of this article.
§ 167-5. Cat licensing; vaccinations; disposal of waste. [Added
11-9-2006 by Ord. No. MC 3329; amended 3-27-2007 by Ord. No.
MC 3341]
All owners of cats must obtain a license from the Township of Irvington's
Division of Licensing. All cats and dogs shall be vaccinated by a licensed
veterinarian. Any person who walks a dog upon the public streets or in
any park in the Township or other public property must carry with him/her
appropriate materials to pick up and dispose of any waste caused by said
animal.
§ 167-6. Limit on number of dogs and cats per household. [Added
11-9-2006 by Ord. No. MC 3329; amended 8-9-2016 by Ord. No. MC
357985]
No household of any kind shall possess any more than four dogs or cats.
Any number present in a household greater than the above shall subject
the owner or occupier to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, Article III,
Penalties.
§ 167-7. Procurement of license; Seeing Eye dogs. [Amended
3-22-1983 by Ord. No. MC 2693]
A. Application procedure.
(1) Any person who shall own, acquire, keep or harbor a dog, or a cat
which runs at large, of seven months or older in the Township shall,
in the month of January of each year, apply for and procure from
the Division of Licensing a license and an official metal registration
tag for each dog, or cat which runs at large, or a three-year license
and an official metal registration tag for each dog, or cat which
84.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
85.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 167-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-7
1:229
§ 167-8. License and tag fee. [Amended 9-13-1966 by Ord. No. MC
2140; 12-11-1973 by Ord. No. MC 2387; 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC
2622; 4-12-1983 by Ord. No. MC 2693; 1-9-1996 by Ord. No. MC
3030; 5-15-2007 by Ord. No. MC 3346; 3-24-2015 by Ord. No. MC
3530; 9-13-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3583]
runs at large, and shall place upon each dog, or cat which runs
at large, a collar or harness with the registration tag securely
fastened thereto. Such application shall:
(a) State the breed, sex, age, color and marking of the dog or cat
for which the license and registration are sought, and whether
it is a long- or short-haired variety, in addition to the name,
street address of the owner and the person who shall keep or
harbor such dog, or cat which runs at large.
(b) State if the dog for which the license is being sought shall be
used as a guard dog on business premises, and the location of
the business if within the Township, and whether or not the dog
shall be kept on the premises 24 hours per day.
(2) An applicant may file for a dog or cat license in person or by mail
with the Division of Licensing. Each applicant upon receiving the
license shall be given a copy of the general rules and regulations
regarding the keeping or harboring of animals within the Township.
B. The owner of any newly acquired dog, or cat which runs at large, of
licensing age or which attains the licensing age shall make application
for a license and registration tag for such animal within 10 days after
such acquisition or age attainment, or for any person just moving into
the Township with such animal over seven months old or which
possesses a set of permanent teeth.86
C. Dogs used for blind persons, commonly known as "Seeing Eye" dogs,
dogs used to assist handicapped persons and commonly known as
"service dogs," or dogs used to assist deaf persons and commonly
known as "hearing ear" dogs shall be licensed and registered as other
dogs herein provided for, except that the owner or keeper of such dogs
shall be exempt from payment of any fee therefor.87
A. Dogs and cats. The person applying for a license as provided by § 167-4
shall pay a total sum of $21 annually, or $63 for a three-year
registration tag for each dog, and for each cat which runs at large.
Seniors (age 60 and over with proper verification) shall pay an annual
fee of $15.25. The fee for each renewal for the license and for the metal
registration tag shall be the same as the original license and metal tag.
All such original and renewals thereof shall expire on the last day of
January of the succeeding year on a one-year license, or on the last day
86.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
87.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 167-7 IRVINGTON CODE § 167-8
1:230
§ 167-9. Duplicate registration tags. [Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord.
No. MC 2622; 4-12-1983 by Ord. No. MC 2693; 1-9-1996 by Ord. No.
MC 3030]
Any person who keeps, owns or harbors a dog or cat for which there shall
have been issued a license by the Division of Licensing of the Township,
upon proper proof that the metal registration tag for such dog or cat
has been either mislaid, lost or stolen, shall be issued a duplicate metal
registration tag upon the payment of $1.
§ 167-10. Use of improper registration tag. [Amended 4-12-1983 by
Ord. No. MC 2693]
No owner or person shall keep or harbor any dog or cat upon which there
shall be found a registration tag for which the corresponding license has
been issued for another dog or cat or has been canceled.
§ 167-11. Restrictions on dogs and cats in parks or playgrounds.
[Amended 4-12-1983 by Ord. No. MC 2693; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No.
MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511; 10-14-2015 by Ord. No.
MC 3553]
of January of the succeeding third year for a three-year license. The
Division of Licensing shall, within 30 days after the collection of such
fees, forward to the State Department of Health the registration tag fee
of $1 for each dog or cat which runs at large for a one-year license, or
$3 for a three-year license. There shall be a late fee charge of $5 per
calendar month for each dog or cat license issued after January 31 of
any year.
B. A five-day period of grace following the established license deadline is
hereby established.
C. If not renewed with five days of the established license deadline, as set
out in Subsection A of this section, there shall be a late fee charged per
calendar month for each dog or cat license issued after the expiration of
a one-year or three-year license.
A. No dog or cat, licensed, unlicensed, under control of the owner or
guardian or held by a leash, shall be allowed in any of the parks or
public playgrounds of the Township. Any dog or cat so found not in the
presence of the owner in any of the parks or playgrounds as aforesaid
shall be seized and impounded in the absence of the owner when the
violation of this article occurs. If said dog or cat is in the presence of the
owner or guardian, the aforesaid person shall be warned by either a law
enforcement officer in the Department of Public Safety, park or
playground attendant in charge or the animal control officer or an
official of the Department of Health. Any repeated violation of the
animal owner or guardian responsible shall be subject to the penalties
as provided for in this article, including seizure and impoundment.
§ 167-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-11
1:231
§ 167-12. Seizure of dogs and cats at large. [Amended 4-12-1983 by
Ord. No. MC 2693]
§ 167-13. Dogs as nuisances.
Any dog, whether licensed or muzzled or not, that shall jump upon or annoy
any person in the streets or public places of the Town shall be considered
a nuisance and shall be subject to seizure; provided, however, that no dog
shall be seized for such reasons unless the owner of such dog shall, after
receiving a written notice to that effect, fail to thereafter sufficiently control
such dog and prevent a recurrence of such nuisance.
§ 167-14. Female dogs in season.
Any female dog found on the public highway or in any other public place in
the Town in season and not on leash shall be subject to seizure.
§ 167-15. Impounding procedure; notice; fees. [Amended 5-13-1969
by Ord. No. MC 2219; 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622]
B. This section shall not apply to pet shops and dog shows held upon
permit issued by the Department of Public Works, or where a K-9
demonstration is held under supervision and control of the Public
Safety Department or a duly trained officer thereof.
A. All dogs or cats found at large any time in the streets or public places of
the Township, whether unlicensed or unmuzzled, shall be subject to
seizure.
B. All dogs or cats found at large at any time on abandoned private lots or
abandoned buildings shall be seized and impounded, whether licensed
or unlicensed and not on a leash or within voice control of the owner.
C. Any dog or cat which is found on private property, other than the animal
owner's property, whether licensed or unlicensed, shall be subject to
seizure and impoundment, except that the owner of the private
property must request the seizure and sign a waiver that the Township
is not liable for any property damage during the course of duty in
seizing the animal.
A. The Department of Health shall designate some person to seize and
impound all dogs subject to seizure as specified in this article. Any
member of the Public Safety Department observing or responding to a
complaint regarding an animal subject to the provisions and in violation
of this article may cause the seizure and impoundment of the animal
upon approval of the superior officer in charge once there is a
determination for a need to impound. In the case of regular work hours
of the Department of Health, the Public Safety Department must notify
the Health Officer of the need to seize and impound. All other hours,
day or night, the police dispatcher shall notify the agency designated to
impound an animal to respond. Reports of such seizures and
§ 167-11 IRVINGTON CODE § 167-15
1:232
impoundments must be forwarded to the Department of Health on the
next regular workday. [Amended 4-12-1983 by Ord. No. MC 2693;
7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511;
10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
B. If any animal seized pursuant to the provisions of this article wears a
collar or harness which has inscribed thereon or attached thereto the
name and address of any person or a registration tag, or the owner or
guardian keeping or harboring such dog is known, the person so
authored shall forthwith serve on the person whose address is given on
the collar, or on the owner or the guardian, if known, a notice in writing
stating that the dog has been seized and will be liable to be disposed of
or destroyed if not claimed within seven days after the service of notice.
[Amended 4-12-1983 by Ord. No. MC 2693]
C. A notice under this section may be served either by delivering it to the
person on whom it is to be served or by leaving it at the person's usual
or last known place of abode or at the address given on the collar, or by
forwarding it by post in prepaid letter addressed to that person at his
usual or last known place of abode or to the address given on the collar.
D. When any animal so seized has been detained for seven days after
notice, when notice can be given as above set forth, or has been held for
seven days after seizure, when notice remains undeliverable or the
animal remains unclaimed and all costs incurred by the Township due
to the impoundment have not been recovered from the owner or
guardian or the owner or guardian of such animal fails to produce a
license and registration tag prior to claiming the animal, the Director of
the Health Department or his designee may order the animal destroyed
in a lawful manner. [Amended 4-12-1983 by Ord. No. MC 2693;
7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
E. The Department of Health shall charge and collect a daily fee of $4 paid
to the Department of Health to secure initial release from the Township
of said dog or cat. The owner of said animal must also incur any
additional costs by reason of detention and care of said animal as may
be charged by the facility so designated by the Health Officer.
[Amended 2-13-1985 by Ord. No. MC 2769; 7-14-2009 by Ord.
No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 351188]
F. Animal bites. [Amended 4-12-1983 by Ord. No. MC 2693;
7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
(1) All animal bites shall be reported immediately to the Department of
Health during normal working hours or to the Department of Public
Safety at all other times, which shall then notify the Department of
Health during regular working hours. [Amended 10-14-2015 by
Ord. No. MC 3553]
88.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 167-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-15
1:233
§ 167-16. Kennels; annual fee. [Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC
2622; 1-9-1996 by Ord. No. MC 3030; 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. MC
3134; 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by Ord. No. MC
3306; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC
3413;7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 351189]
All persons who desire to maintain a dog kennel for breeding or boarding
dogs shall make application to do so to the Department of Health. A canvass
shall then be conducted by the Department of Health of the immediate
adjoining properties to determine the opinion of those living upon the
aforementioned adjacent properties. If in the opinion of the Department
of Health a dog kennel for breeding or boarding dogs may constitute a
nuisance, no license shall be issued. The kennel license, if granted, shall
include a fee for every dog over one year of age, the same as the regular
license fee provided for by this article, in addition to an annual fee of $10 for
kennels accommodating 10 or fewer dogs, and for kennels accommodating
more than 10 dogs, an annual license fee of $25 (N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.9). The
maximum number of dogs permitted on aforementioned kennel premises at
any one time shall be 25. No person shall violate any part of this section.
§ 167-17. Permitting dog to commit nuisance; barking dogs.
[Amended 9-26-1972 by Ord. No. MC 2332]
(2) In a case wherein a person is bitten by a dog or animal while the
animal was confined to the premises of the owner or guardian, the
Director of Health, upon notification of the animal owner, bite
victim, police or doctor, shall direct the owner to keep the animal
indoors in quarantine, or if the Director of Health determines that
the owner is incapable or refuses to retain the animal indoors, the
animal shall be held in quarantine at the animal shelter.
(3) In a case wherein a person is bitten by a dog or other animal while
at large, whether licensed or unlicensed, and it is known that the
animal has at least one other time bitten a person, the Director of
Health, designee or police, in the case of the police handling the
incident, shall direct that the animal be seized and impounded
immediately upon apprehension. Upon proper notification of the
owner, the Director shall decide the fate of the animal within seven
days after the incident occurs or apprehension is made.
A. No person owning or having the care, custody or control of a dog shall
knowingly or negligently permit such dog to commit any nuisance, and
more particularly and without limiting the generality thereof, any
excretion of feces, upon any public sidewalk or other thoroughfare, or
in or upon any public building or any paved approach to such building
from the street, or in or upon any public park or public playground, or
on any private property without the permission of the owner of said
property; nor shall any person omit to do any reasonable and proper act
89.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 167-15 IRVINGTON CODE § 167-17
1:234
or omit to take any reasonable and proper precaution to prevent any
such dog from committing a nuisance in, on or upon any of the places
or premises herein specified.
B. Any person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog which
soils, defiles, defecates on or commits any nuisance on any common
thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bypath, play area, park or any
place where people congregate or walk, or upon any public property
whatsoever, or upon any private property without the permission of the
owner of such property, shall immediately remove all feces deposited by
such dog by any sanitary method approved by the local health authority.
C. Any person who keeps, owns or harbors a dog or cat on the owner's
premises shall remove all feces that have been deposited by the animal
on the owner's walkways, driveway, open garages and yard area within
24 hours in temperatures below 50° F. and within 12 hours in
temperatures above 50° F. in an approved sanitary method. [Added
4-12-1983 by Ord. No. MC 2693]
D. Any person who keeps, owns or harbors a dog shall be required to
restrain the dog, whether inside or outside of the owner's or guardian's
property, from prolonged, continuous and unwarranted barking and
howling any time of the day or night, so as not to annoy or disturb
neighboring residents, nursing homes, schools, churches and hospitals.
Complaints made by residents or persons who suffer from this type of
noise may be made to the Department of Health, in the case of
nonoperating hours of the Department of Health, such complaints may
be made to the Department of Public Safety. [Added 5-10-1983 by
Ord. No. MC 2699; amended 4-11-1989 by Ord. No. MC 2882;
7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511;
10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
E. The Public Department, in receiving such complaint, shall dispatch an
officer to the location of the barking dog, and if such complaint is
authenticated by the officer, the officer shall attempt to contact the
owner or leave a written notice of the offense at the location of the
owner or guardian of said dog. A notice of the police response shall be
forwarded to the Department of Health on the next regular day of
operation. Neither the Public Safety Department nor the Department of
Health shall reveal the identity of the complainant to the accused unless
such is required by court action. [Added 5-10-1983 by Ord. No. MC
2699; amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by
Ord. No. MC 3511; 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
F. In case a barking dog complaint is received during regular hours of the
Department of Health, the Public Safety Department shall refer the
complainant to the Department of Health. The Department of Health
shall cause investigation of the complaint and notify the owner
regarding the complaint and shall advise said person that subsequent
violations shall lead to further action by the Township.90 [Added
5-10-1983 by Ord. No. MC 2699; amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No.
§ 167-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-17
1:235
§ 167-18. Permitting dog to injure lawn or property.
No person owning, keeping or harboring a dog shall permit or suffer it to do
any injury or to do any damage to any lawn, shrubbery, flowers, grounds or
property.
§ 167-19. Violations and penalties; schedule of fines. [Amended
9-13-2016 by Ord. No. MC 358291]
MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511; 10-14-2015 by Ord. No.
MC 3553]
A. Except as otherwise provided by N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.19, or elsewhere in
this article, the penalties for violations of this article are as follows:
Section
Short
Description
1st
Offense
2nd
Offense
3rd
Offense
4th
Offense
Maximum
Fine;
Court
Appearance
Required
§ 167-4 Animal
license
required
$50 $100 $150 $250
§ 167-6 Limit on
dogs and
cats per
household
$50 $100 $150 $250
§ 167-10 Use of
improper
registration
tag
$50 $100 $150 $250
§ 167-11 Animals in
parks or
playgrounds
$50 $100 $150 $250
§ 167-13 Dogs as
nuisances
$50 $100 $250 $500
§ 167-17 Permitting
dog to
commit
nuisance
$100 $200 $300 $500
90.Editor's Note: Former § 65-14G of the 1981 Revised Code, added 10-9-1984 by Ord. No.
MC 2750, which immediately followed this subsection and provided a penalty for
violations of former § 65-14A and B (now § 167-17A and B), was repealed 9-8-1987 by Ord.
No. MC 2835. See now Ch. 1, Art. III, Penalties.
91.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 167-17 IRVINGTON CODE § 167-19
1:236
Section
Short
Description
1st
Offense
2nd
Offense
3rd
Offense
4th
Offense
Maximum
Fine;
Court
Appearance
Required
§ 167-18 Permitting
dog to
injure lawn
or
property
$50 $100 $250 $500
B. Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of a violation of any other
terms of this article shall be subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter
1, Article III, Penalties, of the Township Code.
§ 167-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-19
1:237

ARTICLE III
Animal Treatment Facilities
[Adopted 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622 as Ch. 65, Part 1, Art. III,
of the 1981 Revised Code]
§ 167-20. Prohibited in residential zones.
No person shall operate in a residential zone in the Town an establishment
wherein or whereon dogs, cats or other animals are received or kept for
diagnostic, medical, surgical or other treatment.
§ 167-21. Statement to be filed with Health Officer.
In order that proper supervision may be made of establishments where
dogs, cats or other animals are received or kept for diagnostic, medical,
surgical or other treatment, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate
such an establishment unless and until he shall have first made known to
the Health Officer of the Town, in writing, his name and the location of such
establishment; also, whether he is a licensed veterinarian of the state. Such
person shall also file with the Health Officer a photostat of such license and
a description of the premises where such dogs, cats and other animals will
be received, treated and cared for.
§ 167-22. Rabies observations.
In any establishment regulated by this article, if any dog or other animal
is received for observation for possible rabies, a record shall be kept and
forwarded by the person operating such establishment to the Health Officer
of the Town, and it shall be incumbent upon such operator to so confine such
dog or other animal that it will not escape from such premises.
§ 167-23. Record required when animals kept overnight.
In any establishment regulated by this article, if dogs, cats or other animals
are kept overnight for more than a period of 12 hours, a record shall be
made of such cases and forwarded to the Health Officer, and such record
shall also state the history of such cases and the reason for such dogs, cats
or other animals for the period above mentioned.92
§ 167-24. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-13-2016 by Ord. No.
MC 358293]
Any person, association or corporation who shall violate the provisions of
this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties in Chapter 1,
Article III, Penalties.
92.Editor's Note: Former Art. IV of Ch. 65 of the 1981 Revised Code, Vicious Dogs, added
9-8-1987 by Ord. No. MC 2840, which immediately followed this section, was repealed
9-14-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3125. This ordinance also provided that N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq.,
concerning vicious and potentially dangerous dogs, be adopted.
93.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 167-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-24
1:239

ARTICLE IV
Feeding Wildlife on Public Property
[Adopted 2-24-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3391 (Ch. 65, Part 2, Art. IV, of
the 1981 Revised Code)]
§ 167-25. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife
in any public park or on any other property owned or operated by the
Township of Irvington, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare,
and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 167-26. Word usage; definitions.
§ 167-27. Outdoor feeding restrictions.
§ 167-28. Enforcement.
A. For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use
in the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning.
When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular
number, and words used in the singular number, and words used in the
singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
B. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated.
A. No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned
or operated by the Township of Irvington, any wildlife, excluding
confined wildlife (for example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or
rehabilitation centers, or unconfined wildlife at environmental
education centers, or feral cats as part of an approved trap-neuterrelease
program).
B. No person shall feed any animal on the exterior of any property unless it
is licensed/registered with the Township.94
94.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 167-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-28
1:241
§ 167-29. Violations and penalties; schedule of fines. [Amended
9-13-2016 by Ord. No. MC 358295]
A. This article shall be enforced by the Irvington Department of Public
Safety and Department of Public Works of the Township of Irvington.
[Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No.
MC 3511; 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
B. Any person found to be in violation of this article shall be ordered to
cease the feeding immediately.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this article, the penalties for violations
of this article are as follows:
Section
Short
Description
1st
Offense
2nd
Offense
3rd
Offense
4th
Offense
Maximum
Fine;
Court
Appearance
Required
§ 167-27 Feeding
animals on
public
property
$50 $100 $250 $500
B. Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of a violation of any other
terms of this article shall be subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter
1, Article III, Penalties, of the Township Code.
95.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 167-28 IRVINGTON CODE § 167-29
1:242
ARTICLE V
Feral Cat Trap, Neuter, Return Program
[Adopted 10-11-2017 by Ord. No. MC 3628]
§ 167-30. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to permit the implementation of a Trap-Neuter-
Return (TNR) program in Irvington Township to reduce the population
of feral cats, benefitting public health, improving the quality of life for
residents, and ensuring the humane treatment of feral cats.
§ 167-31. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular, words used
in the singular number include the plural number, and words in the male
gender include the female gender. The word "shall" is always mandatory
and not merely directory.
ABANDON — To forsake a cat entirely or neglect to provide appropriate
care and support for a cat.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — Any person employed or appointed by the
Township who is authorized to investigate violations of laws and regulations
concerning animals, and to issue citations in accordance with New Jersey
law and the Township Code.
CARETAKER — Any person who provides food, water or shelter to or
otherwise cares for a cat, and who has been appropriately trained as a
caregiver.
DAYLIGHT HOURS — Hours during the day after dusk until dawn.
DOMESTICATED CAT — A cat that is a companion to a person, is regularly
fed and sheltered in that same person's habitation and carries visible indicia
or ownership, including a collar or tag.
EAR TIPPING — Straight-line cutting of the tip of the left ear of a cat by a
licensed veterinarian while the cat is anesthetized.
FERAL CAT — A cat that is completely or substantially unsocialized to
humans and is not an owned or licensed cat.
FERAL CAT COLONY — A group of feral or stray cats that congregate
together outside as a unit and share a common food source.
NUISANCE — Conduct by feral or stray cats that disturb the peace or
causes any condition that threatens or endangers the health, safety, or wellbeing
of persons or other animals, including but not limited to:
A. Habitually or continually howling, crying or screaming;
§ 167-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-31
1:243
STRAY CAT — A cat that is socialized to humans and is not an owned cat.
SUITABLE SHELTER — A structure that provides feral and stray cats with
protection from the sun, cold, rain and other weather-related elements to
protect the health of the cats.
TNR — The method of managing feral and stray cats known as "trap, neuter
and return."
TNR PROGRAM — A municipal program pursuant to which feral and stray
cats are trapped, neutered or spayed, vaccinated against rabies, ear-tipped,
and returned to the location where they were captured or congregate by a
caretaker in accordance with this article.
TOWNSHIP — Township of Irvington in the County of Essex, New Jersey, or
any agent acting on behalf of the Township of Irvington.
§ 167-32. Abandonment prohibited.
§ 167-33. Feral cat colonies.
A TNR Program shall be permitted, and caretakers shall be entitled to
maintain feral cat colonies in accordance with the terms and conditions of
this article.
§ 167-34. Caretaker requirements.
It shall be the responsibility of a caretaker to:
B. Molesting or interfering with persons in the public right-of-way;
The habitual and significant destruction, desecration or soiling of
property against the wishes of the owner of the property; or
C.
D. Attacking or injuring persons or domestic animals.
A. The owner of a cat shall not under any circumstances abandon a
domesticated cat. Affirmatively placing a cat at the location of a feral
cat colony on property belonging to another individual or entity shall be
considered abandonment.
B. Engaging in trap-neuter-return of feral cats in a manner consistent with
the terms of this article shall not be considered abandonment.
A. Make reasonable efforts to trap all cats in a registered colony and have
all trapped cats neutered or spayed, vaccinated against rabies and eartipped
by a licensed veterinarian, as deemed medically necessary;
B. Keep and maintain vaccination, neuter/spay, and medical records for all
trapped cats and provide the Township with copies of vaccination and
neuter/spay records for all trapped cats upon request;
C. Provide adequate food and water on a regular basis to colony cats and
make reasonable efforts to ensure suitable shelter for colony cats;
§ 167-31 IRVINGTON CODE § 167-34
1:244
§ 167-35. Feeding of feral cats; violations and penalties.
§ 167-36. Nuisance abatement.
If an Animal Control Officer determines that an ear-tipped feral colony cat
is causing a nuisance as defined by this article, or state law, the caretaker
must begin nuisance abatement procedures within 48 hours after being
notified of a nuisance by the Township and must take all reasonable steps to
D. Obtain proper medical attention for any colony cat that appears to
require it;
E. Make reasonable efforts to remove and place stray cats and kittens
born to colony cats after they have been weaned in homes, foster
homes, or with animal shelters, rescue organizations or veterinary
offices for the purpose of subsequent permanent placement;
F. Make reasonable efforts to work with the Irvington Health Department
via the Animal Control Officer(s) to resolve any complaints over the
conduct of the caretaker or of colony cats managed by the caretaker.
A. Caretakers are required to feed the cats in their colonies as part of
properly managing the colonies. As part of this requirement, caretakers
must:
(1) Feed only during daylight hours;
(2) Feed only the amount of food required by the cats in the colony;
(3) Leave food out for a maximum of one hour per feeding, no more
than twice per day, which shall mean removing all food dishes after
each one-hour feeding;
(4) A bowl or similar small container with fresh water may be left out
at all times; and
(5) Feeding must take place in the location least likely to cause a
nuisance to tenants, neighbors, customers, and the general public.
B. It shall be unlawful to feed feral cats who are not spayed/neutered, eartipped
and vaccinated in accordance with this article, unless the
caregiver is in the process of trying to trap the cats for spay/neuter, eartipping
and vaccination. Animal Control Officer(s) shall be empowered
to give a warning notice to any individual feeding one or more feral cats
not spayed/neutered, ear-tipped and vaccinated in accordance with this
article. The warning notice shall require the individual to contact the
Animal Control Officer(s) within 15 days to obtain assistance in getting
the cat(s) spayed/neutered, ear-tipped and vaccinated in order to be
brought into compliance with this article. Failure to make such contact
within 15 days and cooperate with the Animal Control Officer(s) in
meeting the requirements of this section will subject the violator to a
maximum fine of $100 per cat, per offense.
§ 167-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-36
1:245
resolve the nuisance in as short a time period as possible, not to exceed 30
days.
§ 167-37. Disposition of colony cats.
An Animal Control Officer that has trapped or received an ear-tipped cat
from within the municipality shall take reasonable steps to notify the
caretaker of the description and gender of the cat and of the address or
location where the cat was captured. The caretaker shall have up to three
business days to arrange for the cat to be retrieved from the temporary
animal holding facility identified by the Animal Control Officer.
§ 167-38. Enforcement.
§ 167-39. Trapping cats prohibited except as part of TNR Program.
A. The Township and/or Animal Control Officer retain the right to:
(1) Seize or remove any cat from a colony that is demonstrating signs
of rabies and is not up to date with rabies vaccinations.
(2) Investigate any nuisance complaint allegedly caused by a feral or
stray cat or feral cat colony.
(3) Seize or remove a cat from a colony creating a nuisance as defined
by this article or state law, after the caretaker has been given 30
days to abate the nuisance or remove the cat and has failed to do
so.
(4) Seize and remove a registered feral cat colony if the caretaker
regularly fails to comply with the requirements of this article and
does not correct the situation within 30 days of being given written
notice by the Township delineating the caretaker's failures with
specificity.
B. The requirements of this section notwithstanding, Animal Control
Officer(s) may investigate any nuisance complaint. If an Animal Control
Officer determines that an ear-tipped feral colony cat is causing a
nuisance as defined by this article and the caretaker fails to resolve the
nuisance or remove the cat within 30 days, the Animal Control Officer
may remove the cat. If an Animal Control Officer reasonably determines
that a cat is injured or poses a significant threat to public health, the
Officer may reduce the time that the caretaker has to resolve the
complaint, as necessary to protect the cat and public health, before
taking further action. In the case of an emergency, the Animal Control
Officer or a law enforcement officer may remove the cat, but within 24
hours the Township must provide the caretaker with notice of the cat's
whereabouts and allow the caretaker an opportunity to retrieve the cat
for treatment, return, or relocation.
A. It shall be unlawful for any individual to trap a cat other than for the
purpose of complying with the requirements of the article. Individuals
§ 167-36 IRVINGTON CODE § 167-39
1:246
may not trap cats for the purpose of euthanizing the cats or
surrendering the cats for impoundment. The Township reserves the
right to collect a deposit on all traps loaned to caretakers as part of
this program, in accordance with rental procedures established by the
Department of Health.
B. This section shall not apply to:
(1) Township officials and their agents trapping cats in the course of
their employment contract; or
(2) Any individual trying to recover his or her own lost cat through
trapping on his or her own property or with permission of the
property owner.
§ 167-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-39
1:247
Chapter 174
BARBERSHOPS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Beauty products, hair braiding and nail
salons — See Ch. 180.
Licensing procedure — See Ch. 290, Art. I.
§ 174-1. Definitions.96
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BARBER — Any person who is licensed to engage in any of the practices
encompassed in barbering.
BARBERING — Any one or combination of the following practices when
done on the human body for cosmetic purposes and not for the treatment
of disease or physical or mental ailments and when done for payment either
directly or indirectly or when done without payment for the general public:
BARBERSHOP — Any establishment engaged in the practice of barbering
for the public.
§ 174-2. License required for barbershop. [Amended 1-13-1981 by
Ord. No. MC 2622]
No barbershop shall be operated in the Town without the operator thereof
having first obtained a license from the Division of Licensing, Department
of Revenue and Finance.
A. Shaving or trimming of the beard, mustache or other facial hair;
B. Shampooing, cutting, arranging, relaxing or styling of the hair;
C. Singeing or dyeing of the hair;
Applying cosmetic preparations, antiseptics, tonics, lotions or creams
to the hair, scalp, face or neck;
D.
Massaging, cleansing or stimulating the face, neck or scalp with or
without cosmetic preparations, either by hand, mechanical or electrical
appliances; or
E.
Cutting, fitting, coloring or styling of hairpieces or wigs, to the extent
that the services are performed while the wig is being worn by a
person.
F.
96.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 167-39 IRVINGTON CODE § 174-3
1:248
§ 174-3. Fee for license; display; renewal. [Amended 1-13-1981 by
Ord. No. MC 2622; 11-27-1984 by Ord. No. MC 2757; 8-11-1987 by
Ord. No. MC 2834; 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3027; 12-14-1999 by
Ord. No. MC 3134; 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by
Ord. No. MC 3306; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 341397]
The fee for a license for a barbershop, beauty shop or unisex shop, to
be obtained from the Division of Licensing, shall be $421 for an initial
license and $128 per year thereafter, and such license shall be renewed
on or before the second day of January of each year. Such license shall be
displayed in a conspicuous place in the shop.
§ 174-4. Inspection of premises; compliance.98
Every barbershop in the Town shall be open to the Department of Health for
inspection at any time and shall comply with the provisions of this chapter.99
§ 174-5. Hours of operation; holidays.
§ 174-6. Sunday operation prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any proprietor, manager or other person to open or
keep open on the first day of the week, commonly known as "Sunday," a
barbershop or other place wherein the business of shaving, haircutting or
other barbering is carried on within the Town.
A. The hour for opening barbershops shall be 8:00 a.m. and the hour for
closing the same shall be 8:00 p.m., Eastern standard time (or daylight
saving time, when in effect), except:100 [Amended 2-11-1997 by Ord.
No. MC 3057]
(1) Permission is granted for those clients of beauty salons who have
entered same prior to the required closing time to remain up until
the hour of 9:00 p.m. After 9:00 p.m., all customers must vacate the
establishments. [Amended 9-9-1998 by Ord. No. MC 3098]
B. All barbershops shall be closed all day on New Year's Day, Washington's
Birthday, Memorial Day, July 4, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and
Christmas or on those days that the aforementioned holidays are
nationally celebrated by federal or state proclamation. [Amended
6-28-1988 by Ord. No. MC 2861101]
97.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
98.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
99.Editor's Note: Former § 69-4, Barbers' licenses, as amended, § 69-5, Health card required,
§ 69-6, Health card to be in barber's possession, and § 69-7, Linen suppliers to be
approved, which previously followed this section, were repealed 10-23-1984 by Ord. No.
MC 2751. Editor's Note: Original § 69-8, Sanitary regulations, which previously followed
this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
I).
100. Editor's Note: Former § 69-9A(1), regarding closing of barbershops on Wednesdays, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 6-28-1988 by Ord. No. MC 2861.
101. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 174-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-7
1:249
§ 174-7. Barbering on Sunday prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person on the first day of the week, commonly
known as "Sunday," to do any shaving, haircutting or other barbering in any
barbershop or other place of business in the Town.
§ 174-8. View of interior on Sunday.
§ 174-9. Electric signs to be turned off at closing.
In the event that any barbershop shall use window lights, illuminated barber
pole or any other electrical device or sign used to designate a barbershop,
the person in charge of such barbershop shall, at the closing hour specified
in § 174-5, immediately disconnect the electric current or any other means
used to illuminate the aforesaid devices or signs. In addition thereto, at
least one window or door with glass partition shall remain uncovered so that
the interior of such barbershop may be fully visible from the outside thereof.
§ 174-10. Screen doors to be bolted at closing.
Wherever a screen door shall be used in lieu of a wooden or metal door
for the purpose of egress and ingress, such screen door at closing hours
shall immediately be bolted from within so as to prevent any person from
entering the barbershop.
Chapter 180
BEAUTY PRODUCTS, HAIR BRAIDING AND NAIL SALONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Barbershops — See Ch. 174. Licensing procedure — See Ch. 290, Art. I.
A. The clear interior view of every barbershop or other place wherein the
business of shaving, haircutting or other barbering is carried on within
the Town shall, on the first day of the week, commonly known as
"Sunday," be in no way obstructed by a screen, nontransparent glass,
shade, blind, door, shutter or merchandise or any other article placed
therein.
B. The entire interior of every barbershop or other place wherein the
business of shaving, haircutting or other barbering is carried on in the
Town shall, on the first day of the week, commonly known as "Sunday,"
be open to full view from the public street.
§ 174-7 IRVINGTON CODE § 174-10
1:250
ARTICLE I
Hair Braiding and Nail Salons
[Adopted 6-24-1997 by Ord. No. MC 3071 (Ch. 69, Art. II, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 180-1. License required.
No hair braiding or nail salon shall be operated in the Township without
the operator thereof having first obtained a license from the Division of
Licensing, Department of Revenue and Finance.
§ 180-2. Fees. [Amended 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3134;
8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by Ord. No. MC 3306;
12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413102]
The fee for the license under this article shall be $458 for an initial license
and $139 per year thereafter.
§ 180-3. Inspections.103
Establishments regulated by this article shall be open to the Department of
Health for inspection at any time.
§ 180-4. Sanitary regulations.
Establishments that are the subject of this article shall be governed by any
state and local sanitary regulations relevant to their operations.
§ 180-5. Hours of operation.
The hour for opening of the establishments in this article shall be 8:00 a.m.
and the hour for closing shall be 8:00 p.m.
§ 180-6. Location of nail salons. [Added 9-26-2006 by Ord. No. MC
3323]
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
NAIL SALON — A nail salon shall include any establishment whose
primary business is providing manicures, pedicures or other fingernail
and/or toenail cosmetic treatment.
B. Location. Within the confines of the Township of Irvington, no nail salon
shall be located within 500 feet of an existing nail salon business. The
distance between nail salon businesses shall be measured from the
nearest entrance of the existing nail salon to the newest entrance of the
102. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
103. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 180-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-6
1:251
proposed new nail salon business, along the route that a pedestrian
would normally walk.
§ 180-6 IRVINGTON CODE § 180-6
1:252
ARTICLE II
Retail Beauty Supply Establishments
[Adopted 10-8-2013 by Ord. No. MC 3502 (Ch. 69, Art. III, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 180-7. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
RETAIL BEAUTY ESTABLISHMENT — Includes any establishment whose
primary business is to provide beauty supplies sold at retail.
§ 180-8. Location.
Within the confines of the Township of Irvington, no retail beauty supply
establishment shall be located within 500 feet of an existing retail beauty
supply establishment. The distance between retail beauty supply
establishments shall be measured from the nearest entrance of the existing
retail beauty supply establishment to the newest entrance of the proposed
new retail beauty supply establishment, along the route that a pedestrian
would normally walk.
§ 180-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 180-8
1:253
Chapter 192
BOWLING ALLEYS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing procedure — See Ch. 290, Art. I.
§ 192-1. License required.
It shall be unlawful in the Town to conduct or operate a bowling alley (other
than bowling alleys in incorporated clubs) without first being duly licensed
to do so in accordance with this chapter.
§ 192-2. Application for license.
A person desiring to conduct a bowling alley in the Town shall make
application to the Division of Licensing for a blank application form, which
shall be properly filled in by the applicant and submitted to the Municipal
Council, which shall either grant or reject the application by resolution.
§ 192-3. Conditions of license.
Each license issued under this chapter shall be subject to the following
conditions:
§ 192-4. License fee. [Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622;
12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413104]
The fee for a license pursuant to this chapter shall be $768 for the initial
license and $386 per year thereafter, which amount shall accompany the
application. The license shall be issued to be in force until December 31
next following. It shall be signed by the Director of Revenue and Finance
and the Town Clerk, and the seal of the Town affixed. If the license is not
granted, the fee shall be returned to the applicant.
A. The license shall not be transferable or assignable except by consent of
the Municipal Council, and the business or organization shall be
conducted only at the place therein specified.
B. Such license shall in no way operate to permit a violation of Chapter
650, Zoning, or other ordinances of the Town, but shall be evidence only
of the payment of the license fee required.
104. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 180-8 IRVINGTON CODE § 192-5
1:254
§ 192-5. License to apply to only one bowling alley.
The license authorized by this chapter shall be issued upon condition that
each license shall apply to only one bowling alley, which shall be conducted
in accordance with the regulations set forth in this chapter.
§ 192-6. License to be displayed. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No.
MC 3553]
Any person making application for a license under this chapter and to
whom such license is granted shall at all times produce such license while
conducting such business or occupation and shall display it in the ticket or
other business office at all times and upon demand of any official of the
Town or of any law enforcement officer in the Department of Public Safety
thereof.
§ 192-7. Expiration of license; proration of fee; revocation.
Licenses issued under this chapter shall expire on December 31 next after
the issuance thereof, unless sooner revoked. If the license is issued between
June 30 and December 31, then the license fee shall be 1/2 the amount
specified by this chapter. All licenses shall be granted by the Municipal
Council under resolution and may be revoked in like manner. In the event
that any such license be revoked by the Municipal Council, no part of the
license fee will be returned to the licensee.
§ 192-8. Hearing on suspension or revocation.
Licenses issued under this chapter shall be subject to suspension or
revocation by resolution of the Municipal Council, upon a hearing to be held
after notice to the licensee.
Chapter 200
BUILDINGS, MOVING OR DEMOLITION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction code — See Ch. 240.
Housing standards — See Ch. 355.
Pest control — See Ch. 449.
Tax liens — See Ch. 586.
§ 192-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-8
1:255

ARTICLE I
Moving of Buildings
§ 200-1. Conditions of issuance of permit.
Before any person shall move any building into, upon, over or through any
street or other public land in the Town, such person shall comply with all
the requirements of the BOCA Basic Building Code relating to the removal
of buildings105 and shall file with the Town Engineer the following.
§ 200-2. Surety bond.
A surety bond in the sum of $10,000, in form to be approved by the Town
Attorney, conditioned upon:
§ 200-3. Issuance of permit.
An agreement in writing, to be signed by the owner and the mover, whereby
in consideration of the issuance of the permit they will cooperate with
and abide by such directives as may be issued by the Town Engineer and
all appropriate department supervisors of the Town with regard to such
moving operations.
§ 200-4. Certificate of insurance.
Certificates of policies of insurance in favor of the owner and the mover
for public liability in the sum of $50,000 and property damage in the
sum of $25,000, with contingent liability coverage in favor of the Town, in
connection with such operations.
§ 200-5. Deposits.
A deposit, by cash or certified check, representing the estimated costs to
the Town for any work done by the Town as a result of such removal, which
sum shall be applied on account of the actual cost of such work, and the
applicant agreeing in writing that he will pay any excess should the actual
cost be more than the estimated cost. The Town shall refund any difference
should the actual cost be less than the estimated cost.
A. The immediate commencement of the operations to remove such
building and to complete such removal with all due diligence and not to
abandon such operations, and to complete such project within the
period of time stipulated upon the permit granted for such removal and
agreeing to forfeit the sum of $100 per day for each day or part of day
such period of time is exceeded.
B. Indemnifying and saving harmless the Town and all of its employees
against every loss, expense, damage and liability by reason of such
moving operation or granting of such permit.
105. Editor's Note: The building code referred to was superseded by the adoption of the State
Uniform Construction Code Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 200-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-5
1:257

ARTICLE II
Demolition of Buildings
[Added 12-12-1967 by Ord. No. MC 2180; amended 1-13-1981 by
Ord. No. MC 2622; 6-12-1984 by Ord. No. MC 2730]
§ 200-6. Extermination of buildings.
No building or structure within the Township of Irvington may be
demolished or removed unless the same is first completely exterminated
in accordance with § 449-4 of this Code to rid the premises of infestation
of vermin and rats. The Building Inspector shall require a certification
in writing from a reputable exterminating company that it has treated
the building and premises for the extermination of vermin and rats. The
certification shall set forth the date on which the buildings and premises
were treated, and a minimum period of seven days must elapse from the
time premises were treated before a demolition permit will be issued.
§ 200-7. Notification of utility companies.
Before a building or structure may be demolished or moved, the owner
or agent shall notify all utilities having service connections within the
building, such as water, electric, gas, sewer and other connections. A permit
to demolish or remove a building shall not be issued until a release is
obtained from the utilities stating that their respective service connections
and appurtenant equipment, such as meters and regulators, have been
removed or sealed and plugged in a safe manner.
§ 200-8. Dust and windborne matter.
In demolishing any building or structure or part thereof, all bricks, timbers
and other parts of each story shall be lowered to the ground immediately
after displacement. The material to be removed shall be properly wet to lay
the dust incident to its removal.
§ 200-9. Deposit required to secure compliance.
Before any owner, architect, builder or contractor commences demolishing
any building or structure, such person shall:
A. File with the Building Inspector certificates of policies of insurance in
favor of the owner and contractor for public liability in the sum of
$300,000 for personal injury and property damage with contingent
liability coverage in favor of the Township, in connection with such
operations; and
B. Deposit with the Building Inspector a certified check payable to the
Township of Irvington in the amount of $2,500 to insure proper
performance by the contractor. In the event that the contractor fails to
repair sidewalks, curbs or streets damaged by him, or properly place,
fill or repair other damages caused by him, the Township may, upon 10
days' written notice to the contractor, cause such damage to be
§ 200-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-9
1:259
§ 200-10. Permit fee.
The fee for a permit for the demolition of a building or structure shall be at
a rate set out in Chapter 240, Construction Codes, Uniform.
repaired and all costs thereof deducted from said deposit. Any balance
remaining shall be returned within 90 days of the completion of all
work by the Township together with an itemized statement of work
performed.
§ 200-9 IRVINGTON CODE § 200-10
1:260
ARTICLE III
Unsafe Buildings106
[Added 2-15-2017 by Ord. No. MC 3599]
§ 200-11. Definitions.
Whenever used in this article, the terms listed below shall be defined as
follows unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
AUTHORITY — The Casino Reinvestment Development Authority
established under Section 5 of L. 1984, c. 218 (N.J.S.A. 5:12-153).
BUILDING — Any building, structure or part thereof, whether used for
human habitation or not. The term includes any structures ancillary to a
building.
CASINO LICENSEE — Any casino licensed under the Casino Control Act, L.
1977, c. 110 (N.J.S.A. 5:12-1 et seq.).
GOVERNING BODY — The Council of the Township of Irvington.
OWNER — The holder or holders of title in fee simple.
PARTIES IN INTEREST — Any individuals, associations or corporations who
have interests of record in a building and any who are in possession of it.
§ 200-12. Repair, closing or demolition.
A. Whenever a petition is filed with the Construction Official by a public
authority or by at least five residents of the municipality charging that
any building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use or
whenever it appears to the Construction Official that any building is
unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use, the Construction
Official shall, if a preliminary investigation supports these charges,
serve upon the owner and parties in interest a complaint stating the
charges and a notice that a hearing will be held before the Construction
Official (or a designated agent) at a place therein fixed not less than
seven nor more than 30 days after service of the complaint. The
complaint shall also provide that the owner and parties in interest may
file an answer and appear in person, or otherwise, to give testimony at
the place and time fixed in the complaint and that the rules of evidence
prevailing in the courts shall not be controlling in hearings before the
Construction Official.
B. If after notice and hearing the Construction Official determines that the
building is unfit for habitation or occupancy or use, the Construction
Official shall state, in writing, findings of fact in support of such
determination and shall serve upon the owner and parties in interest an
order as follows:
106. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 355, Art. II, Unfit Dwellings.
§ 200-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-12
1:261
(1) The order shall require the owner to repair, alter or improve the
building within a reasonable time set forth in the order or at the
option of the owner vacate and close the building within the time
specified in the order.
(2) If the building is in a condition dangerous to the health and safety
of persons on or near it and the owner fails to repair, alter or
improve the building within the time specified, the order shall
require the owner to remove or demolish the building within a
reasonable time specified in the order.
(3) If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve
or, at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building, the
order shall specify that the Construction Official may post on the
main entrance of any building so closed a placard with the
following words: "This building is unfit for human habitation or
occupancy or use; the use or occupation of this building is
prohibited and unlawful."
(4) If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish
the building, the Construction Official may cause the building to be
removed or demolished or may contract for its removal or
demolition after advertisement for, and receipt of, bids therefor.
(5) The amount of:
(a) The cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witnesses' fees,
search fees and advertising charges incurred in the course of
any proceeding taken under this article determined in favor of
the municipality; and
(b) The cost of repairs, alterations or improvements or vacating
and closing or removal or demolition, if any, or the amount of
the balance thereof remaining after deduction of the sum, if
any, realized from the sale of materials derived from such
building or from any contract for removal or demolition shall
be a municipal lien against the real property upon which the
cost was incurred. If the building is removed or demolished by
the Construction Official, he or she shall sell the materials of
such building. There shall be credited against the cost of the
removal or demolition, including the clearance and, if
necessary, leveling of the site, the proceeds of any sale of such
materials or any sum derived from any contract for the removal
or demolition of the building. If there are no such credits or if
the sum total of such costs exceeds the total of such credits, a
detailed statement of the costs and the amount due shall be
filed with the Tax Collector or other custodian of records of tax
liens and a copy shall be forthwith forwarded to the owner by
registered mail. If the total of the credits exceeds the costs, the
balance shall be deposited in the Superior Court by the
Construction Official, shall be secured in a manner directed by
§ 200-12 IRVINGTON CODE § 200-12
1:262
§ 200-13. Gifts and grants; loan agreements.
the court and disbursed according to the order of the court
to the persons entitled thereto. Any owner or party in interest
may, within 30 days from the date of the filing of the lien
certificate, proceed in a summary manner in the Superior
Court to contest the reasonableness or accuracy of the costs
set forth in the municipal lien certificate.
C. If an actual and immediate danger to life is posed by the threatened
collapse of any fire damaged or other structurally unsafe building, the
Construction Official may, after taking such measures as may be
necessary to make such building temporarily safe, seek a judgment in
summary proceedings for its demolition (Superior Court - OTSC).
D. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit in any way the power
of the municipality to define and declare nuisances and to cause their
removal or abatement, by summary proceedings or otherwise, nor is
anything in this article intended to limit the authority of the enforcing
agency or Construction Official under the State Uniform Construction
Code Act, L. 1975, c. 217 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.) or any rules or
regulations adopted thereunder.
E. Any building or buildings, or parts thereof, which have come into a state
of disrepair through neglect, lack of maintenance or use, fire, accident
or other calamities or through any other act rendering the building or
buildings, or parts thereof, in a state of disrepair to the extent that the
building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use, shall be
deemed inimical to the welfare of the residents of the municipality
wherein it is located, and a Construction Official appointed pursuant to
the provisions of L. 1942, c. 112 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3 et seq.) may
exercise his or her powers to repair or demolish the building or
buildings, or parts thereof, pursuant to the provisions of Section 5 of L.
1992, c. 89 [N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.5(b)].
A. Pursuant to L. 1992, c. 89 [N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.5(b)] the Township of
Irvington, to finance the costs of accomplishing the purpose of this
article, shall have the power to accept gifts or grants from private or
public agencies or to accept donations from or enter into loan
agreements with any casino licensee or the authority under any legal
terms and conditions, including agreements which obligate such
municipality to repay any such loan over a period not in excess of one
year, which the Construction Official determines will be beneficial to
the purposes of L. 1942, c. 112 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3 et seq.). If the
Construction Official accepts or borrows any funds from any casino
licensee or the authority for which the casino licensee seeks
authorization for an investment tax credit in accordance with Section 3
of L. 1984, c. 218 (N.J.S.A. 5:12-144.1), the authority is authorized to
approve an investment tax credit in accordance with the provisions of
Section 3 of L. 1984, c. 218 (N.J.S.A. 5:12-144.1) and the authority's
rules.
§ 200-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-13
1:263
§ 200-14. Conditions rendering buildings unfit.
The Construction Official may determine that a building is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use by finding that conditions exist in the
building which are dangerous to the occupants of the building, the
occupants of neighboring buildings or other residents or such municipality.
Conditions may include the following: defects increasing the hazards of fire,
accident or other calamities; lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary
facilities; dilapidation; disrepair, structural defects; uncleanliness; failure
to comply with the requirements of the building code or the certificate of
occupancy.
§ 200-15. Service of complaints and orders.
Complaints or orders issued by a Construction Official shall be served upon
persons either personally or by registered mail, but if the whereabouts of
such persons is unknown and cannot be ascertained by the Construction
Official in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the Construction Official
shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of such complaint or
order upon such persons may be made by publishing the same once in a
newspaper printed and published in the municipality, or, in the absence of
such newspaper, in one printed and published in the county and circulating
in the municipality in which the buildings are located. A copy of any
complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on premises
affected by the complaint or order. A copy of such complaint or order shall
be duly recorded or lodged for record with the county recording officer of
the county in which the building is located.
§ 200-16. Remedies.
Any person aggrieved by an order issued by a Construction Official may,
within 30 days after the posting and service of such order, bring an action
for injunctive relief to restrain the Construction Official from carrying out
the provisions of the order and for any other appropriate relief. The court
may proceed in the action in a summary manner or otherwise. The remedy
herein provided shall be exclusive, and no person affected by an order of
the Construction Official shall be entitled to recover any damages for action
B. All funds received pursuant to Subsection A of this section shall be
placed in a separate municipal fund designated as the "Emergency
Demolition Fund" to be used solely for demolition related activities. The
Construction Official shall have the sole discretion in determining
which funds will be accepted and the time and manner of all
expenditures necessary to carry out the purposes of this article, except
that the Construction Official shall not accept or use any funds provided
by a casino licensee or the authority for the purpose of demolishing any
structure owned by a casino licensee. All payments made pursuant to
this section shall be made under the direction of the Construction
Official.
§ 200-13 IRVINGTON CODE § 200-16
1:264
taken pursuant thereto, or because of noncompliance by any person with
any order of the Construction Official.
§ 200-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-16
1:265
Chapter 222
CLAIMS AGAINST TOWNSHIP
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 32.
§ 200-16 IRVINGTON CODE § 200-16
1:266
ARTICLE I
Tort Claim Notice
[Adopted 1-13-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3388 (Ch. 78, Art. I, of the 1981
Revised Code)]
§ 222-1. Adoption of notice form.
The attached Tort Claims Action Notice Form shall be and is hereby adopted
as the official tort claims notice form for the Township of Irvington.107
§ 222-2. Requirement for notice form.
All persons making claims against the Township of Irvington, its officers,
employees, agencies or departments, pursuant to the New Jersey Tort
Claims Act, N.J.S.A. 59:1-1 et seq., are required to complete the form
adopted by this article as a condition of compliance with the New Jersey
Tort Claims Act notice requirement.
107. Editor's Note: Said form is on file and available in the Township offices.
§ 222-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-2
1:267
Chapter 229
COIN-OPERATED MACHINES AND VENDING MACHINES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement games in amusement
parks — See Ch. 163.
Licensing procedure — See Ch. 290, Art. I.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 307.
Food establishments — See Ch. 324.
Laundromats — See Ch. 369.
Poolrooms and billiard rooms — See Ch. 455.
§ 222-2 IRVINGTON CODE § 222-2
1:268
ARTICLE I
Automatic Amusement Devices
[Adopted 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622 as Ch. 79, Art. I, of the
1981 Revised Code]
§ 229-1. Purpose. [Amended 3-22-1983 by Ord. No. MC 2691]
This article is enacted for the purpose of regulating and controlling
automatic amusement devices as hereinafter defined. Because such devices
may become a public nuisance by reason of the manner in which they are
distributed or operated, it is hereby determined that regulation and control
of such device is necessary for the protection and preservation of the public
safety, morals and welfare.
§ 229-2. Definitions. [Amended 6-14-1977 by Ord. No. MC 2498]
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
AUTOMATIC AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any machine which, upon insertion
of a coin, disk, token, slug, plate, key or similar object or by the payment
of any price, may be operated as a game, entertainment or amusement,
including but not limited to such devices as pinball machines, skill ball,
bagatelle, video games or machines and all games, machines and devices
similar thereto under whatever name. The term is not intended to include
any device licensed under Article II or Article III hereof or licensed or
regulated under Chapter 163 of this Code.[Added 3-22-1983 by Ord. No.
MC 2691]
AMUSEMENT DEVICE ARCADE — Any premises upon which is located
more than five automatic amusement devices.108[Added 3-22-1983 by
Ord. No. MC 2691]
DISTRIBUTOR — Any natural person, partnership, firm, association,
corporation or any other business entity which leases, rents out or places
under any kind of arrangement, within the Town, one or more devices or
machines as defined hereunder in § 229-3 in premises or in a location owned
or controlled by another.
OPERATOR — Any natural person, partnership, firm, association,
corporation or any other business entity which owns or controls premises
or a location within the Town in which any device or machine as defined
hereunder in § 229-3 is displayed for public patronage or is placed or kept
for operation by the public.
OWNER-OPERATOR — Any natural person, partnership, firm, association,
corporation or any other business entity which owns or controls premises
or a location within the Town in which any device or machine as defined
hereunder in § 229-3, which is owned by such natural person, partnership,
108. Editor's Note: The former definition of "coin-operated skill amusement machines," added
9-9-1980 by Ord. No. MC 2614, which immediately followed this definition, was repealed
3-22-1983 by Ord. No. MC 2691.
§ 229-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 229-2
1:269
firm, association, corporation or other business entity, is displayed for
public patronage or is placed or kept for operation by the public.
§ 229-3. License required. [Amended 9-9-1980 by Ord. No. MC
2614; 3-22-1983 by Ord. No. MC 2691]
No person shall place; operate, maintain or possess any automatic
amusement device in any public or quasi-public place or in any building,
store or other place wherein the public is invited or may enter without first
obtaining a license therefor from the Director of Revenue and Finance.
§ 229-4. Procedure for application for license. [Amended 3-22-1983
by Ord. No. MC 2691]
A. Contents and information to accompany application.
(1) Applications for a license required by this article shall be filed on a
form to be furnished by the Director of Revenue and Finance. The
application shall contain the following:
(a) Name and address of the applicant.
(b) Name under which the place is being operated and the location
of the same.
(c) Number and type of alcoholic beverage license, where
applicable.
(d) Number of machines sought to be licensed.
(e) Location where each automatic amusement device is to be
located.
(f) Name and address of the person from whom each device is to
be purchased, rented or otherwise obtained.
(g) Description of each automatic amusement device sought to be
licensed, including, for each device, the name of the
manufacturer, model number and serial number.
(h) Information indicating whether the distributor, the applicant or
any person connected with the operation of the place wherein
the game or device is to be installed has ever been convicted of
any crime or found guilty of the violation of any ordinance
pertaining to gambling or gaming.
(i) In the case of an amusement device arcade, a floor plan
showing the location of each proposed device and the
dimensions of the premises.
(j) Such further information which the Director of Revenue and
Finance may deem reasonably necessary and proper for the
protection of the public.
§ 229-2 IRVINGTON CODE § 229-4
1:270
(2) Such application shall be accompanied by the license fee provided
for by § 229-5 and shall be verified by the applicant if an individual,
and if a partnership, by one of the partners, and if a corporation,
then by an officer of the same authorized to make such application,
which authorization shall be made a part of the application.
B. The Director of Public Safety or his designee shall make an
investigation of the premises and the applicant to determine the truth
of the facts set forth in the application, the business responsibility,
moral character and ability of the applicant to properly conduct the
licensed activity. Upon completion of the investigation, the Director of
Public Safety shall forward a report of said investigation, together with
any recommendations to the Director of Revenue and Finance.
[Amended 1-12-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3562]
C. The Fire Chief or his designee shall inspect the premises to determine
whether said premises and the proposed arrangement of the automatic
amusement devices within said premises comply with the existing fire
regulations of the Township. Upon completion of the inspection, the
Fire Chief shall forward a report of said investigation together with any
recommendations to the Director of Revenue and Finance.
D. The Director of the Department of Housing Services or his designee
shall inspect said premises to determine whether the same is in
compliance with all applicable laws, ordinances and codes under his
jurisdiction. Upon completion of his investigation, said Director shall
forward a report of said investigation together with any
recommendations to the Director of Revenue and Finance. [Amended
2-13-1985 by Ord. No. MC 2769; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407;
7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
E. Upon receipt of the application and the reports of the Director of Public
Safety, the Fire Chief and the Director of the Department of Housing
Services, the Director of Revenue and Finance shall either approve,
approve conditionally or disapprove the issuance of the license for the
automatic amusement devices of the applicant. [Amended 2-13-1985
by Ord. No. MC 2769; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014
by Ord. No. MC 3511; 1-12-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3562]
F. If the application is approved, the Director of Revenue and Finance
shall issue the necessary licenses.
G. If the application is approved conditionally, the Director of Revenue and
Finance shall communicate the conditions to the applicant, who shall
have a period of 45 days to comply with said conditions. Upon being
satisfied that the conditions have been complied with, the Director of
Revenue and Finance shall approve the application.
H. If the application is disapproved, the Director of Revenue and Finance
shall notify the applicant in writing of the disapproval and the reasons
therefor.
§ 229-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 229-4
1:271
§ 229-5. License fees. [Amended 6-14-1977 by Ord. No. MC 2498;
9-9-1980 by Ord. No. MC 2614; 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622;
12-8-1987 by Ord. No. MC 2844; 4-11-1989 by Ord. No. MC 2884;
12-12-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3027; 1-9-1996 by Ord. No. MC 3030;
12-14-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3134; 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176;
10-12-2005 by Ord. No. MC 3306; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413]
The fee for the issuance of a license required by this article for distributors
and for owner operators shall be as follows, except that no fee shall be
charged where the distributor or owner/operator is a tax-exempt
organization. The burden of establishing such exemption shall be on the
organization claiming said exemption.
§ 229-6. Contents of license.
The license issued pursuant to this article shall, on its face, disclose the
serial number, the name and post office address of the licensee and the cost
or charge made for the use of such machine, and state that the machine to
which the same is affixed is licensed for operation in the Town.
§ 229-7. Term of license.
The license for the placing, operation, maintenance or use of amusement
devices or machines mentioned in § 229-3 shall be issued for the calendar
year, commencing January 1 and expiring December 31 at 12:00 midnight.
§ 229-8. License to be affixed to machines; location of machines.
[Amended 3-22-1983 by Ord. No. MC 2691]
No device or machine regulated by this article shall be placed, operated,
maintained or used unless the license issued hereunder is posted in a
conspicuous place in public view in the premises where said device or
machine is located. No such device or machine shall be located in any back
room or other closed-off or otherwise inaccessible portion of the premises.
I. All original actions which are required to be taken by the Director of
Revenue and Finance shall be taken within 30 days after the date of the
filing of the license application.
A. Distributors. The fee for a license for a distributor of automatic
amusement devices shall be $588 plus the sum of $119 for each
machine or device distributed.
B. Owner-operator. The fee for a license for an owner-operator of
automatic amusement devices shall be as follows: the sum of $351 for
the first, second and third machine or device owned or operated; the
sum of $290 for the fourth or fifth machine or device owned or
operated; and the sum of $237 for each machine or device owned or
operated in excess of five.
§ 229-4 IRVINGTON CODE § 229-9
1:272
§ 229-9. License not to be issued to certain persons; cancellation of
license.
No license shall be issued under this article to any person who has been
convicted of a crime, and further, no such license shall be issued to any
person who has been convicted of any offense under the Disorderly Persons
Act109 or against any provision of this Code or other Town ordinance if
the offense for which the applicant was convicted was one of gambling,
and in the event the licensee shall be convicted of any crime or shall be
convicted of the offense of gambling contrary to the Disorderly Persons Act
or any provision of this Code or other Town ordinance, then the license of
such person shall be forthwith canceled and all machines to which such
licenses may be affixed or upon which they may appear shall be deemed to
be operated in violation of this article.
§ 229-10. Transferability of license.
§ 229-11. Report of change in ownership. [Amended 3-22-1983 by
Ord. No. MC 2691]
In the event that there is any change in the ownership, management or
interest in whole or in part of the holder of a license hereunder, which
change shall occur after the filing of the application for a license as provided
by this article, the licensee shall forthwith file a report thereof with the
Director of Revenue and Finance, and all persons named in such report shall
qualify as licensees under this article; otherwise, all licenses theretofore
issued to such licensee shall be forfeited and be null and void.
§ 229-12. Delegation of powers and duties by Director of Revenue
and Finance; reports from licensees.
The Director of Revenue and Finance is hereby authorized to delegate any
and all powers and duties conferred upon him by this article to any of
his subordinates, as he may deem necessary or proper, and the Director
A. Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the holder of a license
issued hereunder from using the same within the calendar year for
which it is issued upon additional or other machines, provided that the
cost or charge for the operation of such additional or other machines
shall be the same, and provided further that if any such license is
removed from any machine taken out of use and placed upon another
machine put in use, the machine from which it is taken shall not be used
again unless and until a license shall be affixed thereto as required by
this article.
B. The license hereby authorized and issued shall not be assignable or
transferable from one person to another.
109. Editor's Note: The Disorderly Persons Act (N.J.S.A. 2A:170-1 et seq.) was repealed by
Chapter 95 of the Laws of 1978. See now the Code of Criminal Justice (N.J.S.A. 2C:1-1 et
seq.).
§ 229-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 229-12
1:273
of Revenue and Finance may, in his discretion, require periodical reports
from the licensees to whom licenses are issued under the provisions of this
article, but not oftener than once in any calendar month, which reports shall
disclose the type of machine to which each license issued is affixed, the
manufacturer's serial number of such machine, the locations of machines
during the period covered by the report and the name and address of the
owner or possessor of the location whose permission the licensee obtained
for locating the machine on such premises. The Director of Revenue and
Finance may require that such report be rendered to him under oath.
§ 229-13. Confiscation of unlicensed machines; right of entry by
police. [Amended 3-22-1983 by Ord. No. MC 2691; 10-14-2015 by
Ord. No. MC 3553]
Any machine or device regulated by this article and not having a license
shall be taken into the custody by the Public Safety Department and
disposed of. For the purpose of determining whether or not such machines
and devices are so licensed, the Public Safety Department shall have the
right of entry in any premises where such machines are located. In the
event that any such machine or device is taken into custody hereunder and
thereafter returned to the owner, operator or distributor, the same shall pay
to the Township the sum of $150 in addition to any other fines or penalties
provided by this Code.
§ 229-14. Limitation on number of machines per location;
regulations for amusement device arcades. [Amended 6-14-1977 by
Ord. No. MC 2498; 9-9-1980 by Ord. No. MC 2614]
A. Not more than a total of three machines or devices regulated by this
article shall be permitted, used or operated in any one store, place,
location or premises of the type generally known as a candy store,
grocery store, luncheonette, delicatessen or neighborhood general
retail business store.
B. All coin-operated or other type of pool or billiard tables are specifically
prohibited from any of the stores or locations referred to in Subsection
A above.
C. Not more than a total of five machines or devices regulated by this
article shall be permitted, used or operated in any store, place, location
or premises of the type generally known as a "tavern." [Amended
3-22-1983 by Ord. No. MC 2691]
D. An amusement device arcade shall be subject to the following
regulations, which shall be in addition to any other regulations imposed
by this article: [Added 3-22-1983 by Ord. No. MC 2691]
(1) At least one qualified attendant over the age of 18 shall be present
at all times when the business is open; any arcade having more
than 20 devices shall have at least two such attendants.
§ 229-12 IRVINGTON CODE § 229-14
1:274
(2) Amusement devices shall not be operated after 9:00 p.m. and
before 9:00 a.m. [Amended 2-23-1993 by Ord. No. MC 2975110]
(3) Off-street parking shall be for at least one motor vehicle for each
six devices or such off-street parking as is required by Article VIII
of the Zoning Ordinance,111 whichever is greater.
(4) No arcade shall be located within 750 feet of another arcade. The
distance shall be measured from the nearest entrance of the
existing establishment to the nearest entrance of the premises
where another arcade is sought to be located along the route that a
pedestrian would normally walk.
(5) No arcade shall be located within 150 feet of a residential
premises.
(6) No arcade shall be located in a premises any portion of which is
used for residential purposes.
(7) Devices located in an arcade shall be subject to the following
requirements:
(a) Each device shall be located at least 10 feet from the
entranceway to the premises in which located and placed so
that it does not obstruct or interfere with the free and
unfettered passage to and from the premises of patrons or
users of the premises.
(b) Each device shall have a free and unobstructed perimeter zone
or distance on each side of the device as follows:
[1] Front: a zone five feet in width wherein the user or users
may operate the machine and wherein others waiting to
operate or watching the operation of the device may stand.
[2] Sides: a zone 2 1/2 feet in width wherein those waiting to
operate or watching the operation may stand.
[3] Rear. No zone is required.
(c) The perimeter zone which is required hereunder for each
device shall not be encroached upon by the zone of any other
device.
(d) The number of devices which may be located in any arcade
shall be governed solely by the application of the foregoing
requirements to the physical space available.
110. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 79-14D(3), prohibiting persons under
16 years of age from being on the premises after 10:00 p.m., which immediately followed
this subsection.
111. Editor's Note: See Ch. 650, Zoning.
§ 229-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 229-14
1:275
§ 229-15. Using machines for gambling.
Any operator or licensee of any device or machine within the purview of this
article who shall knowingly and wilfully permit, use or permit to be used any
of the machines licensed under this article for the purpose of gambling shall
be deemed to be guilty of a violation of this article and punishable therefor
as provided by this Code.
§ 229-16. Rewards and prizes; locating machines on certain
premises prohibited.
§ 229-17. Locating machines near schools and houses of worship.
[Amended 9-9-1980 by Ord. No. MC 2614]
(8) No operator of an arcade shall permit the consumption of alcoholic
beverages on the premises nor any activity which creates an undue
amount of noise or creates or tends to create a danger of a breach
of peace to occur. In the event that an arcade is located within a
premises having a license for the sale or consumption of alcoholic
beverages, the operator shall not permit or allow the consumption
of such beverages within the perimeter zone established in
Subsection D(7)(b) hereinabove.
(9) Nothing herein shall be construed so as to permit an arcade in any
zoning district in which such use is not permitted.
A. Any licensee and any owner, possessor or any person in control or
charge of any place or location where any machine or device regulated
by this article is located who shall offer to, or who shall, pay any reward,
gift, prize or merchandise to any person using or operating such
machine or device, shall be deemed to be guilty of a violation of this
article and shall be punishable therefor as provided by this Code.
B. No such machine or device shall be placed in any location where the
possessor thereof or the person in control or charge thereof has been
convicted of a crime, or where such person has been convicted of any
offense under the Disorderly Persons Act112 or against any provision of
this Code or other Town ordinance if such offense was one of gambling.
In the event that any such person, after the location of such machine or
device, shall be convicted of a crime or shall be convicted of any offense
under the Disorderly Persons Act or against any provision of this Code
or other Town ordinance if the offense was one of gambling, the
licensee shall forthwith, upon notice of such conviction, remove such
machine or device from such location. Failure to do so shall be
considered sufficient cause for the revocation of the license of the
licensee.
112. Editor's Note: The Disorderly Persons Act (N.J.S.A. 2A:170-1 et seq.) was repealed by
Chapter 95 of the Laws of 1978. See now the Code of Criminal Justice (N.J.S.A. 2C:1-1 et
seq.).
§ 229-14 IRVINGTON CODE § 229-17
1:276
§ 229-18. Notice to be displayed on machines. [Amended 9-9-1980
by Ord. No. MC 2614; 3-22-1983 by Ord. No. MC 2691]
All machines and devices licensed under this article shall contain a notice
displayed on a prominent place thereon in full view of the player, in form
approved by the Director of Revenue and Finance, declaring that such
machine is not to be used for gambling purposes, that no reward, gift, prize
or merchandise may be given to or by any person in connection with the
play or operation of such machine or device, the hours when the machine
may be operated and the ages of the persons permitted to operate same.
§ 229-19. Restrictions on minors. [Amended 9-9-1980 by Ord. No.
MC 2614; 3-22-1983 by Ord. No. MC 2691]
No person shall permit the playing of an automatic amusement device by a
minor under the age of 18 years during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
when the public or private schools are in session.
§ 229-20. Violations and penalties; schedule of fines. [Added
9-13-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3582113]
A. Except for the locations referred to in § 229-14C above, no machine or
device regulated by the provisions of this article shall be permitted,
used, placed, maintained, operated or licensed in any location or
premises located within 200 feet of any school.
B. No automatic amusement device may be operated within 200 feet of
any house of worship. The distances referred to shall be measured from
the nearest entrance of the premises wherein the device is located to
the nearest entrance of the house of worship along the route that a
pedestrian would normally walk. [Added 3-22-1983 by Ord. No. MC
2691]
A. Except as otherwise provided in this article, the penalties for violations
of this article are as follows:
Section
Short
Description
1st
Offense
2nd
Offense
3rd
Offense
4th Offense
Maximum
Fine;
Court
Appearance
Required
§ 229-3 License
required
$250 $500 $750 $1,500
B. Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of a violation of any other
terms of this article shall be subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter
1, Article III, Penalties, of the Township Code.
113. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 229-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 229-20
1:277

ARTICLE II
Jukeboxes, Kiddie Carousels and Weighing Machines
[Adopted 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622 as Ch. 79, Art. II, of the
1981 Revised Code]
§ 229-21. Definitions. [Amended 9-9-1980 by Ord. No. MC 2614]
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
JUKEBOX or MUSIC BOX — Any music vending machine, contrivance or
device which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disk or key into
any slot, crevice or other opening, or by the payment of any price, operates
or may be operated for the emission of songs, music or similar amusement.
KIDDIE CAROUSEL — A mechanically or electrically operated device
containing a platform which revolves or agitates and on which are located
miniature wooden, metallic or plastic forms of horses or other objects for
the seating accommodation of children of tender years and who are charged
an admission fee or charge for receiving a ride thereon.
WEIGHING MACHINE — Any machine, device or contrivance containing a
platform which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disk or key
into any slot, crevice or other opening and the placing of an object or person
upon such platform, registers the weight of the object or person.
§ 229-22. License required. [Amended 9-9-1980 by Ord. No. MC
2614]
No person shall operate a kiddie carousel in the Town, and no person
shall distribute, locate or place, or continue to locate, place or distribute
or have in the possession of any person, owner, occupant, tenant, lessor,
lessee or licensee of any premises located in the Town where members of
the public at large are invited to enter or where members of a club, lodge
or association or their guests are invited to enter, any jukeboxes or music
boxes or weighing machines, without first having obtained from the Division
of Licensing of the Town a license to do so.
§ 229-23. Application for license.
Every person desiring to obtain a license as is provided for by this article
shall fill out and sign an application form to be furnished by the Division of
Licensing of the Town and deposit with such application the license fee as
fixed by this article.
§ 229-24. License fees. [Amended 3-25-1980 by Ord. No. MC 2601;
1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622; 3-22-1983 by Ord. No. MC 2691;
11-27-1984 by Ord. No. MC 2757; 8-11-1987 by Ord. No. MC 2834;
4-11-1989 by Ord. No. MC 2884; 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3027;
1-9-1996 by Ord. No. MC 3030; 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3134;
§ 229-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 229-24
1:279
8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by Ord. No. MC 3306;
12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413]
The annual fees for licenses pursuant to this article, which are fixed for the
purpose of revenue as well as for regulation and control, are as follows. In
the event, however, that a license is granted at a time when there is less
than six months of the license year to run, the license fee shall be prorated
accordingly.
§ 229-25. Term of license; nontransferable.
The licenses provided for by this article shall be for the period of one year
from the first day of February and shall not be transferable.
§ 229-26. Licenses to be posted.
The licenses provided for by this article shall be posted permanently and
conspicuously at the location of the machine.
§ 229-27. Revocation of license.
Every license issued under this article is subject to the right of the Town,
which is hereby expressly reserved, to revoke the same should the licensee,
directly or indirectly, permit the licensed article to be used in such a way
as to be inimical to the health, morals or safety of the inhabitants or the
citizens of the Town or violate any of the terms of this article. However,
before a license shall be revoked, there shall be a hearing before the
Director having jurisdiction over the Division of Licensing, who shall set a
time and place for such a hearing and give written notice of such hearing,
by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least five days in
advance of the date of such hearing. Such notice shall be addressed to the
licensee at the address stated in the application signed by such licensee.
§ 229-28. Operating unlicensed devices.
If the Division of Licensing shall discover that any kiddie carousel,
jukeboxes or music boxes, coin-operated skill amusement machines or
weighing machines are being operated without a license or are being
used for a purpose which is destructive of the health, morals or safety of
the citizens of the Town, such machine may be seized and impounded by
the police or the person operating such machine may be charged with a
violation of this article.
A. The annual fee for a license for a kiddie carousel shall be $141 initially
and the sum of $30 per carousel.
B. The annual fee for a jukebox or music box shall be $65 per machine.
C. The annual fee for a license for weighing machines shall be $68 per
machine.
§ 229-24 IRVINGTON CODE § 229-29
1:280
§ 229-29. Violations and penalties; schedule of fines. [Added
9-13-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3582114]
A. Except as otherwise provided in this article, the penalties for violations
of this article are as follows:
Section
Short
Description
1st
Offense
2nd
Offense
3rd
Offense
4th Offense
Maximum
Fine;
Court
Appearance
Required
§ 229-22 License
required
$250 $500 $750 $1,500
B. Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of a violation of any other
terms of this article shall be subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter
1, Article III, Penalties, of the Township Code.
114. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 229-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 229-29
1:281

ARTICLE III
Vending Machines Generally
[Adopted 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622 as Ch. 79, Art. III, of the
1981 Revised Code]
§ 229-30. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COIN-OPERATED VENDING MACHINE — Any device or piece of
mechanical or electrical equipment which, upon the insertion of a
designated piece of metallic or other currency of the United States of
America into a slot or place on such machine, device or equipment, activates
certain mechanisms resulting in the dispensing of or making available to the
person inserting such currency into such machine, device or equipment a
measure of nonalcoholic beverage (except milk) or a container of cigarettes,
one or more cigars or a supply of other form of tobacco, or a container or
measure of candy, nuts, popcorn, chewing gum, ice cream or frozen ices.
§ 229-31. License required for distributors.
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, place or locate, or to
continue to have placed, located or in the possession of any person who
is the owner, occupant, tenant, lessor, lessee or licensee of any premises
located in the Town, a coin-operated vending machine for dispensing
nonalcoholic beverages (exclusive of milk), cigarettes, cigars or other form
of tobacco, or candy, nuts, popcorn or chewing gum, without first having
obtained a distributor's license from the Division of Licensing of the Town.
§ 229-32. Application for distributor's license.
A separate application for a distributor's license for each coin-operated
vending machine, as defined by § 229-30, shall be filed with the Division
of Licensing of the Town, showing the name of the applicant, his post
office address and answers to other data required by such application. Such
application shall be on forms furnished by the Division of Licensing of the
Town.
§ 229-33. Distributor's license fees. [Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord.
No. MC 2622]
A. License fees for a distributor's license are hereby fixed as follows,
which fees shall cover the license year beginning February 1.
[Amended 3-22-1983 by Ord. No. MC 2691; 11-27-1984 by Ord.
No. MC 2757; 8-11-1987 by Ord. No. MC 2834; 4-11-1989 by Ord.
No. MC 2884; 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3027; 1-9-1996 by Ord.
No. MC 3030; 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3134; 8-14-2001 by
Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by Ord. No. MC 3306; 12-29-2009
by Ord. No. MC 3413]
§ 229-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 229-33
1:283
§ 229-34. Distributor's license nontransferable; contents.
The distributor's license required by this article shall not be transferable,
and it shall designate the location and number or other form of identity of
the machine licensed.
§ 229-35. Renewal of distributor's license; removal of unlicensed
machines.
(1) The fee for a distributor's license for coin-operated machines which
require the insertion of moneys in order that the products
contained therein or a service be dispensed shall be $154 per
machine per year or any part thereof, except that in the event of a
bulk vending machine, the fee for a distributor's license shall be
$15 per item vended. For the purpose of this section, a "bulk
vending machine" shall be defined as a mechanically operated coin
machine which requires the insertion of a single coin to dispense a
single item or a single service and which is the kind usually
associated with a stanchion support.115
(2) The fee for a distributor's license for coin-operated vending
machines which require the insertion of less than $0.07 in order
that the products contained therein be dispensed shall be $12 per
machine per year or any part thereof.
B. Such license fees are fixed for the purpose of raising revenue and for
regulation and control and shall be payable with the filing of the
application. If the application is rejected, the fee shall be returned to
the applicant.
A. If any licensee shall intend to renew his license under §§ 229-31 to
229-37 for a year beyond that for which it was granted, such licensee
shall advise the Division of Licensing not later than 60 days prior to the
expiration date of the license.
B. If the license is not renewed or if the license is revoked prior to its
expiration date, such licensee shall take all necessary proceedings to
remove such coin-operated vending machine, as defined by § 229-30,
from the Town within five days or, in default thereof, shall be presumed
to have abandoned such machine to the Town, and by the acceptance of
such license the licensee hereby agrees that under such circumstances
aforesaid the Town may thereupon cause such machine to be destroyed
or otherwise disposed of.
C. The five days' period above referred to shall run from the expiration
date of the license or from 2:00 a.m. of the date following that on which
notice of revocation was sent, registered or certified mail, to the
licensee at the address stated in the application for the license.
115. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 229-33 IRVINGTON CODE § 229-36
1:284
§ 229-36. Licensees to cooperate with Town officers; revocation of
license.
§ 229-37. Prohibiting unlicensed machines to be located on
premises.
No person shall permit the location or placement or continue to have
located or placed upon any premises in the Town owned, occupied, rented
or leased, or to which premises such person shall have the right to
possession thereof, of a coin-operated vending machine, as defined by
§ 229-30, for the purpose of operation and use by the public at large or by
persons invited or having a right to be upon or in such premises where such
coin-operated vending machine is located, unless the person who is about
to place or who shall have distributed or placed such machine upon such
premises shall obtain or has obtained from the Division of Licensing of the
Town a distributor's license covering such machine under the provisions of
this article.
§ 229-38. Premises occupation license required.
No person shall permit the location or placement or continue to have
located or placed upon any premises in the Town owned, occupied, rented
or leased, or to which premises such person shall have the right to
possession thereof, of a coin-operated vending machine, as defined by
§ 229-30, for the purpose of operation and use thereof by the public at
large or by persons invited or having a right to be upon or in the premises
where such coin-operated vending machine is located, unless such person
so owning, occupying, renting, leasing or having the possession of such
A. The licensee of a license granted pursuant to the provisions of §§ 229-31
to 229-37 shall cooperate at all times with the person in charge of the
Division of Licensing and other officers of the Town when requested to
do so in order to obtain information or knowledge which will enable
them to safeguard the health, welfare, morals and safety of the
residents of the Town as the same may be affected in anywise by such
coin-operated vending machines covered by this article.
B. If any such licensee shall refuse to render such cooperation, the license
issued to such licensee shall be revoked. However, before a license can
be revoked for such cause, a hearing shall be held by the Director
having jurisdiction over the Division of Licensing to determine if the
licensee has been guilty of such a charge. Written notice of such a
hearing shall be given to the licensee at least three days prior to the
date set for the hearing, addressed to the licensee at the address stated
in his application and sent registered or certified mail, stating the time,
date, place and the nature of the hearing.
C. Also, such license shall be revoked upon proof of circumstances or
conditions which are inimical to the health, welfare, morals or safety of
the residents of the Town, but only after a hearing afforded to the
licensee as provided for in this section.
§ 229-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 229-38
1:285
premises where such coin-operated vending machine is located shall have
applied for and obtained a premises occupation license for such machine.
§ 229-39. Application for premises occupation license.
Application forms for premises occupation licenses required by this article
shall be furnished by the Division of Licensing of the Town upon request,
and each applicant for such a license shall fully supply all information
requested by such application form.
§ 229-40. Premises occupation license fee. [Amended 1-13-1981 by
Ord. No. MC 2622; 3-22-1983 by Ord. No. MC 2691; 11-27-1984 by
Ord. No. MC 2757; 8-11-1987 by Ord. No. MC 2834; 4-11-1989 by
Ord. No. MC 2884; 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3027; 1-9-1996 by
Ord. No. MC 3030; 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3134; 8-14-2001 by
Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by Ord. No. MC 3306; 12-29-2009 by
Ord. No. MC 3413116]
A premises occupation license fee for each machine on the premises
referred to in this article in which the applicant has such interest is $3 per
year. Such license fee is for the purpose of both regulation and revenue
and shall be payable with the filing of the application. If the application is
rejected, the fee shall be returned to the applicant.
§ 229-41. Term of premises occupation license; nontransferable.
The premises occupation license required by this article shall be valid for
the period of one year from the first day of February of the year in which
the license is granted. Such license shall not be transferable.
§ 229-42. Renewal of premises occupation license; removal of
unlicensed machines.
If any licensee under §§ 229-38 to 229-43 shall intend to renew his license
for a year beyond that for which it was granted, such licensee shall advise
the Division of Licensing, in writing, not later than 60 days prior to
expiration of license. If the license is not renewed, the licensee possessing
such expired license shall take all necessary proceedings to remove such
coin-operated vending machine, as defined by § 229-30, from the premises
aforementioned within five days.
§ 229-43. Revocation of premises occupation license.
A premises occupation license, once granted, may thereafter be revoked
after hearing, on three days' written notice to the licensee sent to the
licensee at the address stated in the application, which hearing shall be
before the Director having jurisdiction over the Division of Licensing, but
such revocation shall be based upon grounds that a continuance of the
license would be inimical to the health, welfare, morals or safety of the
116. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 229-38 IRVINGTON CODE § 229-43
1:286
residents of the Town or upon violations of this article, or that the
distributor's license covering such machine has expired or has been
revoked.
§ 229-44. Violations and penalties; schedule of fines. [Added
9-13-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3582117]
A. Except as otherwise provided in this article, the penalties for violations
of this article are as follows:
Section
Short
Description
1st
Offense
2nd
Offense
3rd
Offense
4th Offense
Maximum
Fine;
Court
Appearance
Required
§ 229-31 License
required for
distributors
$250 $500 $750 $1,500
B. Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of a violation of any other
terms of this article shall be subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter
1, Article III, Penalties, of the Township Code.
117. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 229-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 229-44
1:287

ARTICLE IV
Food and Beverage Vending Machines
[Adopted 8-13-1974 by Ord. No. MC 2419 (Ch. 79, Art. IV, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 229-45. Adoption of standards.118
This article adopts by reference N.J.A.C. 8:24, Sanitation in Retail Food
Establishments and Food and Beverage Vending Machines, effective
January 2, 2007 (see N.J.A.C. 8:24-4.12, Vending machines).
§ 229-46. Permits and licenses required.119
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether as principal, agent, clerk or
employee, either for himself, any other person, any body corporate, as
officer of any corporation or otherwise, to:
§ 229-47. Permit and license fees. [Amended 3-25-1980 by Ord. No.
MC 2601; 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622]
A. Engage in the operation of one or more machines or devices offered for
public use which upon insertion of a coin, coins or token or by other
means, dispense unit servings of food or beverages, either in bulk or
package, without the necessity of replenishing the machine or device
between each vending operation, without first having applied for and
procured a permit from the Division of Licensing of the Town, or
without complying with all applicable provisions of this article or
N.J.A.C. 8:24, Sanitation in Retail Food Establishments and Food and
Beverage Vending Machines.
B. Maintain or permit to be maintained on or in any location in this
municipality one or more machines or devices offered for public use
which, upon insertion of a coin, coins or token or by other means,
dispense unit servings of food or beverages, either in bulk or package,
without the necessity of replenishing the machine or device between
each vending operation, without having first applied for and procured a
license for each such machine or device from the Division of Licensing
of the Town, or without complying with all applicable provisions of this
article and N.J.A.C. 8:24, Sanitation in Retail Food Establishments and
Food and Beverage Vending Machines.
A. The fees for permits and licenses required for the vending machines or
devices dispensing food or beverages set forth in § 229-46 hereof and to
be paid annually to the Town, are as follows: [Amended 3-22-1983 by
Ord. No. MC 2691; 11-27-1984 by Ord. No. MC 2757; 8-11-1987
by Ord. No. MC 2834; 4-11-1989 by Ord. No. MC 2884;
12-12-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3027; 1-9-1996 by Ord. No. MC 3030;
118. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
119. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 229-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 229-47
1:289
§ 229-48. Application for permits and licenses; issuance;
nontransferable.120
Application for and issuance of permits and licenses referred to in §§ 229-46
and 229-47 hereof shall be made in conformity with the applicable
provisions of the N.J.A.C. 8:24 and this article, as adopted, amended or
supplemented. Such permits and licenses are not transferable.
§ 229-49. Certifications before issuance.
Before any applicant shall be entitled to receive such permit or license
provided for herein:
12-14-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3134; 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC
3176; 10-12-2005 by Ord. No. MC 3306; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No.
MC 3413]
(1) The distributor's permit fee for each food and beverage vending
machine other than milk vending machines shall be $172 initially
and $72 per year thereafter.
(2) The location license fee for each food and beverage vending
machine other than milk vending machines shall be $10 per year or
any part thereof.
B. Permit and license fees shall be paid to the Division of Licensing
aforesaid at the time of and with the filing of the application therefor as
provided in § 229-48.
A. The Health Officer of the Town or his duly authorized representative
shall certify that the granting of a permit or license at the location
applied for, for a food or beverage vending machine, will not violate any
health regulation or provision of this article, N.J.A.C. 8:24, the
provisions of this Code or any other ordinance of the Town or applicable
federal, state or county regulation or law, and that such machine or
device has been inspected by such Health Officer or his representative
and is unobjectionable from the viewpoint of health and sanitation.121
B. The Director of Public Safety and the Fire Chief of the Public Safety
Department of the Town shall certify respectively that the placing of
such vending machine or device at the location mentioned in the
application of applicant is unobjectionable from the viewpoint of
welfare, safety, traffic and fire hazards. [Amended 10-14-2015 by
Ord. No. MC 3553; 1-12-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3562]
C. The Division of Building Inspection of the Town shall certify that the
location of such machine or device complies with the Building Code,122
120. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
121. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
122. Editor's Note: See Ch. 240, Uniform Construction Code.
§ 229-47 IRVINGTON CODE § 229-49
1:290
§ 229-50. Removal of unlicensed machines.
If the permit or license of any food or beverage vending machine or device
as defined in § 229-46 hereof is not renewed or shall be revoked prior to
its expiration date, such permittee or licensee shall take all necessary steps
to remove such coin-operated food and beverage machine or device from
the premises where same is located and from the Town within five days
of such expiration date or date of revocation of such permit or license,
or, in default thereof, shall be presumed to have abandoned such machine
or device to the Town, and by acceptance of such permit or license the
permittee or licensee agrees that under such circumstances aforesaid the
Town may thereupon cause such machine or device to be destroyed or
otherwise disposed of.
§ 229-51. Cooperation with Town officers; revocation.
§ 229-52. Suspension, revocation or reinstatement.124
Permits and licenses issued under the authority of this article and N.J.A.C.
8:24, Sanitation in Retail Food Establishments and Food and Beverage
the Zoning Ordinance,123 other provisions of this Code and other
applicable ordinances of the municipality.
A. Holders of the permit or license granted pursuant to the provisions of
this article shall cooperate with the License Clerk of the Town and with
the person in charge of such Division of Licensing and other officers of
the Town when requested to do so in order to obtain information or
knowledge which will enable them to safeguard the health, welfare,
morals and safety of the residents of the Town as the same may be
affected in anywise by such coin-operated food and beverage vending
machines covered by this article and the provisions of this Code.
B. If any such permittee or licensee shall refuse to render such
cooperation, the permit or license issued to such permittee or licensee
shall be revoked after a hearing held by the Director of the Department
of Health, upon a finding of guilt of such charge or charges. Written
notice of such hearing shall be given to such permittee or licensee by
letter addressed to such permittee or licensee at the address stated in
the application at least 10 days prior to the date set for hearing, by
certified mail, stating the date, time, place and nature of the hearing.
[Amended 9-28-1982 by Ord. No. MC 2668; 2-13-1985 by Ord.
No. MC 2769; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord.
No. MC 3511]
C. Such permit or license shall be revoked after such hearing upon proof
of circumstances or conditions which are inimical to the health,
welfare, morals or safety of the residents of the Town.
123. Editor's Note: See Ch. 650, Zoning.
124. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 229-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 229-52
1:291
Vending Machines, may be suspended, revoked or reinstated by the health
authority, as defined in N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.5, after a hearing for cause.
§ 229-53. Interstate commerce.125
No provision of this article or N.J.A.C. 8:24 shall be applied so as to impose
any unlawful burden on either interstate commerce or any activity of the
state or federal governments.
§ 229-54. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord. No.
MC 2622126]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or N.J.A.C.
8:24 shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in the general
penalty provisions as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article III.
125. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
126. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 229-52 IRVINGTON CODE § 229-54
1:292
ARTICLE V
Laundry Machines Located in Apartment Buildings
[Adopted 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622 as Ch. 79, Art. V, of the
1981 Revised Code]
§ 229-55. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COIN-OPERATED WASHING OR DRYING MACHINE — Any device or piece
of mechanical or electrical equipment which, upon the insertion of a
designated piece of metallic or other currency of the United States of
America into a slot or place located on such machine, device or equipment,
activates certain mechanisms as a result of which there is effected the
washing or drying of clothing, wearing apparel and other washable items.
§ 229-56. License required.
No owner, lessee or landlord of a dwelling or apartment house located in the
Town containing more than one family residing therein shall place or permit
to be placed or continue to permit to be placed upon such premises for
use by the tenants or occupants residing therein any coin-operated washing
or drying machine, as defined by this article, until such owner, lessee or
landlord shall have obtained a license permitting the use and operation of
such machine from the Division of Licensing of the Town.
§ 229-57. Application for license.
Application forms for licenses required by this article shall be furnished
by the Division of Licensing upon request. Each applicant for a license
provided for by this article shall answer and otherwise fill out such
application form.
§ 229-58. Prerequisite certificates.
Prior to the granting of any license provided for by this article, there shall
be certified by the Health Officer and the Plumbing Inspector of the Town
the fact that such machine is approved by each of them as complying
with the health regulations and ordinances as well as the Plumbing and
Sanitation Code of the Town.127
§ 229-59. License fee; term. [Amended 3-25-1980 by Ord. No. MC
2601; 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622; 3-22-1983 by Ord. No. MC
2691; 11-27-1984 by Ord. No. MC 2757; 8-11-1987 by Ord. No. MC
2834; 4-11-1989 by Ord. No. MC 2884; 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. MC
3027; 1-9-1996 by Ord. No. MC 3030; 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. MC
127. Editor's Note: The code referred to was superseded by the adoption of the State Uniform
Construction Code Act, L.1975, c.217; N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 229-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 229-59
1:293
3134; 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by Ord. No. MC
3306; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413]
A license fee for each coin-operated washing or drying machine, as defined
by § 229-55, is $22. Such license fee is for the purpose of both regulation
and revenue and shall be payable with the filing of the application. If
the application is rejected, the fee shall be returned to the applicant. The
license shall be for a period of one year or any part thereof from the first
day of April of the year in which the license is granted.
§ 229-60. Renewal of license; discontinuance of use of unlicensed
machines.
If any licensee under this article shall intend to renew his license for a year
beyond that for which it was granted, such licensee shall advise the Division
of Licensing, in writing, not later than March 1 of the year in which the
license expires. If the license is not renewed, the licensee possessing such
expired license shall take all necessary proceedings to discontinue the use
of such machine.
§ 229-61. Revocation of license.
A license provided for under this article, once granted, may thereafter be
revoked after a hearing on two days' written notice to the licensee, sent to
the licensee at the address stated in the application, which hearing shall
be before the Director having jurisdiction over the Division of Licensing,
but such revocation shall be based upon grounds that a continuance of the
license would be inimical to the health, welfare, morals or safety of the
residents of the Town or upon violations of the terms of this article.
§ 229-62. Applicability to launderettes.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to apply to the licensing
of launderettes under the provisions of Chapter 369, Laundromats, or other
ordinances of the Town.
§ 229-59 IRVINGTON CODE § 229-62
1:294
Chapter 234
CONDOMINIUM AND COOPERATIVE CONVERSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing standards — See Ch. 355. Rent control — See Ch. 472.
§ 234-1. Designation of administrative agency and fees. [Amended
12-12-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3027; 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3134;
8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by Ord. No. MC 3306;
12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413]
The Township Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to act as the
administrative officer for the purposes as set forth in the New Jersey
Condominium Act128 and the Senior Citizen and Disabled Protected Tenancy
Act,129 and the rules and regulations enacted pursuant thereto, and is
hereby authorized to charge the owner of a building being converted a
fee of $166, for each dwelling unit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.35, which
fee shall accompany the notice of intention and tenant list submitted to
and processed by the Township Clerk. This fee shall apply to any and all
applications completed after the effective date of this chapter.
§ 234-2. Appeals.
A. Any person or party aggrieved by a determination of said administrative
officer shall be entitled to an administrative hearing before the
Township Attorney or his designee.
B. All notices of determinations issued by the Township Clerk as said
administrative officer shall advise the recipient of his/her right to a
hearing and of the ten-day time limit for the filing of an administrative
hearing request and shall give the name and address of the Township
Attorney as the person to whom all applications for administrative
hearings are to be made.
C. Application for such administrative hearing shall be made in writing
and shall state the portions of the determination disagreed with and
shall be delivered to the Township Attorney or his designee within 10
days after receipt by the aggrieved person or party of notice of such
determination. Each notice of appeal will be accompanied by a fee of
$227. [Amended 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3027; 12-14-1999 by
Ord. No. MC 3134; 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005
by Ord. No. MC 3306; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413]
128. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:8B-1 et seq.
129. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.22 et seq.
§ 229-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-2
1:295
Chapter 240
CONSTRUCTION CODE, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Moving or demolition of buildings — See Ch.
200.
Fences — See Ch. 294.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 307.
Housing standards — See Ch. 355.
Pest control — See Ch. 449.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 460.
Subdivision and site plan review — See Ch.
560.
Sunday construction — See Ch. 566.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 571.
Zoning — See Ch. 650.
D. Administrative hearings shall be held within 10 days of the filing of the
application therefor, except that the Township Attorney or his designee
may hold hearings at a later date due to extenuating circumstances, at
the sole discretion of the officer hearing said appeal.
E. Notice of the date, time and place of each and every administrative
hearing shall be given by the Township Attorney or his designee to all
known parties in interest, all of whom shall have the opportunity to
testify and present evidence and to examine adverse witnesses and
evidence, including, without limitation, application forms and
supporting documentation previously submitted to either the Township
Clerk as the administrative officer or the Township Attorney or his
designee as the hearing officer.
F. A sound recording of the administrative hearing shall be made and a
transcript obtainable, at the expense of the requesting party, in
accordance with the rules applicable to municipal courts.
G. Within 10 days of the hearing, the Township Attorney or his designee
shall issue a written final decision to all said parties in interest either
upholding or reversing the original determination, which decision shall
state the reasons therefor.
§ 234-2 IRVINGTON CODE § 234-2
1:296
ARTICLE I
Enforcing Agency; Jurisdiction; Fees
[Adopted 2-22-1977 by Ord. No. MC 2485 (Ch. 82 of the 1981
Revised Code)]
§ 240-1. Establishment of enforcing agency.
§ 240-2. Jurisdiction of County Board of Appeals.
A. There is hereby established in the Town of Irvington a State Uniform
Construction Code Enforcing Agency to be known as "Irvington
Construction Code Agency," consisting of a Construction Official,
Building Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode Official, Electrical
Subcode Official, Fire Protection Subcode Official and such other
subcode officials for such additional subcodes as the Commissioner of
the Department of Community Affairs, State of New Jersey, shall
hereafter adopt as part of the State Uniform Construction Code. The
Construction Official shall be the chief administrator of the enforcing
agency.
B. Each official position created in Subsection A hereof shall be filled by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, as
amended,130 and N.J.A.C. 5:23; provided that in lieu of any particular
subcode official, an on-site inspection agency may be retained by
contract pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position
may be held by the same person, provided that such person is qualified
pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, and N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold each such
position.
C. The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency
at one office location, except for emergencies and unforeseen or
unavoidable circumstances.
A. Appeals shall be made to the Essex County Construction Board of
Appeals from decisions by the enforcing agency established by this
article or because of the refusal of the enforcing agency to grant an
application or because of the refusal to act upon an application for a
construction permit by the enforcing agency or when the enforcing
agency makes any other decision pursuant to or related to the State
Uniform Construction Code Act131 or the enforcement of said code or
the enforcement of this article.
B. Appeals to the Essex County Construction Board of Appeals shall be in
writing, and a copy of the appeal, together with all of the documents,
shall be served upon the Town's enforcing agency simultaneously with
the service of the appeal to the Essex County Construction Board of
Appeals.
130. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
131. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 240-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-2
1:297
§ 240-3. Construction permit and subcode fees. [Amended
1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622; 4-22-1986 by Ord. No. MC 2810;
8-11-1987 by Ord. No. MC 2834; 10-11-1989 by Ord. No. MC 2890;
5-19-1992 by Ord. No. MC 2947; 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3027;
6-15-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3119; 9-28-2004 by Ord. No. MC 3273;
9-27-2005 by Ord. No. MC 3301; 4-5-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3564]
The fee schedule for issuance of permits (Construction Department) shall
be as follows:
C. The procedure for filing the appeal is set forth in N.J.S.A. 52:27D-127b.
A. Plan review fee. The fee for plan review shall be 25% of the amount to
be charged for all permits being issued. This fee is nonrefundable.
B. The basic construction permit fee shall be the sum of the computed on
the basis of the volume or cost of construction, the number of plumbing
fixtures and pieces of equipment, the number of electrical fixtures and
devices, the number of sprinklers, standpipes and detectors (smoke and
heat), at the unit rates provided herein, plus any special fees. The
minimum permit fee for a basic construction permit covering any or all
of the building, plumbing, electric and/or fire protection work shall be
$75.
C. Building volume or cost. The permit fees for new construction or
alteration are as follows:
(1) Permit fees for new construction shall be based upon the volume of
the structure. Volume shall be computed in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.28. The new construction fee shall be in the amount
of $0.0395 per cubic foot of volume for buildings and structures of
all use groups and types of construction as classified and defined in
Articles 3 and 4 of the Building Subcode. The minimum fee for new
construction shall be $300.
(2) Permit fees for renovations, alterations and repairs shall be based
upon the estimated cost of the work. The fee shall be in the amount
of $30 per $1,000. From $50,001 to and including $100,000, the
additional fee shall be in the amount of $24 per $1,000 of the
estimated cost above $50,000. Above $100,000, the additional fee
shall be in the amount of $18 per $1,000 of the estimated cost
above $100,000. For the purpose of determining estimated cost,
the applicant shall submit to the Construction Official such cost
data as may be available produced by the architect or engineer of
record or by a recognized estimating firm or by the contractor. A
bona fide contractor's bid, if available, shall be submitted. The
Construction Official shall make the final decision regarding
estimated cost. Permit fees for additions shall be computed on the
same basis as for new construction for the added portion, except
that the minimum fee for an addition shall be $100.
§ 240-2 IRVINGTON CODE § 240-3
1:298
(3) Tank abandonment. In-ground abandonment of any tank: $300.
(4) Tank removal: $200.
(5) Permit fees for combination renovations and additions shall be
computed as the sum of the fees computed separately in
accordance with Subsection C(1) and (2) above.
(6) In order to provide for the training and certification and technical
support programs required by the act, the enforcing agency shall
collect a surcharge fee to be based upon the volume of new
construction within the Township. Said fee shall be accounted for
and forwarded to the Department of Community Affairs. This fee
shall be the amount as set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.19(b). For the
purpose of calculating this fee, volume shall be computed in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.28.
D. Plumbing fixtures and equipment.
(1) For the purpose of computing permit fees:
(a) "Plumbing fixtures" shall include, but not be limited to, stacks,
lavatories, kitchen sinks, slop sinks, sinks, urinals, water
closets, bathtubs, shower stalls, laundry tubs, floor drains,
washing machine connections and similar fixtures.
(b) "Plumbing appurtenances" shall include, but not be limited to,
devices, a manufactured device or an on-the-job assembly of
component parts, which adjunct to the basic piping system and
plumbing fixtures, pressure-reducing valves, backflow
prevention devices, backwater valves, vacuum breakers,
grease traps, interceptors and similar devices.
(c) "Plumbing appliances" shall include, but not be limited to, hot
water heaters, tankless heaters, heat exchangers, water
storage talks, solar panels, water pressure booster systems,
sump pumps, dishwashers, ice makers, instant hot water coils,
sewerage ejectors, garbage disposal units, sterilizers and
aspirators.
(2) The permit fee for the installation or replacement of a plumbing
fixture shall be $20 for each plumbing fixture. The permit fee for
hot water boilers, water-cooled air-conditioning units and steam
boilers shall be $75.
(3) The permit fee for the installation or replacement of a plumbing
appurtenance and/or special device shall be $75 per plumbing
appurtenance and/or special device. Exception: The fee for
backflow preventers that do not require ongoing inspection shall be
$25.
(4) The permit fee for the installation or replacement of a plumbing
appliance shall be $75.
§ 240-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-3
1:299
(5) The permit fee for the installation of a house or building sewer and/
or water service pipe is $75.
(6) The permit fee for the installation of a lawn sprinkler system shall
be $10 for each sprinkler head.
(7) The permit fee for the installation or replacement of subsoil drains
shall be $75.
(8) The permit fee for gas piping is $75.
(9) The permit fee for the installation or replacement of oil lines and/or
oil tank piping shall be $75.
(10) The permit fee for fuel connection shall be $20.
(11) Gasoline pump installation is $75.
(12) The minimum fee for any permit issued for the plumbing subcode
shall be $75.
E. Electrical fixtures and devices. The permit fees shall be as follows:
(1) From one to 50 receptacles or fixtures, the fee shall be in the
amount of $75. For each 25 receptacles or fixtures in addition to
this, the fee shall be in the amount of $20. For the purpose of
computing this fee, receptacles or fixtures shall include lighting
outlets, wall switches, fluorescent fixtures, convenience
receptacles or similar fixtures and motors or devices of less than
one horsepower or one kilowatt.
(2) For each motor or electric device greater than one horsepower and
less than or equal to 10 horsepower and for transformers and
generators greater than one kilowatt and less than or equal to 10
kilowatts, the fee shall be $20.
(3) For each motor or electrical device greater than 10 horsepower
and less than or equal to 50 horsepower, for each service panel,
service entrance or subpanel less than or equal to 200 amperes and
for all transformers and generators greater than 10 kilowatts and
less than or equal to 45 kilowatts, the fee shall be $75.
(4) For each motor or electrical device greater than 50 horsepower
and less than or equal to 100 horsepower, for each service panel,
service entrance or subpanel greater than 200 amperes and less
than or equal to 1,000 amperes and for transformers and
generators greater than 45 kilowatts and less than or equal to
112.5 kilowatts, the fee shall be $125.
(5) For each motor or electrical device greater than 100 horsepower,
for each service panel, service entrance or subpanel greater than
1,000 amperes, and for each transformer or generator greater than
112.5 kilowatts, the fee shall be $550.
§ 240-3 IRVINGTON CODE § 240-3
1:300
(6) For the purpose of computing these permit fees, "motors" includes
all motors except those in plug-in heating, cooking or other devices
consuming or generating electrical current.
(7) The minimum fee for any permit issued for the electrical subcode
shall be $75.
(8) For in-ground swimming pools and spas bonding, one receptacle,
one motor, the fee shall be $125. Hydro massage tubs, etc.: $50.
(9) The minimum fee for any electric permit issued shall be $75.
F. Fire protection and other hazardous equipment. Sprinklers, standpipes,
detectors (smoke and heat), pre-engineered suppression systems, gas
and oil-fired appliances not connected to the plumbing system, kitchen
exhaust systems, incinerators and crematoriums.
(1) The fee for 20 or fewer heads or detectors shall be $75. For 21 to
and including 100 heads or detectors, the fee shall be $150. For
101 to and including 200 heads or detectors, the fee shall be $250.
For 201 to and including 400 heads or detectors, the fee shall be
$625. For 401 to and including 1,000 heads or detectors, the fee
shall be $975. In computing fees, each sprinkler head and each
detector shall be each counted as one.
(2) The fee for each standpipe shall be $350.
(3) The fee for each pre-engineered system shall be $150.
(4) The fee for each gas or oil-fired appliance not connected to the
plumbing system shall be $75.
(5) The fee for each kitchen exhaust system (commercial) shall be
$100.
(6) The fee for each incinerator shall be $600.
(7) The fee for each crematorium shall be $600.
(8) For each vapor recovery system, the fee shall be $150.
(9) For each fire pump, the fee shall be $75.
(10) The minimum fee for any fire permit issue shall be $75.
G. Elevator registration and inspection fees.
(1) Upon application for registration of an existing elevator, the owner
shall be responsible for all fees due the third-party inspection
agency; the owner shall also be responsible for the Township
administration fee of $50.
(2) For the installation of a new elevator: as required by agreement
with the third-party inspection agency, plus a Township
administration fee of 15%.
§ 240-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-3
1:301
H. Certificates and other permits. The fees are as follows:
(1) For one- or two-family residence (Use Group R-4 of the Building
Subcode) the fee shall be $300.
(2) For three-family residence and above, the fee shall be $400.
(3) For individual garages, the fee shall be $100.
(4) The fee for a permit to construct a sign shall be in the amount of $2
per square foot surface area of the sign, computed on one side only
for double-faced signs; the minimum fee shall be $100.
(5) Commercial properties.
(a) The fee shall be computed as follows:
1 to 1,000 square feet $100
1,001 to 2,000 square feet $150
2,001 to 3,000 square feet $175
3,001 to 4,000 square feet $200
4,001 to 5,000 square feet $225
(b) The following formula will be used to determine the inspection
fee for any structures over 5,000 square feet:
Sample: 23,000 square feet
Fee: 4 x 5,000 square feet = $900
1 x 3,000 square feet = $175
Total = $1,075
(6) The fee for a certificate of occupancy granted pursuant to a change
of use group shall be $400. The fee for a certificate of continued
occupancy shall be $300. (Four inspectors required going out for
this kind of inspection.)
(7) The fee for an application for a variation in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.10 shall be $250 for Class I structures and $75 for
Class 2 structures and Class 3 structures. The fee for resubmitting
of an application for a variation shall be $175 for Class I structures
and $25 for Class 2 and Class 3 structures.
(8) The fee for a plan review of a building for compliance under the
alternate systems and nondepletable energy source provisions of
the energy subcode shall be $250 for one- and two-family homes,
and for light commercial structures having the indoor temperature
controlled from a single point, and $500 for all other structures.
(9) The permit fee for asbestos and/or lead abatement removal from
any building or structure shall be $200. The certificate of
occupancy shall be $100.
§ 240-3 IRVINGTON CODE § 240-3
1:302
§ 240-4. Reports of Construction Official and enforcing agency;
surcharge fees.
§ 240-5. Establishment of fire limits.
(10) The permit fee for tents in excess of 900 square feet or more than
30 feet in any dimension shall be $100.
(11) The fee for a permit to erect a fence shall be $75 for a one- through
six-family residential application and $150 for business,
commercial, industrial and all other residential applications.
A. The Construction Official shall, with the advice of the subcode officials,
prepare and submit to the Municipal Council of the Town of Irvington
biannually a report recommending a fee schedule based on operating
expenses of the agency and any other expenses of the municipality
fairly attributable to the enforcement of the State Uniform Construction
Code Act.132
B. Surcharge fees.
(1) In order to provide for the training, certification and technical
support programs required by the Uniform Construction Code Act
and the regulations, the Enforcing Agency shall collect, in addition
to the fees specified above, a surcharge fee of $0.0006 per cubic
foot of volume of new construction. Said surcharge fee shall be
remitted to the Bureau of Housing Inspection, Department of
Community Affairs, on a quarterly basis for the fiscal quarter
ending September 30, December 31, March 31 and June 30, and
not later than one month next succeeding the end of the quarter for
which it is due. In the fiscal year in which the regulations first
become effective, said fee shall only be collected and remitted for
the third and fourth quarters.
(2) The enforcing agency shall report annually at the end of each fiscal
year to the Bureau of Housing Inspection, and not later than July
31, the total amount of the surcharge fee collected in the fiscal
year. In the fiscal year in which the regulations first become
effective, said report shall be for the third and fourth quarters only.
A. The fire limits as established by Ordinance No. MC 2128 and as shown
on the map of fire limits accompanying that ordinance are hereby
reestablished, subject to the following revisions: [Amended
1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622]
(1) The distinction between Fire District No. 1 and Fire District No. 2 is
eliminated, and there shall be a single fire district within the Town.
(2) Where the limits of portions of the fire district are currently
designated as extending to a depth of 100 feet on both sides of
132. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 240-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-5
1:303
§ 240-6. Building construction permits; violations and penalties.
[Added 9-27-2005 by Ord. No. MC 3301; amended 5-23-2017 by Ord.
No. MC 3609]
designated streets, these limits are revised to provide that the fire
limits shall extend to the rear lot lines of the lots abutting on both
sides of the designated streets.
(3) That triangular portion of Paine Avenue shown on the Zoning Map
currently in effect at the time of the adoption of Ordinance No. MC
2128 as a light industrial area is hereby added to the fire district.
(4) That triangular portion of land bordered on the north by Chancellor
Avenue, on the east by Fortieth Street and on the west by
Maplewood Township is hereby added to the fire district.
B. The Construction Official shall prepare and submit to the Town of
Irvington annually a report reevaluating the delineation of the fire
limits. This report shall indicate the recommendations of the
construction official, the building subcode official and the fire subcode
official regarding those areas which should be designated as within fire
limits, with the reasons therefor.
A. Any building construction permit issued by the Construction Code
Official shall become invalid and any fees paid for building construction
permits shall be nonrefundable if the authorized work is not
commenced within 12 months after issuance of the permit or if the
authorized work is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months
after the time of commencing the work.
B. Interior or exterior building construction performed without a valid
construction permit issued by the Township is prohibited in the
Township of Irvington. Any contractor and/or property owner found
performing work without a permit will be fined a minimum of $250 and
a maximum of $5,000 or a maximum of $1,000 for each building,
electrical and plumbing or any other permit deemed necessary for the
completion of the project so that it meets code.
C. In addition to the cost of applying for and obtaining the appropriate
permit(s), applying for a permit does not constitute authority to start
work unless written approval is provided by the Construction Official.
You must have the actual permit posted on the property before work is
started. In cases of emergency construction, the contractor and/or
property owner performing the work must make application for the
permit on the first business day after the start of the emergency
construction.
§ 240-5 IRVINGTON CODE § 240-6
1:304
ARTICLE II
Certificate of Compliance Exemption
[Adopted 9-23-2019 by Ord. No. MC 3711]
§ 240-7. Certificate of compliance exemption application.
A. The certificate of compliance exemption applies to all existing
structures. It shall be issued once a complete application accompanied
by a copy of the sales contract has been filed by the owner of the
property. The copy of the sales contract must be signed by both the
seller(s) and the purchaser(s) at the time of submission. A copy of
identification must be included for the seller(s) and buyer(s) with the
application. If the seller is an LLC, a certificate of authority is required.
Once payment is rendered and the application is received in its entirety,
it will be reviewed and executed once.
B. The required fee to obtain the certificate of exemption is $100 to be
paid by certified funds such as bank check, or money order.
C. Applicant may apply for an exemption in order to facilitate a sale of a
property through foreclosure/short sale.
D. When a building, structure or premises has been foreclosed upon or
foreclosure is imminent or complete and the bank has entered into an
agreement with the purchaser to sell, transfer or convey the property
through a short sale, and the building, structure or premises is not
accessible for certificate of compliance following conditions: building
inspection, electrical inspection, plumbing inspection, fire inspection.
(1) Where a certificate of occupancy or continued occupancy has been
issued by the construction official 90 days prior to transfer, or sale
of the structure, a certificate of exemption shall not be required.
(2) Any purchase, sale, transfer, sale or premises owned by the
Township of Irvington.
(3) Any building, structure or premises being purchased, sold,
transferred or conveyed is in such a deteriorated condition that it is
unfit for human habitation as determined by the Director of the
Housing and Building Department or the designee of the Director.
(4) If a certificate of exemption is not filed in place of a certificate of
occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy prior to sale of
any structure, the seller will incur a minimum penalty no less than
a $500 fine plus other penalties permitted by Township ordinance
and state law.
E. The certificate of exemption is not to exceed a period of 90 days from
the conveyance. It is nonrenewable nor can it be transferred. Once new
ownership is in place, it's the new owner's responsibility to obtain a
certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy, granted
all UCC standards have been met upon review of the property.
§ 240-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-7
1:305
Chapter 245
CONTRACTORS, LICENSING OF
§ 245-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONTRACTOR — A person or persons organized and engaged in the
construction, demolition, removal, renovation and/or repair of any building
or structure. New home builders are exempted from the licensing
requirement, coming within the licensing authority of the State of New
Jersey.
DIRECTOR — The Chief License Clerk in the Department of Revenue and
Finance.
OFFICERS — The officers of any firm or corporation, including the
president, vice president, secretary and treasurer and all other officers
which a business entity may appoint.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, member of a firm, partnership, member
of a partnership, corporation or any officer, director or stockholder of any
corporation or any agent or any employees of any firm, partnership or
corporation.
STRUCTURE — Any object which must be put together on a specific site
of land, with materials and labor, including surfaces such as streets and
highways. A "structure" shall include the repair and/or replacement of a
sidewalk or driveway on or within any right-of-way within the Township of
Irvington. This shall not include contractors engaged in the performance
of similar work that are directly under contract with the Township of
Irvington.[Amended 7-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3543]
SUBCONTRACTOR — A person or persons who have a direct contract
with one general contractor to perform any of the work on the work site.
"Subcontractors" may be specialists such as roofing, siding, etc., or have
more than one specialty, but nothing herein shall pertain to the licensing of
plumbers and electricians, which are licensed by the State of New Jersey.
§ 245-2. License required.
No person shall engage in the business of constructing, erecting, altering,
repairing, restoring, moving, adding to or demolishing the whole or any part
of buildings or structures, for which a permit is required by the Revised
Ordinances of the Township of Irvington, as a general contractor or as a
subcontractor, until such person shall be licensed, provided that the owner
of a building or structure who performs any of the activities set forth in this
section on such building or structure shall not be required to be licensed
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, provided that such owner
performs and supervises his own work.
§ 240-7 IRVINGTON CODE § 245-3
1:306
§ 245-3. Application for license.
Applications for licensing pursuant to this chapter shall be made to the
director under oath on a form furnished by him. The application shall set
forth the following information:
§ 245-4. License fee. [Amended 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3134;
8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by Ord. No. MC 3306;
12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413]
Upon the filing of the application, the applicant shall pay a fee of $128
initially for such license or for the relicensing after revocation of a license
previously issued to such applicant in accordance with this chapter. In the
event that such license is not issued, the license fee shall be returned less
$10 for processing. There shall be an additional renewal fee of $76 annually
thereafter for said license.
A. The applicant's name, business name and business address.
B. Whether the person is an individual, a partnership or corporation.
C. If the applicant is an individual, the applicant's residence address.
D. If the applicant is a partnership, the names of the partners and their
respective residence addresses.
E. If the applicant is a corporation or other entity, the names of all
corporate officers and all stockholders who possess more than 10% of
its stock, the name and address of the registered agent and the address
of the principal office of the corporation.
F. Whether the applicant or any partners or officers thereof have ever
been arrested or convicted of a crime, and if so, the name of the person
arrested or convicted, the date of arrest, the crime or charge involved
and the disposition thereof.
G. Whether the applicant or any partner, shareholder or officer has been
named in a complaint to the state or county Division of Consumer
Affairs, the Better Business Bureau or any other similar agency and the
disposition of such a complaint.
H. Whether the applicant or any partner, shareholder or officer has been
named party defendant in a civil suit for any reason related to his work
as contractor or subcontractor as defined above and the disposition of
such litigation.
I. The number of years the applicant has been in business at its present
business address and all prior locations.
J. The type of work engaged in by the contractor, indicating his specialty
or specialties.
§ 245-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 245-5
1:307
§ 245-5. Review of application. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No.
MC 3553]
Upon the filing of the application by the applicant, the Director shall
determine if the character and business responsibility of the applicant and
any partner or officer thereto is satisfactory unless the application or report
of the Public Safety Department regarding the same or other evidence
presented to the Director shall disclose any of the following:
§ 245-6. Issuance of license; term; contents; hearing.
§ 245-7. Failure to renew.
Upon failure to renew any license on or before the expiration date, any
subsequent license shall constitute a new or original license, subject to the
filing of a new application in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
and payment of the fee specified in § 245-4 of this chapter.
§ 245-8. Violations; public hearing; revocation of license.
A. Prior violation of statute, ordinances or regulations relevant to the
construction, erection, alteration, repair, restoration, moving or
demolition of any building or structure or part thereof.
B. A determination of previous fraudulent acts of conduct.
C. A record of chronic or continual breaches of contract.
D. Concrete evidence of bad character.
E. Evidence or grounds similar to those listed above which would
reasonably cause the Director to refuse to issue said license because
the character or business responsibility of the applicant or any partner
or officer is not satisfactory.
A. Upon filing of the application, the applicant shall pay a fee as set forth
in § 245-4, for such license or for relicensing after revocation of a
license previously issued to such applicant in accordance with this
chapter. After a final review and approval of the application, the
Director shall issue the license to the applicant for the year ending on
November 30 of each year. The license will expire on that date but shall
be automatically renewed for one year by the Construction Official upon
payment by the applicant of the annual fee.
B. The license shall contain such information required for application for
same in § 245-3A, B, C, D and H of this chapter, in addition to the
Township license number and the signatures of the Chief License Clerk
and the Director of Revenue and Finance.
C. If the application is rejected by the Director, the applicant may request
a hearing before the Construction Official, as the Township building
code official, to offer why his application should be reconsidered.
§ 245-5 IRVINGTON CODE § 245-8
1:308
§ 245-9. Relicensing after revocation.
Any person whose license has been revoked under the provisions of this
chapter may be relicensed by the Director when the grounds upon which
such license was revoked are removed or corrected and upon payment of
the fee prescribed in § 245-4 of this chapter.
§ 245-10. Violations and penalties.133
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article III,
Penalties, of the Township Code. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 249
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parental responsibility — See Ch. 419. Peace and good order — See Ch. 439.
A. If any person licensed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
shall be convicted of violating any statute, ordinance or regulation in
the execution of any work for which a permit is required by the
applicable ordinances of the Township of Irvington relevant to the
construction, erection, alteration, repair, restoration, reroofing,
residing, moving or demolition of any building or structure or part
thereof, the Construction Official shall revoke the license of such
person immediately. The Construction Official shall not restore such
license during such time such conviction was obtained, exists or
remains.
B. If, after the public hearing held by the Construction Official and
Municipal Engineer, they determine that an applicant is not qualified
pursuant to the standards of § 245-5 herein on application for original
licensing or that the character and business responsibility of any person
licensed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter has become
unsatisfactory, the Construction Official shall revoke the license of such
person immediately. At least 10 days' notice in writing of the time, place
and purpose of such public hearing shall be given to the license holder
by the Construction Official. In determining whether the character and
business responsibility of such license holder has become
unsatisfactory, the Construction Official shall be bound to those
standards set forth in § 245-5 above for the issuance of licenses.
133. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 245-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 249-1
1:309
§ 249-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivatives shall have the meanings indicated:
GUARDIAN — A person, other than a parent, to whom legal custody of the
juvenile has been given by court order or who is acting in the place of the
parent or is responsible for the care and welfare of the juvenile.
JUVENILE — An individual who is under the age of 18 years.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access, including
but not limited to a public street, road, thoroughfare, sidewalk, bridge,
alley, plaza, park, recreation or shopping area, public transportation facility,
vehicle used for public transportation, parking lot or any other public
building, structure or area.
§ 249-2. Hours; responsibility of parents and guardians.
It shall be unlawful for a juvenile under 18 years of age to loiter, idle,
wander, stroll, be in, play in or remain in a public place, as defined in
§ 249-1 above, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:30 a.m. unless
accompanied by the juvenile's parent or guardian. It shall be unlawful for
any parent or guardian to allow an unaccompanied juvenile to be on any
public street or in any public place during those hours, except as herein
provided.
§ 249-3. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to a juvenile under
18 years of age or to a parent or guardian or other person responsible for
the care and custody of the juvenile during the time necessarily required
for such juvenile to travel to and from a place of employment or be actively
involved in activity in which such juvenile may be gainfully and lawfully
employed; or from a school or place of instruction at which such juvenile
may be in bona fide attendance; or from a place at which a religious,
school, civic or properly supervised social meeting, recreational gathering
or assemblage had taken place, to his or her residence; nor in the event of
an emergency involving the danger to health, life or property which shall
require the juvenile to be out of his home in the prohibited area between
the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:30 a.m.
§ 249-4. Enforcement.
Whenever a juvenile shall be taken into custody or detained for willfully
violating the provisions of § 249-2, the parents or legal guardian of such
juvenile or any person who has assumed the responsibility of the natural
parents of the juvenile shall be notified of such detention by the arresting
law enforcement officer or any authorized member of the Irvington Public
Safety Department or special police.
§ 249-1 IRVINGTON CODE § 249-4
1:310
§ 249-5. Violations and penalties.
Upon the second and each successive violation of this chapter, violators
shall be required to perform community service and may be subject to a
fine as provided in § 1-17A of the Revised Code of the Township of Irvington
at the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge. If both a juvenile and the
juvenile's parent or guardian shall be deemed to be in violation of this
chapter, they shall be required to perform community service together.
Chapter 253
DANCES AND DANCE HALLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 158.
Licensing procedure — See Ch. 290, Art. I.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 307.
§ 253-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
PUBLIC DANCE — Any dance to which admission can be had either with or
without the payment of a fee, price, charge, wardrobe charge or otherwise
and in which the public generally may participate.
A. When the parent or legal guardian or the person responsible for the
custody and care of the juvenile calls for the custody of the juvenile, the
authorized law enforcement officer or special police in the Department
of Public Safety shall serve written notice upon such parent or legal
guardian or the person responsible for such juvenile, setting forth the
facts and charges of the violation, which notice shall contain a warning
that, upon a second arrest or detention within 180 days and conviction
of the juvenile on charges of violating this chapter, a formal complaint
may be filed against said parent or legal guardian or other person
responsible for the care and custody of the juvenile for lack of
supervision and permitting said juvenile to violate the provisions of
§ 249-2.
B. A copy of the notice and warning mentioned in Subsection A and the
facts and circumstances of the prior arrest or detention shall be served
upon the Clerk of the Irvington Municipal Court, which notice shall be
evidence of parental or guardian neglect of supervision in any
complaint with charges filed against the parent or legal guardian or
other person responsible for the care and custody of the juvenile
charged with the violation of § 249-2 in allowing said juvenile to violate
§ 249-2.
§ 249-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-1
1:311
PUBLIC DANCE HALL — Any hall, room, space or place, other than a
private home, in which dancing is carried on and to which admission can
be had by the public generally either with or without the payment of a fee,
price, charge, wardrobe charge or otherwise.
§ 253-2. Permitting dancing in unlicensed public dance hall.
It shall be unlawful to permit any dancing in a public dance hall until such
public dance hall shall first have been duly licensed for such purpose in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 253-3. Using unlicensed building; payment of fee; term.
[Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622]
No person shall rent out or hire out any building or part thereof for use as a
public dance hall, or use any building or part thereof as a public dance hall,
as defined by this chapter, until such building or part thereof shall first have
been duly licensed for such purpose. Such license shall be issued upon the
payment of the fee set forth in this chapter; provided that the building or
part thereof complies with the provisions of this chapter. Such fee shall be
paid at the time of the issuance of such license, which license shall expire
one year from date of issue thereof.
§ 253-4. Issuance of licenses.
All licenses and permits provided for by this chapter shall be issued by the
Division of Licensing, be countersigned by the Town Clerk and be under the
seal of the Town.
§ 253-5. Authority of Division of Licensing.
The Division of Licensing is hereby authorized and empowered to grant a
license to the owner, lessee or sublessee of any building or of any hall, room,
space or part of any building which complies with the provisions of this
chapter and with such rules and regulations as the Division of Licensing
may promulgate in relation thereto, for the use of such building or hall,
room, space or place as a public dance hall. The Division of Licensing
is further authorized and empowered to grant permits to conduct public
dances to such persons as comply with the provisions of this chapter and
with such rules and regulations as the Division of Licensing may promulgate
in reference to the carrying on of public dances.
§ 253-6. Licenses not required for certain dances.
No license under this chapter shall be required for dances held:
A. In public schools, when such dances are held under the supervision of
the Board of Education of the Town.
B. By any duly organized religious society in the building owned by the
society and used by it in connection with its religious activities.
§ 253-1 IRVINGTON CODE § 253-7
1:312
§ 253-7. Suspension or revocation of license.
The license of any public dance hall may be revoked at any time, for cause,
by the Division of Licensing, and such license, when revoked, shall not
be reissued until at least six months shall have elapsed from the time
of revocation. Such license may be suspended at any time, for cause, by
the Division of Licensing, and, when so suspended, such suspension shall
not be terminated until the cause of suspension has been removed to the
satisfaction of the Division of Licensing.
§ 253-8. Permit required for public dance.
No person, except a religious organization, shall conduct a public dance
without having first obtained from the Division of Licensing a permit
therefor. A permit to conduct a public dance may be issued to any person
who meets the requirements of this chapter, upon the payment of the fee
provided for by this chapter.
§ 253-9. Persons or groups not eligible for permits.
No permit shall be issued to any individual to conduct a public dance unless
he shall be of good moral character and a citizen of the United States. No
permit shall be issued to any unincorporated association, group or other
society, club or guild, but such permit shall be issued to one or more
individual members of such unincorporated association, group or other
society, club or guild.
§ 253-10. License and permit fees. [Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord. No.
MC 2622; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413134]
The following license and permit fees are hereby fixed for the following
purposes:
A. The license or permit fee for provision of entertainment, including but
not limited to a public dance hall, public dances, cabaret, go-go or
otherwise, shall be $1,067 annually.
B. Public dances. For each permit issued by the Division of Licensing to
any person for a public dance, the fee shall be $12, except that in cases
where an organization, association or corporation formed exclusively
for the moral and mental improvement of men, women or children or for
religious or charitable purposes is about to conduct or sponsor a public
dance, the fee shall be $2.135
134. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
135. Editor's Note: Former § 62-65C, Dancing schools, of the 1981 Revised Code, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 10-23-1984 by Ord. No. MC 2751.
§ 253-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-11
1:313
§ 253-11. Premises requirements. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord.
No. MC 3553]
Every premises shall, at the time of the issuance of any license for the use
of such premises as a public dance hall, comply with and conform to all
laws of the United States, the state, the provisions of this Code and other
ordinances and regulations of the Town relative thereto. Such premises
shall be properly ventilated, supplied with sufficient toilet conveniences,
proper appliances and apparatus for the prevention of fires, suitable
number of fire escapes, as the Fire Chief in the Public Safety Department
shall deem necessary for the proper use of such premises. Such premises
shall be a safe and proper place for use as a public dance hall.
§ 253-12. Sanitary conditions.
All public dance halls shall be at all times kept in a clean, healthful and
sanitary condition, and all rooms connected therewith, as well as all
stairways and other passages leading thereto and therefrom, shall be kept
open, unobstructed and well lighted.
§ 253-13. Causes for closing dance halls.
Any building, hall, room, space or place wherein any public dance is held
shall be closed whenever any of the provisions of this chapter have been,
are being or are about to be violated, or whenever any indecent act has
been, is being or is about to be committed, or whenever any disorder or
public disturbance has taken, is taking or is about to take place therein.
§ 253-14. Closing hours for public dances.
All public dances shall close at not later than 2:00 a.m.
§ 253-15. Dances in buildings where unlawful alcoholic beverages
sold.
It shall be unlawful to conduct any dance or to maintain any dance hall in
any building wherein any malt, vinous, brewed or distilled liquor or liquid
containing an unlawful alcoholic content is sold, or to conduct any dance or
to maintain any dance hall in any building which is connected with any other
building or with any other room, hall, space or place in which any malt,
vinous, brewed or distilled liquor or liquid containing an unlawful alcoholic
content is sold.
Chapter 255
DAY-CARE FACILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees and licenses — See Ch. 290.
§ 253-11 IRVINGTON CODE § 253-15
1:314
ARTICLE I
Licensing
[Adopted 10-10-2018 by Ord. No. MC 3668]
§ 255-1. License required; food handler's permit.
§ 255-2. Fees.
A. No person shall operate a day-care center within the Township of
Irvington unless it has been inspected by the Irvington Department of
Health and a local license to operate the same has been issued, in
addition to the license issued by the state as defined in N.J.A.C.
3A:52-2.2.
(1) Whenever any day care has been deemed to have serious or
imminent hazards to the health, safety, well-being, and
development of children, an "unsatisfactory" or "conditionally
satisfactory" inspection placard will be issued in addition to a
written notice of violation. All identified hazards shall be
remediated according to the timeline established by the designee
of the Department of Health.
B. All employees within day-care facilities who prepare food within their
facility shall receive a food handler's permit from the Department of
Health.
(1) Whenever any day-care facility has been issued a written notice of
violation for lack of a food handler's permit, all persons employed
therein shall, within 30 days of the date of such notification, apply
for a food handler's card and attend the course of instruction
provided herein. Day-care facilities who do not prepare food within
their facility are exempt from the requirements of this subsection.
Failure to obtain the food handler's card may result in the
revocation of the license to operate a day-care facility.
(2) All persons holding a food handler's card shall renew such card
through the Township of Irvington's Department of Health, on or
before June 1 of each calendar year.
(3) Each person applying to attend the general course of instruction
provided by the Department of Health shall pay a registration fee
as set out in § 324-16 of the Revised Code of the Township of
Irvington. Food handler's cards may be renewed upon payment of a
renewal fee as set out in § 324-16 of the Revised Code of the
Township of Irvington.
A. Upon the successful completion of the annual sanitary inspection, a
local license will be issued. The fee for the annual day-care inspection
and audit of immunizations shall be $341 and is payable by January 1 of
each calendar year.
§ 255-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-2
1:315
§ 255-3. Display of license.
All state licenses and permits issued under the provisions of this article
shall be displayed in a conspicuous place near the public entrance in such a
manner that the public may view the license.
§ 255-4. Expiration date; renewal.
The license issued under the provisions of this article shall expire annually
on January 31 of each year and an application for the renewal thereof shall
be submitted together with the required inspection and immunization audit
fee, from December 1 to December 31 each year.
B. A monthly late fee of $25, not to exceed $300 per year, is hereby
established for all fees submitted after the conclusion of the grace
period.
C. For those new facilities commencing business from October 1 through
December 31 of the year, the fee shall be 25% of the established
inspection and audit fee for that calendar year.
§ 255-2 IRVINGTON CODE § 255-4
1:316
Chapter 266
DRUG-FREE ZONES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 439.
§ 255-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-4
1:317

ARTICLE I
Drug-Free Zones
[Adopted 8-12-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3123 (Ch. 139, Art. IV, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 266-1. Adoption of map.
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7 and
N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1, the map produced on or about June 15, 1999, by Ralph
J. Tango, Jr., P.E., P.L.S. License No. NJPE27783, Township Surveyor under
the direction of the Director of Engineering for the Township of Irvington
is hereby approved and adopted as an official finding and record of the
location and areas on or within 1,000 feet of school property as defined
in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7; and also is hereby approved and adopted as an official
finding and record of the location on or within 500 feet of public housing
facility, public park and public building as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1,
hereinafter, "Drug-Free Zone Map."
§ 266-2. Map to constitute official record.
The Drug-Free Zone Map adopted by this article pursuant to § 266-1 of
this article shall continue to constitute an official finding and record of
the location and boundaries of the area or areas on or within 1,000 feet
of school property pursuant to § 266-1; also this article shall constitute an
official finding and record of the location and boundaries of the area or
areas on or within 500 feet of public housing facility, public park and public
building pursuant to § 266-1.
§ 266-3. Changes in boundaries. [Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No.
MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
A. The School Board, or the chief administrative officer in the case of any
private or parochial school, is hereby directed and shall have the
continuing obligation to promptly notify the Department of Public
Works, Township Engineer, of any changes or contemplated changes in
the location and boundaries of any property owned by or leased to any
secondary school or school board which is used for school purposes
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.
B. The local housing authority in the case of the public housing facility, the
appropriate parks department in the case of a public park and the
Director of Engineering in the case of a public building is hereby
directed and shall have the continuing obligation to promptly notify the
Department of Public Works, Township Engineer, of any changes or
contemplated changes in the location and boundaries of any such
property.
§ 266-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-4
1:319
§ 266-4. Filing of map; availability of copies; fee for certified copy.
[Amended 8-12-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3123]
The original map approved pursuant to § 266-1 shall be filed with the
Municipal Clerk. The Municipal Clerk shall maintain the filed map as an
official record of the municipality. A certified copy of the map can be
obtained for fee of $500 upon request by persons; federal, state, municipal
agencies, or federal, state and municipal courts. Certified copies of the map
and this article will be provided to the County Clerk and Essex County
Prosecutor.
§ 266-5. Other evidence of drug-free zones.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to preclude the prosecution from
introducing or relying upon any other evidence or testimony to establish any
element of this offense, nor shall this article be construed to preclude the
use or admissibility of any map or any diagram other than one which has
been approved by the governing body of this municipality, provided that the
map or diagram is otherwise admissible pursuant to rules of evidence.
§ 266-4 IRVINGTON CODE § 266-5
1:320
Chapter 277
EMPLOYER REGULATIONS
§ 266-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-5
1:321

ARTICLE I
Paid Sick Time
[Adopted 9-9-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3513136]
§ 277-1. Purpose.
The purposes of this chapter are as follows:
§ 277-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGENCY — The Township of Irvington.137
CALENDAR YEAR — A regular and consecutive twelve-month period, as
determined by an employer.
A. To ensure that all workers in the Township of Irvington can address
their own health needs and the health needs of their family members by
requiring employers to provide a minimum level of paid sick time,
including time for care for family members;
B. To diminish public and private health care costs and promote
preventative health services in the Township of Irvington by enabling
workers to seek early and routine medical care for themselves and their
family members;
C. To protect the public's health in Irvington by reducing the risk of and
spread of contagion;
D. To promote the economic security and stability of workers and their
families, as well as businesses serving the Township of Irvington and its
residents;
E. To protect residents and all workers in the Township of Irvington from
losing their jobs or facing workplace discipline as a result of illness and
the use of sick time to care for themselves or their family members;
F. To safeguard the public welfare, health, safety and prosperity of the
people of the Township of Irvington;
G. To accomplish the purposes described in Subsections A, B, C, D, E and F
in a manner that is fair and reasonable to both employees and
employers, and rationally related to the objectives sought which is to
promote the overall health and safety of the residents and workers in
the Township of Irvington by reducing the risk of and spread of
communicable disease and contagion.
136. Editor's Note: This ordinance was an initiated ordinance by petition of the registered
voters, and validation of that petition on 8-25-2014 constituted the ordinance's first
reading.
137. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 277-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 277-2
1:323
CONSTRUCTION UNION — A labor organization that represents, for
purposes of collective bargaining, employees involved in the performance
of construction, reconstruction, demolition, alteration, custom fabrication,
or repair work and who are enrolled or have graduated from a "registered
apprenticeship program."
EMPLOYEE — As defined in N.J.S.A. 34:11-56a1(h), one who works in the
Township of Irvington for at least 80 hours in a year except that "employee"
for purposes of this article does not include any person employed by any
governmental entity or instrumentality, including any New Jersey school
district or Board of Education.
EMPLOYER — As defined in N.J.S.A. 34:11-56a1(g), except that "employer"
does not include:
FAMILY MEMBER —
HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONAL — Any person licensed under federal or
New Jersey law to provide medical or emergency services, including but not
limited to doctors, nurses and emergency room personnel.
PAID SICK TIME — Time that is compensated at the same hourly rate and
with the same benefits, including health care benefits, as the employee
normally earns during hours worked and is provided by an employer to an
A. The United States government;
The state or its political subdivisions or any office, department, agency,
authority, institution, association, society or any instrumentality of the
state, including the legislature or judiciary; or
B.
C. The Township of Irvington.
A biological, adopted or foster child, stepchild or legal ward, a child of
a domestic partner, a child of a civil union partner, or a child to whom
the employee stands in loco parentis;
A.
A biological, foster, stepparent or adoptive parent or legal guardian of
an employee or of an employee's spouse, domestic partner or civil union
partner or a person who stood in loco parentis when the employee was
a minor child;
B.
A person to whom the employee is legally married under the laws of
New Jersey or any other state or with whom the employee has entered
into a civil union under N.J.S.A. Title 37;
C.
A grandparent or spouse, civil union partner or domestic partner of a
grandparent;
D.
E. A grandchild;
A domestic partner of an employee as defined in N.J.S.A. 26:8A-3 et
seq.; or
F.
G. A sibling.
§ 277-2 IRVINGTON CODE § 277-2
1:324
employee for the purposes described in § 277-4 of this article, but in no case
shall the hourly wage be less than that provided under N.J.S.A. 34:11-56a et
seq.
REGISTERED APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM — An apprenticeship program
that is registered with and approved by the United States Department of
Labor and which meets not less than two of the following requirements:
RETALIATION — The denial of any right guaranteed under this article and
any threat, discipline, discharge, suspension, demotion, reduction of hours,
or any other adverse action against an employee for the exercise of any
right guaranteed herein, including for filing a complaint or informing any
person about any employer's alleged violation of this article; cooperating
with the agency in its investigations of alleged violations of this article;
participating in any administrative or judicial action regarding an alleged
violation of this article; and informing any person of his or her potential
rights under this article.
§ 277-3. Employees covered by collective bargaining agreements.
§ 277-4. Accrual of paid sick time.
A. Has active, employed, registered apprentices;
Has graduated apprentices to journey worker status during a majority
of the years that the program has been in operation; or
B.
Has graduated apprentices to journey worker status during three of the
immediately preceding five years, provides each trainee with combined
classroom and on-the-job training under the direct and close
supervision of a highly skilled worker in an occupation recognized as an
apprenticeable trade and meets the program performance standards of
enrollment and graduation under 29 CFR 29.
C.
A. All or any portion of the applicable requirements of this article shall not
apply to employees covered by a collective bargaining agreement, to
the extent that such requirements are expressly waived in the collective
bargaining agreement in clear and unambiguous terms.
B. With respect to employees covered by a collective bargaining
agreement in effect at the time of the effective date of this article, no
provision of this article shall apply until the expiration of the collective
bargaining agreement; however, if the terms of an expired collective
bargaining agreement provide paid sick leave that is more generous
than provided by this article, those terms of the expired collective
bargaining agreement apply to the extent required by law.
A. All employees accrue a minimum of one hour of paid sick time for every
30 hours actually worked, subject to the limits set forth below in
Subsections B and C.
§ 277-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 277-4
1:325
B. Employers who employ 10 or more employees for compensation are not
required to provide more than 40 hours of paid sick time in a calendar
year;
C. Employers who employ fewer than 10 employees for compensation are
not required to provide more than 24 hours of paid sick time in a
calendar year, except for employees who are child-care workers, home
health care workers and food service workers. For child-care workers,
home health care workers and food service workers, employers are
required to provide up to 40 hours of paid sick time, so long as the
hours are accrued in a calendar year as set forth in Subsection A above.
D. In determining the number of employees performing work for an
employer, all employees performing work for compensation on a fulltime,
part-time, or temporary basis shall be counted, provided that
where the number of employees who work for an employer for
compensation fluctuates, business size may be determined for the
current calendar year based upon the average number of employees
who worked for compensation during the preceding calendar year.
E. Employees who are exempt from overtime requirements under 29
U.S.C. § 213(a)(1) of the Federal Fair Labor Standards Act are assumed
to work 40 hours in each work week for purposes of paid sick time
accrual unless their normal work week is less than 40 hours, in which
case paid sick time accrues based upon that normal work week.
F. Employees begin to accrue paid sick time on the first day of
employment. Employees are entitled to use accrued paid sick time
beginning on the 90th calendar day of their employment and thereafter
employees are entitled to use paid sick time as it is accrued.
G. Accrued but unused paid sick time shall be carried over to the following
calendar year, provided that no employer shall be required to carry over
more than 40 hours of unused paid sick time from one calendar year to
the next or allow the use of more than 40 hours of paid sick time in a
calendar year. An employer shall not be required to carry over unused
paid sick time if the employee is paid for any unused paid sick time at
the end of the calendar year in which such time is accrued.
H. Any employer with a paid leave policy, such as a paid time off policy,
that provides an amount of paid leave sufficient to meet the total annual
accrual requirements of this section that may be used for the same
purposes and under the same conditions as paid sick time under this
article is not required to provide additional paid sick time.
I. Nothing in this section shall be construed as requiring financial or other
reimbursement to an employee from an employer upon the employee's
termination, resignation, retirement, or other separation from
employment for accrued paid sick time that has not been used.
J. If an employee is transferred to a separate division, entity, or location,
but remains employed by the same employer in the Township of
§ 277-4 IRVINGTON CODE § 277-4
1:326
§ 277-5. Use of paid sick time.
Irvington, the employee is entitled to all paid sick time accrued at the
prior division, entity, or location and is entitled to use all paid sick
time as provided in this section. If the employer terminates or lays
off an employee and the employee is rehired within six months of the
termination or lay off, previously unused accrued paid sick time shall be
reinstated and prior employment shall be counted towards meeting the
ninety-day requirement set forth in Subsection F above.
K. When a different employer succeeds or takes the place of an existing
employer, all employees of the original employer who remain employed
by the successor employer are entitled to all paid sick time accrued
when employed by the original employer and are entitled to use all paid
sick leave previously accrued.
L. At its sole discretion, an employer may loan paid sick time to an
employee in advance of accrual by such employee. A decision by an
employer to deny a loan request by an employee shall not subject the
employer to any liability under this article.
A. Paid sick time shall be provided to an employee by an employer for:
(1) An employee's mental or physical illness, injury, or health
condition; an employee's need for medical diagnosis, care, or
treatment of a mental or physical illness, injury, or health condition;
an employee's need for preventive medical care;
(2) Care of a family member with a mental or physical illness, injury, or
health condition; care of a family member who needs medical
diagnosis, care, or treatment of a mental or physical illness, injury,
or health condition; care of a family member who needs preventive
medical care;
(3) Closure of the employee's place of business by order of a public
official due to a public health emergency or an employee's need to
care for a child whose school or place of care has been closed by
order of a public official due to a public health emergency, or care
for a family member when it has been determined by the health
authorities having jurisdiction or by a health care provider that the
family member's presence in the community would jeopardize the
health of others because of the family member's exposure to a
communicable disease, whether or not the family member has
actually contracted the communicable disease.
B. Nothing in this article prohibits an employer from requesting that an
employee confirm, in writing, following use of paid sick time, that the
paid sick time was used for an authorized purpose under this article.
C. Where the need to use paid sick time is foreseeable, an employer may
require reasonable advance notice of the intention to use paid sick time.
In no event shall an employee be required to give notice more than
§ 277-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 277-5
1:327
§ 277-6. Exercise of rights protected; retaliation prohibited.
§ 277-7. Notice and posting requirements.
seven days prior to the date such sick time is to begin. Where such need
is not foreseeable, an employer may require an employee to provide
notice of the need for the use of sick time before the beginning of the
employee's work shift or work day or, in cases such as emergencies
where advance notice is not possible, notice shall be provided by the
employee as soon as practicable.
D. An employer may not require, as a condition of an employee's taking
paid sick time, that the employee search for or find a replacement
worker to cover the hours during which the employee is absent.
E. The employer shall determine whether paid sick time may be used in
increments of less than one day.
F. After an employee has used paid sick time for three consecutive days or
three consecutive instances (in cases where the employer determined
that paid sick time could be used in increments of less than one day), an
employer may require an employee to provide reasonable
documentation that the time has been used for a purpose covered by
Subsection A. In this instance, the employer may require
documentation signed by a health care professional indicating that the
paid sick time was necessary; however, an employer may not require
that the documentation explain the nature of the illness.
A. No person shall interfere with, restrain, or deny the exercise of, or the
attempt to exercise, any right protected under this article.
B. No person shall retaliate against an employee because the employee
has properly exercised rights protected under this article.
A. All employers shall give written notice to each employee at the
commencement of the employee's employment (or as soon as
practicable if the employee is already employed on the effective date of
this law) regarding employee's rights under this article. Such notice
shall describe the right to paid sick time, the accrual rate and the
amount of paid sick time, and the terms of its use under this article; the
right to be free from retaliation for properly requesting use of paid sick
time; and the right to file a complaint or bring an action in Municipal
Court if paid sick time is denied by the employer or the employee is
retaliated against for requesting or taking paid sick time. Such notice
shall be in English and the primary language spoken by that employee,
so long as the primary language of that employee is also the primary
language of at least 10% of the employer's workforce.
B. Employers shall also display a poster in a conspicuous and accessible
place in each business establishment where employees are employed
containing the information required in Subsection A. The poster shall
§ 277-5 IRVINGTON CODE § 277-7
1:328
§ 277-8. Violations and penalties; restitution.
Any employer who violates the provisions of this article is subject to a fine as
provided in § 1-17A, B and C of the Revised Code of the Town of Irvington. In
addition to the fines set forth above, any employer who violates this article
is subject to payment of restitution in the amount of any paid sick time
unlawfully withheld.
§ 277-9. Employer records.
Employers shall allow the agency reasonable access to records and to
monitor compliance with the requirements of this article. An employer's
failure to maintain or retain adequate records documenting hours worked
by an employee and paid sick time taken by an employee creates a
rebuttable presumption that the employer has violated this article, absent
clear and convincing evidence otherwise.
§ 277-10. Enforcement and regulations.
be in English and in any language that is the first language of at least
10% of the employer's workforce.
C. The agency can create and make available to employers notices and
posters in English and Spanish and any other languages deemed
appropriate by the agency that contain the information required under
Subsection A for employers' use in complying with this section.
A. The agency shall coordinate implementation and enforcement of this
article and promulgate appropriate guidelines or regulations for such
purposes.
B. The agency shall have broad powers to ensure compliance with this
article.
C. In the event an allegation of noncompliance cannot be resolved by the
agency with the employer, a complaint may be filed, by the agency and/
or the employee as the complainant, in the Irvington Municipal Court
for any alleged violation of this article.
D. The Municipal Court shall have the power to adjudicate all allegations
of violations of this article and impose fines or penalties provided for in
this article, or any further relief deemed appropriate by the court,
including but not limited to restitution, reinstatement, injunctive or
declaratory relief.
E. Submitting a complaint to the agency is neither a prerequisite nor a bar
to bringing a private action.
F. The agency shall have the power to do outreach to inform the residents
of the Township of their rights under this article and to publicize online
and in other media the names of employers who violate this article.
§ 277-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 277-11
1:329
§ 277-11. Confidentiality and nondisclosure.
§ 277-12. No effect on more generous policies.
§ 277-13. Other legal requirements.
This article provides minimum requirements pertaining to paid sick time
and shall not be construed to preempt, limit, or otherwise affect the
applicability of any other law, regulation, requirement, policy, or standard
that provides for greater accrual or use by employees of sick time, whether
paid or unpaid, or that extends other protections to employees.
A. An employer may not require disclosure of the specific details relating
to an employee's or an employee's family member's medical condition
as a condition of providing paid sick time under this article. If an
employer possesses health information about an employee or
employee's family member, such information shall be treated as
confidential and shall not be disclosed by the employer except to the
affected employee or with the permission of the affected employee.
B. The agency shall maintain confidential the identity of any complaining
person unless disclosure of the identity is necessary for resolution of
the investigation. The agency shall, to the extent practicable, notify a
complaining person that the agency will be disclosing his or her identify
prior to such disclosure.
A. Nothing in this article shall be construed to discourage or prohibit an
employer from the adoption or retention of a paid sick time policy more
generous than the one required herein.
B. Nothing in this article shall be construed as diminishing the obligation
of an employer to comply with any contract, collective bargaining
agreement, employment benefit plan, or other agreement providing
more generous paid sick time to an employee than required herein.
C. Nothing in this article shall be construed as diminishing the rights of
public employees regarding paid sick time or use of paid sick time as
provided in the laws of the State of New Jersey pertaining to public
employees.
D. Nothing in this article shall be construed as diminishing the rights
secured by S2177, the New Jersey Security and Financial
Empowerment Act, for domestic violence victims in the Township of
Irvington.138
E. Nothing in this article shall be construed or interpreted in a way that
would conflict with any state or federal law pertaining to paid sick time
or employee benefits.
138. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 34:11C-1 et seq.
§ 277-11 IRVINGTON CODE § 277-14
1:330
§ 277-14. Effective date.
This article will take effect 120 days following enactment except that in
the case of employees covered by a collective bargaining agreement in
effect on the effective date prescribed herein, this article shall apply on the
date of the termination of such agreement unless the collective bargaining
agreement expressly waives the protections set forth in this article.
§ 277-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 277-14
1:331
Chapter 282
ESCROW FEES FOR REDEVELOPMENT AND FORECLOSURE
MATTERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use procedures — See Ch. 365.
Subdivision and site plan review — See Ch.
560.
Actions resulting in tax sale, lien sale or
assessment for foreclosure — See Ch. 586,
Art. III.
Zoning — See Ch. 650.
§ 282-1. Escrow accounts.
§ 282-2. Purpose.
With the goal of enhancing planning, redevelopment and economic
development activities within the Township of Irvington and the intent that
such activities further the interests of sustaining and promoting growth
and development in the Township, the administration and the Department
of Economic Development and Grants Oversight is establishing escrow
accounts for fees to defray costs for redevelopment projects and in rem
foreclosure proceedings.
§ 282-3. Authority.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-8(f) of the Local Redevelopment and Housing
Law, potential redevelopers with the Township of Irvington ("Township")
shall be required to enter into a redevelopment escrow funding agreement
("funding agreement") to cover the Township's administrative expenses,
evaluations, negotiation and approval of agreements, and other costs
associated with the implementation and administration of redevelopment
projects (collectively "redevelopment project costs and expenses") with the
Township.
§ 282-4. Escrow funding agreement and procedures regarding
redevelopment matters.
A. Final: $409; $11 per 1,000 square feet of lot area or fraction thereof; $9
per 1,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof. Minimum review
fee: $427.
B. Preliminary: $643; $110 per multifamily dwelling unit.
A. This redevelopment funding agreement shall be a prerequisite to all
redevelopment agreements with the Township where the cost of the
redevelopment project is as described below.
§ 277-14 IRVINGTON CODE § 282-4
1:332
§ 282-5. Escrow funding agreement and procedures regarding
foreclosure matters.
B. The funding agreement acknowledges and binds the developer to post
an escrow with the Township of Irvington to pay the Township's
redevelopment project costs and expenses. This includes, but is not
limited to, all legal, engineering and planning costs associated with the
redevelopment. The Director of the Township's Revenue and Finance
Department will establish an escrow account for the redevelopment
project. The escrow deposit will be held by the Township's Revenue and
Finance Department, for the Department of Economic Development
and Grants Oversight, and disbursed pursuant to a redevelopment
funding agreement. The funding agreement shall be initiated,
implemented and managed by the Department of Economic
Development and Grants Oversight.
C. Escrow amounts for redevelopment matters.
(1) Potential redevelopers shall be required to make payments to an
escrow account to cover the Township's redevelopment project
costs and expenses towards the potential redeveloper's project.
The initial deposit requirement and, if necessary, the amount to be
replenished shall be based on the cost of the potential
redeveloper's project as described below:
Cost of Redevelopment
Project Escrow Deposit
$0 to $250,000 $5,000
$250,000 to $500,000 $10,000
$500,000 to $1,000,000 $15,000
Above $1,000,000 $20,000
(2) If, depending on the scope of the project, the balance of the escrow
deposit has insufficient funds and/or falls below $2,000, the
potential redeveloper may be required to replenish the escrow
account within 20 days from an agreement reached between the
potential redeveloper and the Township's Department of Economic
Development and Grants Oversight on the replenish amount based
on the remaining work.
A. This foreclosure funding agreement shall also be a perquisite for
redevelopers and other professionals or persons seeking to have the
Township facilitate in rem foreclosure proceedings to foreclosure on
properties with Township-owned tax liens and to subsequently transfer
title to the property acquired by the Township, after a final judgment of
foreclosure extinguishes the underlying tax debt.
B. The funding agreement acknowledges and binds the redeveloper and/or
professional to post an escrow with the Township of Irvington to pay the
Township's foreclosure costs and expenses. This includes, but is not
§ 282-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-5
1:333
§ 282-6. Limit on powers conferred.
This chapter shall not confer upon the Township of Irvington any power
not otherwise provided by law to determine the legality of any collective
bargaining agreement or to regulate any collective bargaining process.
Chapter 290
FEES AND LICENSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Escrow fees for redevelopment and
foreclosure matters — See Ch. 282.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 313.
limited to, the Township's administrative expenses, costs of
professionals, cost of title search fees, cost of court filing fees and other
related expenses associate with the Township initiating and managing
in rem foreclosure proceedings. The Director of the Township's
Revenue and Finance Department will establish an escrow account
for the redevelopment project. The escrow deposit will be held by the
Township's Revenue and Finance Department, for the Department of
Economic Development and Grants Oversight, and disbursed pursuant
to a foreclosure funding agreement. The funding agreement shall be
initiated, implemented and managed by the Department of Economic
Development and Grants Oversight.
C. Escrow amounts for foreclosure expenses and costs.
(1) Potential redevelopers shall be required to make payments to an
escrow account to cover the Township's redevelopment project
costs and expenses towards the potential redeveloper's project.
The initial deposit requirement and, if necessary, the amount to be
replenished shall be based on the cost of the potential
redeveloper's project as described below:
(a) Minimum escrow deposit: $2,500.
(b) Maximum escrow deposit: $5,000.
(2) The escrow deposit listed above is per property. An additional
deposit above $2,500 and up to $5,000 may be required if the
Township has an increase in filing, title search fees and other
related expenses and/or if the matter is contested by the property
owner, which will increase the underlying costs of the proceeding.
§ 282-5 IRVINGTON CODE § 282-6
1:334
ARTICLE I
Licensing Procedure
§ 290-1. Applications.
Except as otherwise expressly provided by the Revised Code or other
ordinances of the Town, all types of licenses required by the various
provisions of the Revised Code and other ordinances of the Town shall
be applied for by proper application to the Division of Licensing of the
Department of Revenue and Finance of the Town.
§ 290-2. Issuance of licenses.
Except as otherwise expressly provided by the Revised Code or other
ordinances of the Town, all licenses of every type and kind as regulated
by the provisions of the Revised Code and the various other ordinances of
the Town shall be issued, after proper application as set forth in § 290-1,
through the Division of Licensing.
§ 290-3. Applicability to certain licenses.
This article shall not apply to the various types of licenses which are
specifically delegated to be applied for, issued and regulated by any
municipal department or municipal agency pursuant to the direction of any
law or statute of the state.
§ 290-4. Prerequisite for issuance and continuation of licenses and
permits. [Added 8-13-1991 by Ord. No. MC 2929139; amended
12-18-2012 by Ord. No. MC 3476; 4-8-2019 by Ord. No. MC 3696;
9-23-2019 by Ord. No. MC 3712]
BUSINESS
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following term(s) shall have the
meanings as indicated:
BUSINESS — Any individual, partnership or corporation who is
conducting a commercial activity within the physical boundary of the
Township of Irvington.
B. Display of license or permit.
(1) Any and all license(s) or permit(s) issued to an individual,
partnership or corporation to conduct business in the Township of
Irvington must be current and displayed on such premises, at all
times and in a conspicuous manner, within five feet of the front
entrance of said business. Failure to properly display a license
required to operate the business shall constitute a violation of this
139. Editor's Note: Section 4 of this ordinance provided as follows: "The issuance or
maintenance of licenses or permits under any provision of this ordinance will not be
withheld or denied if such action will jeopardize the health and safety of the citizens of
Irvington."
§ 290-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-4
1:335
section subjecting the property and/or business owner to penalty
as indicated by this section.
(2) This subsection shall not apply to those businesses regulated by the
Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
(3) Failure to obtain a license covering the type of commercial activity
for which the property and/or business owner is engaged in shall
constitute a violation of this section and subject both the property
and/or business owner to a penalty as indicated by this section.
(4) Failure to obtain a license covering the commercial activity for
which the property and/or business owner is engaged shall subject
the property and/or business owner to the following penalties:
(a) Immediate shut down of the business until such time as the
business is properly licensed to conduct the commercial
activity within the Township of Irvington.
(b) Fines:
[1] First offense: $250.
[2] Second offense: $500.
[3] Third offense: $750.
[4] Fourth offense: mandatory court hearing with a minimum
fine of $1,000 and permanent revocation of ability to
obtain a business license to engage in any commercial
activity within the Township of Irvington.
(5) Failure to display a license covering the commercial activity for
which the property and/or business owner is engaged shall subject
the property and/or business owner to the following penalties:
(a) Fines:
[1] First offense: $50.
[2] Second offense: $150.
[3] Third offense: $250.
[4] Fourth offense: mandatory court hearing with a fine up to
$500 and prohibition on conducting any commercial
activity within the Township for one year by the business
entity and/or owner.
DENIAL OF LICENSE
C. No license or permit shall be issued or renewed, as the case may be, to
any applicant who is the owner of property wherein a business or
activity for which a license or permit is sought or wherein a business or
§ 290-4 IRVINGTON CODE § 290-4
1:336
activity is to be conducted unless and until any delinquent property
taxes or assessments on such property are paid and current. This
subsection shall not apply to licenses issued pursuant to the Alcoholic
Beverage Control Act140 of the State of New Jersey.
D. The applicant shall supply a certificate from the Township Tax Collector
that all property taxes and assessments are paid and current on the
subject property.
E. A license issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked or suspended
when any licensee who is the owner of the property upon or within
which the licensed activity is conducted has failed to pay the taxes due
on the property for at least three consecutive quarters.
F. A license may be denied wherein the business has willfully conducted
business activity with the intent to avoid the requirements of this Code
and/or the payment necessary to conduct such activity(ies).
140. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.
§ 290-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-4
1:337

ARTICLE II
Miscellaneous Fees
§ 290-5. Fees under Chapter 313, Flood Damage Prevention.
[Amended 9-22-1977 by Ord. No. MC 2508; 1-22-1980 by Ord. No.
MC 2594; 8-11-1987 by Ord. No. MC 2834; 12-12-1995 by Ord. No.
MC 3027; 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3134; 8-14-2001 by Ord. No.
MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by Ord. No. MC 3306; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No.
MC 3413]
§ 290-6. Administrative fee for building construction or
rehabilitation permit. [Added 12-11-2007 by Ord. No. MC 3362;
amended 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413]
Any permits taken out for building construction or rehabilitation shall be
subject to an administrative fee of 35% in the event that such work is not
performed and a refund is sought.
§ 290-7. Miscellaneous business fees. [Added 3-25-1980 by Ord. No.
MC 2601; amended 2-24-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2623; 6-26-1984 by
Ord. No. MC 2731; 11-27-1984 by Ord. No. MC 2757; 8-11-1987 by
Ord. No. 2834; 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3027; 12-14-1999 by
Ord. No. MC 3134; 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by
Ord. No. MC 3306; 3-11-2008 by Ord. No. MC 3375; 12-29-2009 by
Ord. No. MC 3413]
License or permit fees shall be paid annually to the Division of Licensing of
the Township of Irvington for the period beginning April 1 of each year for
the conduct of the following businesses, such fees to be for the purpose of
regulation, control and revenue to offset the cost of services:
A. The fee for the service of the Construction Officer in giving advice and
making a decision as to compliance with Chapter 313 of the Revised
Code of the Town of Irvington shall be $55.
B. The fee for information supplied by the Township Engineer as to
whether a particular block and/or lot is located in the special flood
hazard area shall be the sum of $22.
A. To conduct or operate a telephone answering service, the license fee
shall be $65.
B. To conduct or operate the business of manufacturing, distributing or
selling cosmetics (liquids, creams or sprays) or beauty parlor or
barbershop supplies, the fee shall be $235 initially and $65 annually
thereafter.
C. To conduct or operate the business of automobile washing, the fee shall
be $397 initially and $160 annually thereafter.
D. To conduct or operate the business of check cashing, the fee shall be
$535.
§ 290-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-7
1:339
§ 290-8. Birth, marriage and death certificates.
E. To conduct or operate the business of body art (tattoo, permanent
cosmetics, ear and body piercing) establishments, the initial license fee
shall be $500. Thereafter, the annual renewal fee to conduct or operate
the business of body art (tattoo, permanent cosmetics, ear and body
piercing) shall be $250.
F. To conduct or operate the business of buying or selling used
merchandise, the license fee shall be $217.
G. To conduct or operate the business of a hotel or motel, the license fee
shall be $1,082 initially and $325 annually thereafter.
H. Every person who desires a topographic sheet or a sewer master plan
sheet shall pay the sum of $108 for each copy thereof.
I. General business fee. Any business not falling within any category
outlined in any other section of this chapter shall be subject to a fee of
$129 to operate any "miscellaneous" commercial activity within the
Township of Irvington. [Added 4-8-2019 by Ord. No. MC 3696;
9-23-2019 by Ord. No. MC 3712]
A. Every person who desires a certified copy of a birth, marriage or death
certificate or an amendment/correction to the record thereto shall
complete and submit an application form accompanied by the full
amount of the application fees to the Registrar of Vital Statistics of the
Township of Irvington as follows: [Amended 3-26-2013 by Ord. No.
MC 3485]
(1) For each certified copy of a birth certificate, the fee shall be $25 for
the first copy and $9 for each copy thereafter per transaction.
(2) For each certified copy of a death certificate, the fee shall be $25
for the first copy and $9 for each copy thereafter per transaction.
(3) For each certified copy of a marriage certificate, the fee shall be
$25 for the first copy and $9 for each copy thereafter per
transaction.
(4) For any correction to a birth, marriage or death certificate, the fee
shall be $25.
B. Inmate birth certificates. [Added 2-23-2011 by Ord. No. MC 3432]
(1) Inmates who are enrolled in the STARS program and successfully
complete it before release shall be entitled to discount fee of $4
from the birth certificate fee of $25.
(2) The aforementioned shall apply only after the Township receives $5
to cover birth certificate fees from the New Jersey Department of
Corrections.
§ 290-7 IRVINGTON CODE § 290-8
1:340
§ 290-9. Fees for use of the Nye Avenue Parking Garage. [Added
10-23-1984 by Ord. No. MC 2752; amended 8-11-1987 by Ord. No.
MC 2834; 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3027; 12-14-1999 by Ord. No.
MC 3134]
§ 290-10. Fees for parking lots. [Added 8-11-1987 by Ord. No. MC
2834; amended 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3027; 12-14-1999 by
Ord. No. MC 3134; 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by
Ord. No. MC 3306; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413]
The license fee for a parking lot shall be $423 initially and $217 annually
thereafter.
§ 290-11. Fees for used car lots. [Added 8-11-1987 by Ord. No. MC
2834; amended 3-14-1989 by Ord. No. MC 2880; 12-12-1995 by Ord.
No. MC 3027; 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3134; 8-14-2001 by Ord.
No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by Ord. No. MC 3306; 12-29-2009 by Ord.
No. MC 3413]
The license fee for a used car lot shall be $108 per year with a display of
five cars or less and $645 with more than five cars on display.
§ 290-12. Fees for incinerators. [Added 8-11-1987 by Ord. No. MC
2834; amended 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3027; 12-14-1999 by
Ord. No. MC 3134; 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by
Ord. No. MC 3306; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413]
The license fee for an incinerator shall be $693 initially and $96 annually
thereafter.
§ 290-13. Fees for apartment rental agencies. [Added 8-11-1987 by
Ord. No. MC 2834; amended 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3027;
(3) The aforementioned discount only applies to inmates in the STARS
program and who are Irvington residents.
A. Parking fees for the Nye Avenue Parking Garage shall be as follows:
(1) Up to three hours: $1.
(2) Over three hours, per day: $4.
B. Parking permits for the Nye Avenue Garage shall be as follows:
(1) Per month: $60.
(2) Initial deposit for entry card: $5 (deposit is refunded when card is
returned).141
141. Editor's Note: Former § 98-31C, regarding the Washington Avenue lot, was moved to
§ 620-57 at the request of the Township.
§ 290-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-13
1:341
12-14-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3134; 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176;
10-12-2005 by Ord. No. MC 3306; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413]
The license fee for an apartment rental agency, not operating as part of
a licensed real estate firm, shall be $2,164 initially and $535 annually
thereafter.
§ 290-14. Tobacco license fees. [Added 8-11-1987 by Ord. No. MC
2834; amended 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3027; 12-14-1999 by
Ord. No. MC 3134; 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by
Ord. No. MC 3306; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413; 5-30-2018 by
Ord. No. MC 3655; 1-28-2019 by Ord. No. MC 3681]
A. License required. No person shall sell tobacco unless a local license to
operate the same has been issued by the Department of Health
following the requisite approval, as defined in N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.5.
B. Annual fee. The annual fee for a tobacco license shall be $250.
C. Display of license. The license issued under the provision of this section
shall be displayed in a conspicuous place, by the establishment's
entrance or cash register in such a manner that the public may view the
license.
D. Violations. A license issued under the provision of this section may be
revoked or suspended, a request for a license may be denied, and the
violation may be reported to the New Jersey Department of Taxation
based upon just cause which shall include:
(1) The violation of any statute, regulation or code of the State of New
Jersey dealing with health, disease control, sanitary practices, or
environmental control;
(2) The sale of tobacco and/or any type of smoking device or product to
a person under the legal age, as defined in N.J.S.A. 54:40A-4.1;
(3) The illegal sale of untaxed, counterfeit or single cigarettes; or
(4) The violation of any provision of any other ordinance of the
Township of Irvington.
E. Penalties. Fines for violations of this section are as follows:
(1) First violation: a fine of $100.
(2) Second violation: a fine of $500.
(3) Third violation: a fine of $1,000 and a mandatory court appearance.
§ 290-13 IRVINGTON CODE § 290-15
1:342
§ 290-15. Fees for wreckers and tow trucks. [Added 8-11-1987 by
Ord. No. MC 2834; amended 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3027;
12-14-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3134; 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176;
10-12-2005 by Ord. No. MC 3306; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413]
The license fee for a wrecker/tow truck shall be $108 annually.
§ 290-16. Fees for antique stores. [Added 8-11-1987 by Ord. No. MC
2834; amended 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3027; 12-14-1999 by
Ord. No. MC 3134; 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by
Ord. No. MC 3306; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413]
The license fee for an antique store shall be $108 annually.
§ 290-17. Fees for livery service. [Added 8-11-1987 by Ord. No. MC
2834; amended 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3027; 12-14-1999 by
Ord. No. MC 3134; 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by
Ord. No. MC 3306; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413]
The license fee for livery services shall be $217 annually.
§ 290-18. Fees for newspaper vending machines. [Added 8-11-1987
by Ord. No. MC 2834; amended 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3027;
12-14-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3134; 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176;
10-12-2005 by Ord. No. MC 3306; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413]
The license fee for newspaper vending machines shall be $53 annually, and
such machines shall not block the sidewalk.
§ 290-19. Fees for Irvington Swimming Pool. [Added 6-27-1995 by
Ord. No. MC 3019; amended 6-25-1996 by Ord. No. MC 3037;
6-24-1997 by Ord. No. MC 3069; 6-23-1998 by Ord. No. MC 3097;
4-10-2012 by Ord. No. MC 3461]
Summer season fees for persons desiring to use the facilities of the
Irvington Swimming Pool shall be as follows:
A. Family (permanent residents of Irvington, husband, wife, unmarried
children up to and including 18 years of age, residing in the same
household): $75.
B. Adults (permanent residents of Irvington, over the age of 18 and up to
the age of 59): $35.
C. Minors (permanent residents of Irvington, ages infant up to 18 years of
age): $15.
D. Senior citizens (permanent residents of Irvington, ages 60 and older):
$15.
E. Nonresidents (daily): $20.
F. Nonresidents temporarily residing with an Irvington resident:
§ 290-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-19
1:343
§ 290-20. Exemption for use of shelter houses. [Added 9-9-1998 by
Ord. No. MC 3097]
§ 290-21. Fees for rights-of-way. [Added 9-28-1999 by Ord. No.
3129142]
(1) Ages six to 12: $10.
(2) Ages 13 to 18: $15.
A. Shelter houses owned and operated by the Township of Irvington shall
be made available for public use by the following Irvington
organizations without any cost after appropriate application is made for
such use and depending upon the availability of the facility requested:
(1) All Irvington-recognized block associations by listing filed with the
Community Development Department and Public Safety
Department, with president and vice president. [Amended
10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
(2) All tenant associations.
(3) Irvington Chamber of Commerce.
(4) Irvington Anti-Graffiti Committee.
(5) Irvington Economic Development Committee.
(6) Irvington Little League Organization.
(7) Irvington International Small Fry Parents Association.
(8) Irvington Urban Enterprise Zone Organization.
(9) Irvington Special Improvement Association.
(10) Irvington Clergy Association.
(11) Irvington Municipal Council representative (for community
meetings only).
(12) Irvington Springfield Avenue Business Association (for meetings
only).
(13) Community meetings for the Mayor.
B. Other groups not specifically mentioned herein may apply for use of the
herein-mentioned facilities without cost and shall be given proper
consideration after its use application is reviewed.
142. Editor's Note: This ordinance also stated: "This Agreement is subjected to any ruling by a
court of competent jurisdiction allowing municipalities to impose a higher fee."
§ 290-19 IRVINGTON CODE § 290-21
1:344
§ 290-22. Legal fees for outside counsel. [Added 11-9-1999 by Ord.
No. MC 3133; amended 2-26-2002 by Ord. No. MC 3188; 4-22-2008
by Ord. No. MC 3377; 11-25-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3517]
The Township shall utilize a range for attorney fees from $115 to $250 per
hour for legal matters assigned by the legal department.
§ 290-23. Fee for junkyards. [Added 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. MC
3134; amended 4-25-2000 by Ord. No. MC 3148; 8-14-2001 by Ord.
No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by Ord. No. MC 3306; 12-29-2009 by Ord.
No. MC 3413]
The fee for a junkyard shall be $1,271 annually.
§ 290-24. Fee for towing and storage of motor vehicles. [Added
12-14-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3134; amended 4-25-2000 by Ord. No.
MC 3148; 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by Ord. No.
MC 3306; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413]
The fee for towing and storage of motor vehicles shall be $1,271 annually.
§ 290-25. Fee for Health Officer search. [Added 12-14-1999 by Ord.
No. MC 3134; amended 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005
by Ord. No. MC 3306; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413]
The fee for the Health Officer to search the Township's environmental and/
or medical records shall be $55 per hour with a minimum charge of $99.143
§ 290-26. Fee for firesafety inspection. [Added 12-14-1999 by Ord.
No. MC 3134; amended 4-10-2018 by Ord. No. MC 3641]
The fee for firesafety inspections shall be as follows:
A. Metropolitan Fiber Systems of New Jersey, Inc., (MFS) shall pay the
Township $1,000 as an initial administrative processing fee, upon
effective date; and
B. A fee equal to the actual costs to the Township as invoiced annually,
within one year of the accrual of said actual cost; or
C. The greater of $500 or $200 per route mile of its facilities physically
occupying the public rights-of-way.
A. One unit: $100.
B. Two units: $150.
C. Three units: $200.
143. Editor's Note: Original § 98-49, False fire alarms, as amended, which previously followed
this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
I).
§ 290-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-26
1:345
§ 290-27. Fees for Chris Gatling Center. [Added 12-14-1999 by Ord.
No. MC 3135]
§ 290-28. Fees for Farmer's Market. [Added 7-15-2003 by Ord. No.
MC 3227]
The fee to sell goods at the Farmer's Market shall be $50 per month or part
thereof payable monthly, in advance, to the Township of Irvington.
§ 290-29. (Reserved)144
§ 290-30. Fees for installation of subdivision monuments. [Added
3-29-2011 by Ord. No. MC 3435]
The fee for installation of monuments that have not been installed as part
of a filed subdivision map shall be $1,000 per monument. This fee shall be
deposited with the Municipal Clerk. Upon the installation of the required
monuments, the fee shall be returned to the applicant; however, if one
year elapses from the date of the posting of the fee and the monuments
have not been installed, the Township shall be free to engage the services
of a licensed professional land surveyor and install these monuments. The
costs incurred for the installation of these monuments, plus reasonable
D. For structures with more than three units a fee of $20 per additional
unit shall be added to the $200 fee.
E. The reinspection fee shall be 50% of the initial fee.
F. All fees must be paid prior to an initial inspection or reinspection.
A. Membership fees for the Chris Gatling Center for persons desiring to
use the facilities shall be as follows: [Amended 12-29-2009 by Ord.
No. MC 3413]
(1) Family membership (up to two adults and three children or one
adult and four children): $50 per year; each additional child: $5 per
year.
(2) Adult membership (age 18 or over): $30 per year.
(3) Senior citizen (age 62 or over): $20 per year.
(4) Youth membership (age 17 or younger): $20 per year.
(5) Guest pass: $15 per day.
(6) Special activities fee: $25 to $50 per activity.
B. Membership is limited to Irvington residents.
144. Editor's Note: Former § 290-29, Fees for day-care center, added 10-13-2004 by Ord. No.
MC 3274, as amended, was superseded by Ord. No. MC 3668, adopted 10-10-2018. See
now Ch. 255, Art. I, for fees related to day-care facilities.
§ 290-26 IRVINGTON CODE § 290-30
1:346
administrative costs, shall be drawn from this fee. In the event there is an
available balance after the installation of the monuments, that sum shall be
returned to the person posting the fee.
§ 290-31. Activity fees for Recreation Center. [Added 7-12-2011 by
Ord. No. MC 3447; amended 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. MC 3461]
Activity Fee/Cost
Biddy basketball $35
Karate $35
Cheerleading activities $35
Aerobics $15/$150
Adult 35 years and older $15/$150
Basketball
Ages 13 through 16 activity
Junior Lad
$35
Age 17 activity
Senior Lad
$35
Weight room $50
Boxing $35
Open activity Free
Summer registration $40
Trip activity Minimum $10 not to exceed $50
Referee Minimum $15 not to exceed $30
Uniforms Minimum $25 not to exceed $100
T-shirts Minimum $10 not to exceed $25
Basketball leagues Minimum $150 not to exceed $300
§ 290-32. Fees for bid packages. [Added 4-9-2013 by Ord. No. MC
3488; amended 3-13-2018 by Ord. No. MC 3635]
There shall be a fee of $50 payable by all vendors who desire to receive a
bid package to cover the general costs of producing or reproducing such by
the Department of Finance. The fee shall be payable by cash and or check
with the latter being made out to the Township of Irvington. A fee of $20
for bank charges will be assessed for any checks returned not payable or
dishonored.
§ 290-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-33
1:347
§ 290-33. Substitute Municipal Prosecutors. [Added 6-25-2013 by
Ord. No. MC 3494]
The Substitute Municipal Prosecutors in the Irvington Municipal Court will
be paid at a rate of $300 per session (a full day or full evening) for their
services rendered in the Municipal Court.
§ 290-34. Internet user fees. [Added 9-26-2017 by Ord. No. MC
3618]
§ 290-35. Discovery fee; video and audiotape reproduction fees.
[Added 6-26-2018 by Ord. No. MC 3659]
A. There shall be a user fee that will vary from $1 up to $50 payable by any
individual, entity, firm, corporation, company, organization, etc., that
desires to use an online/Internet-based system for the purchase of,
applying for, obtaining, registering, or receiving any of the various
municipal documents, records, permits, forms, certifications,
applications, licenses, etc., from the Township of Irvington.
B. The user fee will be in addition to and a separate charge from the
Township fees already required to obtain what is being sought.
C. The user fee may be required by a third party or multiple parties that
are distinct and not affiliated with the Township of Irvington.
D. The user fee will only apply to transactions conducted over the Internet.
The fee is mandatory to process the request. The fee(s) cannot be
waived, altered or amended in any way.
E. The user fee is nonrefundable under any circumstances.
A. Discovery fee. The fee for discovery requested for a matter pending
before the Irvington Municipal Court shall be $20 per request for all
paper reports. Fees for videotape and audio tape is outlined in
Subsection B(1) and (2).
B. Videotape and audiotape reproduction fees.
(1) The fee for the Police Department reproduction of a videotape or
audiotape shall be as follows:
(a) Reproduction of videotape: $50 per tape.
(b) Reproduction of audiotape: $20 per tape.
(2) The fee for any other department of the Township of Irvington for
the reproduction of a videotape or audiotape shall be as follows:
(a) Less than two hours' playing time: $10 per tape.
(b) Over two hours' and less than four hours' playing time: $16 per
tape.
§ 290-33 IRVINGTON CODE § 290-35
1:348
§ 290-36. Mortgage discharge fee. [Added 9-11-2018 by Ord. No.
MC 3664]
(c) Over four hours' playing time: $20 per tape.
C. This fee shall be collected by the Police Department.
D. The Township will waive above fees for all cases represented by a
Public Defender.
A. There shall be a mortgage discharge fee in the amount of $50 to be paid
by the property owner or his or her authorized representative to cover
the cost of the Township preparing and recording the discharge of
mortgage, affordability or deed restriction.
B. The mortgage discharge fee is nonrefundable under any circumstances.
§ 290-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-36
1:349
Chapter 294
FENCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform Construction Code — See Ch. 240.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 555.
Zoning — See Ch. 650.
§ 294-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FENCE — An artificially constructed barrier of wood, masonry, stone, wire,
metal or any other manufactured or natural material or combination of
materials which encloses land or divides one piece of land from another. A
retaining wall shall not be considered a "fence" so long as the top of the wall
does not extend above the grade of the land it is retaining.
§ 294-2. Permit required.
§ 294-3. Application.
Application for such fences shall be made, in writing, to the Division of
Building Inspection and shall set forth the following information:
A. No fence shall be erected within the Township unless the owner of the
premises, or his representative authorized in writing to make such
application, shall first have obtained a permit from the Division of
Building Inspection, except that no permit shall be required for any
fence constructed by the Township or any of its boards, authorities,
commissions or agencies.
B. Prerequisite for issuance of permits. [Added 8-13-1991 by Ord. No.
MC 2929145]
(1) No permit shall be issued to any applicant who is the owner of
property wherein a permit is sought unless and until any
delinquent property taxes or assessments on such property are
paid and current.
(2) The applicant shall supply a certificate from the Township Tax
Collector that all property taxes and assessments are paid and
current on the subject property.
145. Editor's Note: Section 4 of this ordinance provided as follows: "The issuance or
maintenance of licenses or permits under any provision of this ordinance will not be
withheld or denied if such action will jeopardize the health and safety of the citizens of
Irvington." Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
§ 290-36 IRVINGTON CODE § 294-3
1:350
§ 294-4. Fees. [Amended 8-11-1987 by Ord. No. MC 2834;
12-12-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3027; 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3134;
8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by Ord. No. MC 3306;
12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413146]
The fees for a permit to erect a fence for a one- through six-family
residential application and for business, commercial, industrial and all other
residential applications are set forth in Chapter 240, Construction Code,
Uniform.
§ 294-5. Height regulations.
A. The owner and address of the premises where the fence is to be
erected.
B. A description and specification of the fence, including size, height,
dimensions, material and percentage of openings.
C. A sketch plan of the proposed location of the fence in relation to lot
lines.
A. Residential uses. No fence hereinafter erected, altered or
reconstructed in a residential district shall exceed four feet in height
above ground level when located at a distance closer to any street line
than the front setback line prescribed for said district, nor shall any
fence exceed six feet in height above ground level when located at a
distance equal to or greater than the front setback line prescribed for
said district; provided, however, that, due to the pressing need for
heightened security in large apartment complexes, perimeter fences
around apartment complexes of 500 or more contiguous units may be
eight feet in height above ground level when located at a distance
closer to any street line than the front setback line prescribed for said
district or when located at a distance equal to or greater than the front
setback line prescribed for said district.147 [Amended 12-27-1988 by
Ord. No. MC 2876; 4-23-1996 by Ord. No. MC 3033]
B. Nonresidential uses. No fence hereafter erected, altered or
reconstructed in the B-1 and B-2 Districts shall exceed a height of eight
feet above ground level, however, when site plan review is required, the
approving agency shall have the right to waive this requirement when
justified for safety or security reasons or for special screening
purposes.
C. No fence hereafter erected, altered or reconstructed in the M-1, M-2,
and O-1 Districts shall exceed the height of 10 feet above ground level.
[Amended 3-28-2006 by Ord. No. MC 3316]
146. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
147. Editor's Note: Former § 100-5B of the 1981 Revised Code, Other residential uses, as
amended, which previously followed this subsection, was repealed 12-27-1988 by Ord. No.
MC 2876.
§ 294-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 294-5
1:351
§ 294-6. Materials and types of fences restricted. [Amended
12-27-1988 by Ord. No. MC 2876]
§ 294-7. Construction requirements.
All fences shall be erected with the face or finished side away from the
property and the structural side toward the interior of the property. Fence
gates shall have a latch and shall open into the property and not onto the
sidewalk, street or other adjacent property.
§ 294-8. Maintenance standards.
Every fence shall be maintained in a safe, sound, upright condition and
in accordance with the approved plan on file with the Division of Building
Inspection.
§ 294-9. Locations. [Amended 12-27-1988 by Ord. No. MC 2876]
All fences shall be erected within the property lines, and no fence shall be
erected so as to encroach upon a public right-of-way or watercourse. Fences
erected on any corner lot shall conform to § 650-11D of said Chapter 650,
Zoning.
D. Where there is a difference in ground level between two adjacent lots,
the ground level of the higher lot shall be used in determining the
permissible height of any fence erected between said lots.
E. Exceptions. The foregoing restrictions shall not be applied so as to
prevent the erection of an open wire fence not exceeding 15 feet in
height above ground level anywhere within a public park, public
playground or public school properties.
F. Nonconforming uses. No fence shall be erected on any lot on which is
located a nonconforming building or use as such terms are defined in
the Zoning Ordinance for the Township of Irvington148 without the prior
approval of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
A. Except as otherwise provided herein, the following fences and fencing
materials are specially prohibited in any location: barbed-wire fences,
homemade fences made from pipe, sharp pointed fences (including but
not limited to cyclone fences, with sharp points extending above the
upper protective bar), canvas, cloth or electrically charged fences,
poultry netting, temporary fences, expandable fences and collapsible
fences, or fences topped with broken glass, stone or metal spikes.
B. In the M-1 and M-2 Districts, not more than four strands of barbed wire
may be added to the top of fencing, provided that the same is a
minimum of eight feet above ground level.
148. Editor's Note: See Ch. 650, Zoning.
§ 294-5 IRVINGTON CODE § 294-10
1:352
§ 294-10. Applicability to existing fences.
§ 294-11. Enforcement.
If the Building Inspector, upon inspection, determines that any fence or
portion of any fence is not being maintained in a safe, sound, upright
condition, he shall notify the owner of such fence, in writing, of his findings
and shall state briefly the reasons for such findings and order such fence
or portion of such fence repaired or removed within 30 days of the date of
written notice.
Chapter 299
FILMING
§ 299-1. Local Film Commission.149
There shall be a Local Film Commission consisting of the Director of Public
Safety, Director of Recreation and Business Administrator. The Commission
shall be charged with the responsibility of overseeing the application of all
rules, regulations and guidelines as set forth herein to those desiring to
engage in filming by way of use of the Township streets, parks and other
public places.
§ 299-2. Permit requirements.
Anyone desiring to film or videotape in the Township in a way as set forth
in § 299-1 shall first file an application for same in the Township Clerk's
office. The Clerk's office will ultimately issue the permit. The permit must be
required at least seven days prior to the requested shooting date with only
the Local Film Commission having jurisdiction to waive such a requirement.
§ 299-3. Insurance.
Proof of insurance must be provided in the following amounts:
A. Except as provided herein, any fence in existence on or before the
effective date of this chapter and not located outside of the property
lines may continue in existence without compliance with this chapter
except that the fence shall be kept painted, where applicable, and in
good repair. However, no such fence, destroyed or removed, shall be
replaced except in conformity with this chapter.
B. Any fence that encroaches on a public right-of-way or is in violation of
§ 650-11D of said Chapter 650, Zoning, shall be removed within 120
days of the effective date of this chapter.
A. For bodily injury: $250,000.
149. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 294-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 299-3
1:353
§ 299-4. Prior notice of filming.
The person or company responsible for filming must, without exception,
give written notice to the residents and businesses directly affected by the
filming at least five days before the requested shooting and include notice
of any parking restrictions resulting from the filming to take place.
§ 299-5. Time restrictions.
No filming shall be permitted in a restricted area after 10:00 p.m. and in
any other area no later than 12:00 midnight.
§ 299-6. Safety.
§ 299-7. Application review; objections.
B. For property damage: $150,000.
A. The Township of Irvington can require that at least one or more on-site
patrolmen be present at the scene of the filming for purposes of traffic
and crowd control. The cost of deploying a patrolman for such reason
shall be the responsibility of the permit holder.
B. The Township of Irvington may require an on-site electrician (in the
event power lines are utilized or affected) with the cost of such person's
presence being assessed to the permit holder.
C. The permit holder shall make the filming site accessible at all
reasonable times for inspection by the Township Fire Prevention
Bureau or other Township inspectors.
A. The Local Film Commission has the absolute right to reject any
application for filming or videotaping if it finds any of the following:
(1) Interference with traffic flow.
(2) Unreasonable interference with property owners' use and
enjoyment of their property.
(3) Any reason that it deems such filming or videotaping not to be in
the best interests of the health, safety and welfare of the residents
of the Township and/or surrounding area of the filming or
videotaping.
B. Any person (resident or business) objecting to the filming shall file such
objection with the office of the Township Clerk, with such objection
becoming a part of the potential filmmaker's application. Such
objection should be in writing.
§ 299-3 IRVINGTON CODE § 299-8
1:354
§ 299-8. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the Commission's decision to deny or revoke a
permit can request relief from such decision by filing a written appeal
before the Irvington Municipal Council. The Council shall act as an
appellate review panel and decide to either affirm or reverse such decision.
§ 299-9. Fees.
§ 299-10. Violations and penalties.150
Any permit holder who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall
be subject the penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article III, Penalties, of the
Township Code.
Chapter 304
FIREARMS AND WEAPONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sales — See Ch. 478.
A. The fee for a permit to film or videotape shall be $300. The permit, once
issued, shall be issued for a period not to exceed 14 days. Renewal for
an extended period of filming shall be at a cost of an additional $100 per
week.
B. A fee of $5 per day shall be charged for each commercial vehicle used,
with the total for such not exceeding $200 in total.
150. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 299-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 299-10
1:355

ARTICLE I
Toy or Imitation Firearms
[Adopted 12-15-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3557]
§ 304-1. Sale of toy pistols and imitation firearms prohibited;
exceptions.
A. Sale of toy pistols. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or dispose
of to a minor any toy pistol or pistol that can be loaded with powder and
ball or blank cartridge to be exploded by means of metal caps, but
nothing herein contained shall apply to the sale or disposal of what are
known as "firecracker pistols," "torpedo pistols" or such pistols as are
used for the explosion of paper caps.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell, possess or use
or attempt to use or give away any toy or imitation firearm which
substantially duplicates or can reasonably be perceived to be an actual
firearm unless:
(1) The entire exterior surface of such toy or imitation firearm is
colored white, bright red, bright orange, bright yellow, bright blue,
bright pink or bright purple, either singly or as the predominant
color in combination with other colors in any pattern; or
(2) Such toy or imitation firearm is constructed entirely of transparent
or translucent materials which permits unmistakable observation
of the imitation or toy firearm's complete contents; and
(3) The barrel of such toy or imitation firearm, other than the barrel of
any such toy or imitation firearm that is a water gun, is closed with
the same material of which the toy or imitation firearm is made for
a distance of not less than 1/2 inch from the front end of said barrel;
and
(4) Such toy or imitation firearm has legibly stamped thereon the name
of the manufacturer or some trade name, mark or brand by which
the manufacturer can be readily identified; and
(5) Such toy or imitation firearm does not have attached thereto a laser
pointer.
C. Subsection B of this section shall not apply to:
(1) The possession or display of toy or imitation firearms by a
manufacturer or dealer solely for purposes of sales that are
accompanied by delivery to a point without the Township;
(2) Any toy or imitation firearm that will be used only for or in the
production of television programs or theatrical or motion picture
presentations; provided, however, that such use of any toy or
imitation firearm complies with all applicable laws, rules or
§ 304-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 304-1
1:357
§ 304-2. Selling or possessing air pistols and air rifles; license; fee.
§ 304-3. Violations and penalties.151
regulations concerning request and receipt of waivers authorizing
such use;
(3) Nonfiring collector replica antique firearms, which look authentic
and may be a scale model but are not intended as toys, molded on
real firearms designed, manufactured and produced prior to 1898.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell or have in such
person's possession any air pistol or air rifle or similar instrument in
which the propelling force is a spring or air, except that the sale of such
instruments, if accompanied by delivery to a point without the
Township, and possession for such purpose shall not be unlawful if such
person shall have secured an annual license from the Township
authorizing such sale and possession. The sale and delivery of such
instruments within the Township from one licensee to another licensee,
and the use of such instruments in connection with an amusement
licensed by the Division of Consumer Affairs or at rifle or pistol ranges
duly authorized by law, shall not be considered a violation of this
section.
B. All persons dealing in such instruments referred to in this section shall
keep a record showing the name and address of each person
purchasing such instrument or instruments, together with place of
delivery, and said record shall be open to inspection during regular
business hours by the officers of the Public Safety Department of the
Township.
C. Every person to whom a license shall be granted the instruments
described in this section shall pay an annual fee of $10.
A. Toy guns. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this section, any
person who shall willfully violate any provisions of § 304-1A and B shall,
upon conviction, be subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article
III, Penalties, of the Township Code.
B. Air pistols and air rifles. Any person who shall violate § 304-2 shall be
subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article III, Penalties, of the
Township Code.
151. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 304-1 IRVINGTON CODE § 304-3
1:358
Chapter 307
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Division of Fire — See § 7-141.
Air pollution — See Ch. 149.
Alarm systems — See Ch. 154.
Uniform construction code — See Ch. 240.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 460.
Zoning — See Ch. 650.
§ 304-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 304-3
1:359

ARTICLE I
Standards; Fire Prevention Code
[Adopted 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622 as Ch. 102, Art. I, of the
1981 Revised Code]
§ 307-1. Adoption of standards; filing of copies. [Amended
3-27-1973 by Ord. No. MC 2352; 1-22-1980 by Ord. No. MC 2596152]
§ 307-2. Amendments. [Added 2-26-1974 by Ord. No. MC 2394153]
A. There is hereby adopted by the Municipal Council of the Town of
Irvington, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing
conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, that
certain code known as the "Fire Prevention Code" recommended by the
American Insurance Association, being particularly the 1976 Edition
thereof and the whole thereof, and any subsequent additions or
amendments thereto which may be hereinafter promulgated, of which
code not less than three copies have been and now are filed in the office
of the Municipal Clerk, and the same are hereby adopted and
incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on
which this chapter shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be
controlling within the Town.
B. Three copies of the Fire Prevention Code recommended by the
American Insurance Association, the 1976 Edition thereof, are on file in
the office of the Clerk of the Town of Irvington, and the same are
adopted and incorporated as if fully set out in length therein and from
the date this chapter shall take effect, pursuant to the authority for such
adoption in N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1.
A. Permits required. Per N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.7, permit requirements are as
follows:
§ 5:70-2.7 Permits required.
(a) Permits shall be required and obtained from the local enforcement
agency for the activities specified in this section, except where
they are an integral part of a process or activity by reason of which
the use is required to be registered and regulated as a life hazard
use. Permits shall at all times be kept in the premises designated
therein and shall at all times be subject to inspection by the fire
official.
152. Editor's Note: Ord. No. MC 2595 adopted 1-22-1980 provided that upon prior approval by
the Bureau of Fire Prevention that a permit be issued for the conduct or maintenance of
enumerated businesses or operations, the Division of Licensing should issue such permit
upon receipt of enumerated fees, and that every applicant should be required to fulfill and
comply with all requirements of the Fire Prevention Code and other pertinent codes,
statutes and ordinances.
153. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 307-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 307-2
1:361
1. Type 4 permits shall not be required when the storage or
activity is incidental or auxiliary to the agricultural use of a
farm property.
2. In a public or private K-12 educational building, or in a camp
accommodating six or more children of school age, when such
uses are registered as life hazard uses, no permit shall be
required for activities which are consistent with the designed
and intended use of the building or premises or part thereof.
3. Type 1 permit:
i. Bonfires.
ii. The use of a torch or flame-producing device to remove
paint from, or seal membrane roofs on, any building or
structure.
iii. The occasional use of any nonresidential occupancy other
than Use Groups F, H or S for group overnight stays
of persons over 2 1/2 years of age, in accordance with
Section F-709.0 of the Fire Prevention Code.
iv. Individual portable kiosks or displays when erected in a
covered mall for a period of less than 90 days, and when
not covered by a Type 2 permit.
v. The use of any open flame or flame-producing device,
in connection with any public gathering, for purposes of
entertainment, amusement, or recreation.
vi. Welding or cutting operations except where the welding
or cutting is performed in areas approved for welding by
the fire official and is registered as a Type B life hazard
use.
vii. The possession or use of explosives or blasting agents,
other than model rocketry engines regulated under
N.J.A.C. 12:194.
viii. The use of any open flame or flame-producing device in
connection with the training of non-fire-service personnel
in fire suppression or extinguishment procedures.
ix. The occasional use in any building of a multipurpose
room, with a maximum permitted occupancy of 100 or
more for amusement, entertainment or mercantile type
purposes.
x. The storage or handling of Class I flammable liquids in
closed containers of aggregate amounts of more than 10
gallons, but not more than 660 gallons inside a building,
or more than 60 gallons, but not more than 660 gallons
outside a building.
§ 307-2 IRVINGTON CODE § 307-2
1:362
xi. The storage or handling of Class II or IIIA combustible
liquids in closed containers of aggregate amounts of more
than 25 gallons, but not more than 660 gallons inside a
building, or more than 60 gallons, but not more than 660
gallons outside a building.
xii. Any permanent cooking operation that requires a
suppression system in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:70-4.7(g) and is not defined as a life hazard use in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.4.
xiii. The use as a place of public assembly, for a total of
not more than 15 days in a calendar year, of a building
classified as a commercial farm building under the
Uniform Construction Code.
xiv. The temporary use of any building or portion thereof as a
special amusement building for a total of not more than
15 days in a calendar year.
(1) Use of a building or portion thereof as a special
amusement building for a longer period shall
require the issuance of a certificate of occupancy,
pursuant to the Uniform Construction Code
(N.J.A.C. 5:23), for the new use.
(2) Permits issued pursuant to this section shall
require compliance with the requirements for
special amusement buildings at N.J.A.C. 5:70-4.16.
xv. The erection, operation, or maintenance of any tent,
tensioned membrane structure, or canopy, excluding
those used for recreational camping purposes, that meets
the criteria in (a)3xv(1) or (2) below shall require a Type
1 permit. Tents, tensioned membrane structures, or
canopies greater than 16,800 square feet in area or
greater than 140 feet in any dimension, whether one unit
or composed of multiple units; remaining in place for
more than 180 days; used or occupied between December
1 and March 31; having a permanent anchoring system or
foundation; or containing platforms or bleachers greater
than 11 feet in height shall be subject to the permitting
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C.
5:23-2.14).
(1) The tent, tensioned membrane structure, or canopy
is greater than 900 square feet or more than 30
feet in any dimension whether it is one unit or
composed of multiple units, but 16,800 square feet
or less in area and 140 feet or less in any
dimension, whether it is one unit or composed of
multiple units.
§ 307-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 307-2
1:363
(2) The tent, tensioned membrane structure, or canopy
contains platforms or bleachers 11 feet or less in
height;
xvi. The erection, operation, or maintenance of any outdoor
combustible maze shall require a Type 1 permit if the
outdoor combustible maze is less than six feet in height
and does not contain electrical equipment. Outdoor
combustible mazes that are six feet or greater in height
or contain electrical equipment shall be subject to the
permitting requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.14.
(1) For the purposes of applying this requirement, an
outdoor combustible maze is an attraction that
lacks a roof and is designed to disorient patrons,
reduce vision, present barriers, or otherwise
impede the flow of traffic and does not consist
solely of living rooted plants such as corn stalks or
trees, but includes mazes created from plants that
have been cut and attached to an object to support
them.
(A) Mazes consisting solely of living, rooted
plants, such as corn stalks or trees, may be
repaired using cut, replacement plants that
are otherwise the same as those of which the
maze is created without the need for a permit.
(B) No permit shall be required for mazes up to
42 inches in height created of bales of hay or
straw.
4. Type 2 permit:
i. Bowling lane resurfacing and bowling pin refinishing
involving the use and application of flammable liquids or
materials;
ii. Fumigation or thermal insecticide fogging;
iii. Carnivals and circuses employing mobile enclosed
structures used for human occupancy;
iv. The use of a covered mall in any of the following manners:
(1) Placing or constructing temporary kiosks, display
booths, concession equipment or the like in more
than 25% of the common area of the mall;
(2) Temporarily using the mall as a place of assembly;
(3) Using open flame or flame devices;
(4) Displaying liquid or gas fuel powered equipment;
or
§ 307-2 IRVINGTON CODE § 307-2
1:364
(5) Using liquefied petroleum gas, liquefied natural
gas or compressed flammable gas in containers
exceeding five-pound capacity.
v. Storage outside of buildings of LP-gas cylinders when a
part of a cylinder exchange program.
5. Type 3 permit:
i. Industrial processing ovens or furnaces operating at
approximately atmospheric pressures and temperatures
not exceeding 1,400° F. which are heated with oil or gas
fuel or which contain flammable vapors from the product
being processed;
ii. Wrecking yards, junkyards, outdoor used tire storage,
waste material handling plants, and outside storage of
forest products not otherwise classified; or
iii. The storage or discharging of fireworks.
6. Type 4 permit:
i. Storage or use at normal temperature and pressure of
more than 2,000 cubic feet of flammable compressed gas
or 6,000 cubic feet of nonflammable compressed gas;
ii. The production or sale of cryogenic liquids; the storage or
use of more than 10 gallons of liquid oxygen, flammable
cryogenic liquids or cryogenic oxidizers; or the storage
of more than 500 gallons of nonflammable, nontoxic
cryogenic liquids;
iii. The storage, handling, and processing of flammable,
combustible, and unstable liquids in closed containers
and portable tanks in aggregate amounts of more than
660 gallons;
iv. To store or handle (except medicines, beverages,
foodstuffs, cosmetics, and other common consumer items,
when packaged according to commonly accepted
practices):
(1) More than 55 gallons of corrosive liquids;
(2) More than 500 pounds of oxidizing materials;
(3) More than 10 pounds of organic peroxides;
(4) More than 500 pounds of nitromethane;
(5) More than 1,000 pounds of ammonium nitrate;
(6) More than one microcurie of radium not contained
in a sealed source;
(7) More than one millicurie of radium or other
radiation material in a sealed source or sources;
§ 307-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 307-2
1:365
(8) Any amount of radioactive material for which a
specific license from the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission is required; or
(9) More than 10 pounds of flammable solids.
v. The melting, casting, heat treating, machining or grinding
of more than 10 pounds of magnesium per working day.
7. Type 5 permit:
i. (Reserved)
(b) Application for a permit required by this Code shall be made to
the fire official in such form and detail as the fire official shall
prescribe. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by plans
or drawings as required by the fire official for evaluation of the
application.
(c) Before a permit is issued, the fire official or the fire official's
designated representative shall make or cause to be made such
inspections or tests as necessary to assure that the use and
activity for which application is made complies with the provisions
of this Code.
(d) A permit shall constitute permission to maintain, store or handle
materials, or to conduct processes which produce conditions
hazardous to life or property, or to install equipment used in
connection with such activities in accordance with the provisions
of this Code. Such permissions shall not be construed as authority
to violate, cancel or set aside any of the provisions of this Code.
(e) Plans approved by the fire official are approved with the intent
they comply in all respects to this Code. Any omission or error
on the plans does not relieve the applicant of complying with all
applicable requirements of this Code.
(f) The fire official may revoke a permit or approval issued under
the provisions of this Code if upon inspection any violation of the
Code exists, or if conditions of a permit have been violated, or
if there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to
material fact in the application, data or plans on which the permit
or approval was based.
(g) A permit shall remain in effect until revoked, or for one year unless
a shorter period of time is otherwise specified. Permits shall not
be transferable and any change in use, operation or tenancy shall
require a new permit.
1. Exceptions:
i. A Type 1 permit for welding or cutting shall be effective
throughout the local enforcing agency's jurisdiction and
shall be issued on an annual basis;
ii. A Type 1 permit for use of a commercial farm building as
a place of public assembly shall be issued for each event;
and
§ 307-2 IRVINGTON CODE § 307-2
1:366
§ 307-3. Bureau of Fire Prevention. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord.
No. MC 3553]
iii. A Type 1 permit for group overnight stays shall be
required for each nonconsecutive overnight stay.
iv. A Type 1 permit for the temporary use of any building
as a special amusement building shall be issued for each
event.
(h) Any permit issued shall become invalid if the authorized work
or activity is not commenced within six months after issuance
of the permit, or if the authorized work or activity is suspended
or abandoned for a period of six months after the time of
commencement.
(i) A permit shall not be issued until the designated fees have been
paid.
1. There shall be no fee for a permit required by this subchapter
if a municipality has by ordinance established a periodic
inspection and fee schedule for a use substantially similar to
the permit requirement.
(j) No permit(s) shall be issued for a carnival, as defined in N.J.A.C.
5:70-1.5, if the carnival has not been registered in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.22.
A. Established, etc. The Fire Prevention Code adopted by this article shall
be enforced by the Bureau of Fire Prevention in the Public Safety
Department of the Town, which is hereby established and which shall
be operated under the supervision of the Fire Chief and Director of the
Department of Public Safety.
B. Inspectors. The Fire Chief and Director of the Department of Public
Safety may detail such members of the Division of Fire as inspectors as
shall from time to time be necessary. The Chief Engineer of the Division
of Fire shall recommend to the Council the employment of technical
inspectors, who, when such authorization is made, shall be selected
through an examination to determine their fitness for the position. The
examination shall be open to members and nonmembers of the
Department of Public Safety, and appointments made after examination
shall be for an indefinite term with removal only for cause.
C. Reports and recommendations. A report of the Bureau of Fire
Prevention shall be made monthly and transmitted to the chief
executive officer of the Town and to the Municipal Council. It shall
contain all proceedings under the Fire Prevention Code adopted by this
article, with such statistics as the Fire Chief and Director of the
Department of Public Safety may wish to include therein. The Fire Chief
and Director of Public Safety shall also recommend any amendments to
the Fire Prevention Code which, in his judgment, shall be desirable.
§ 307-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 307-4
1:367
§ 307-4. Definitions.
As used in the Fire Prevention Code, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
LEGISLATIVE RESEARCH OFFICER — The Attorney for the Town, known
as the "Town Attorney."
MUNICIPALITY — The Town of Irvington.
§ 307-5. Districts in which storage of explosives and blasting agents
prohibited.
The limits referred to in Section 12.5b of the Fire Prevention Code adopted
by this chapter, in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is
prohibited, are in all zones.
§ 307-6. Districts in which manufacture and storage of fireworks
prohibited. [Added 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622]
The limits referred to in Section 13.3a of the Fire Prevention Code, in which
manufacture and storage of fireworks is prohibited, are in all zones.
§ 307-7. Districts in which storage of flammable liquids in outside
aboveground tanks prohibited. [Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC
2622]
§ 307-8. Restricted areas for bulk storage of liquefied petroleum
gases. [Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622]
The limits referred to in Section 21.6a of the Fire Prevention Code, in which
bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, are hereby established
as all zones except the M-2 Light Industrial District and the M-1 Heavy
Industrial Manufacturing District as indicated on the Zoning Map on file in
the office of the Municipal Clerk.
A. The limits referred to in Section 16.22a of the Fire Prevention Code in
which storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is
prohibited, are all zones except the M-2 Light Industrial District and the
M-1 Heavy Industrial Manufacturing District as indicated on the Zoning
Map on file in the office of the Municipal Clerk.
B. The limits referred to in Section 16.61 of the Fire Prevention Code, in
which new bulk plants for flammable or combustible liquids are
prohibited, are all zones except the M-2 Light Industrial District and the
M-1 Heavy Industrial Manufacturing District as indicated on the Zoning
Map on file in the office of the Municipal Clerk.
§ 307-4 IRVINGTON CODE § 307-9
1:368
§ 307-9. Routes for vehicles transporting explosives and blasting
agents. [Added 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622]
The routes referred to in Section 12.7o of the Fire Prevention Code for
vehicles transporting explosives and blasting agents are hereby established
as state highways only.
§ 307-10. Routes for vehicles transporting hazardous chemicals or
other dangerous articles. [Added 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622]
The routes referred to in Section 20.14 of the Fire Prevention Code for
vehicles transporting hazardous chemicals and other dangerous articles are
hereby established as state highways only.
§ 307-11. Modifications. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC
3553]
The Fire Chief and Director of the Department of Public Safety shall have
power to modify any of the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code adopted
by this article upon application in writing by the owner or lessee or his duly
authorized agent when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying
out the strict letter of such code; provided that the spirit of the code
shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The
particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision
of the Fire Chief and Director of the Department of Public Safety shall be
entered upon the records of the Department and a signed copy shall be
furnished the applicant.
§ 307-12. Appeals. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
Whenever the Fire Chief and Director of the Department of Public Safety
shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or
when it is claimed that the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code adopted
by this article do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of such code
have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal
from the decision of the Fire Chief and Director of the Department of Public
Safety to the Municipal Council within 30 days from the date of the decision
appealed.
§ 307-13. Permits for certain businesses; fee. [Added 1-22-1980 by
Ord. No. MC 2595]
A. Upon prior approval by the Bureau of Fire Prevention of the Town of
Irvington that a permit be issued for the conduct or maintaining of any
of the following plants, businesses or manufacturing or for the sale or
storage of any of the following materials, liquids or gases, the Division
of Licensing shall issue such permit upon receipt of the following fees
from the applicant for such permit.
B. Every applicant for a permit shall be required to fulfill and comply with
all requirements of the Fire Prevention Code as well as all other codes,
§ 307-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 307-13
1:369
§ 307-14. Violations and penalties.
statutes and ordinances relating to the particular businesses and
subject matter for the safety and health of the residents of the
municipality and the state.
C. Fees for specific permits. [Amended 8-11-1987 by Ord. No. MC
2834; 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3027]
(1) There shall be a permit fee charged of $57 for each private gasoline
pump or tank used by private business or industrial plants for
fueling company autos or trucks. [Amended 12-14-1999 by Ord.
No. MC 3134; 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by
Ord. No. MC 3306; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413]
(2) Permits shall be required by the Irvington Department of Public
Safety for the installation or removal of tanks containing
flammable, combustible or hazardous materials, acids or
chemicals, including but not limited to gasoline. The fee charged
for such permits shall be: [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No.
MC 3553]
Type Fee
Tanks for home heating oil:
Up to 2,000 gallons $35
2,001 to 5,000 gallons $70
Over 5,000 gallons $140
Commercial heating oil tanks:
Up to 500 gallons $70
501 to 10,000 gallons $140
Over 10,000 gallons $210
Tanks:
Up to 550 gallons $70
551 to 2,000 gallons $105
2,001 to 5,000 gallons $140
5,001 to 10,000 gallons $210
Over 10,000 gallons $280
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the Fire
Prevention Code adopted by this article or fail to comply therewith, or
who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or
who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or
plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit
issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who
shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the
Fire Chief and Director of Public Safety or by a court of competent
§ 307-13 IRVINGTON CODE § 307-14
1:370
jurisdiction, within the time fixed therein, shall severally for each such
violation and noncompliance, respectively, be punishable as provided
in the general penalty provisions as set forth in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article III. [Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622;
10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
B. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the
enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
C. Any owner, lessee, manager or operator of any building or premises
who refuses the Director of Public Safety, Chief of the Bureau of Fire
Prevention or any inspector thereof entry to any building or premises
for the purpose of making an inspection or investigation shall be
deemed in violation of the Fire Prevention Code. [Added 7-9-1974 by
Ord. No. MC 2416; 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
§ 307-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 307-14
1:371

ARTICLE II
Enforcement of Uniform Fire Code
[Adopted 8-6-1985 by Ord. No. MC 2789 (Ch. 102, Art. II, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 307-15. Local enforcement.
Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c. 383)154
the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code shall be locally enforced in the
municipality of the Township of Irvington.
§ 307-16. Enforcement agency.155
The local enforcing agency shall be the Bureau of Fire Prevention.
§ 307-17. Duties.
The local enforcement agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act and
the codes and regulations adopted under it in all buildings, structures and
premises within the established boundaries of the Township of Irvington,
other than owner-occupied one- and two-family dwellings, and shall
faithfully comply with the requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act156
and the Uniform Fire Code.
§ 307-18. Inspection of life hazard uses.
The local enforcing agency established by § 307-16 of this article shall carry
out the periodic inspections of life hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire
Code on behalf of the Commissioner of Community Affairs.
§ 307-19. Organization. [Amended 12-28-2016 by Ord. No. MC
3594]
The local enforcing agency established by § 307-16 of this article shall be a
part of Irvington Fire Department and shall be under the direct supervision
and control of the Director of Public Safety.
§ 307-20. Fire Official. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553;
12-28-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3594]
The local enforcing agency shall be under the direct supervision of a Fire
Official who shall be appointed by the Director of the Department of Public
Safety and shall serve at the discretion of the Director of Public Safety.
154. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-202.
155. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
156. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.
§ 307-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 307-21
1:373
§ 307-21. Inspectors and employees. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord.
No. MC 3553; 12-28-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3594]
Such inspectors and other employees as may be necessary in the local
enforcing agency shall be appointed by the Director of the Department of
Public Safety.
§ 307-22. Boards of Appeal.
Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act,157 any person
aggrieved by any order of the local enforcement agency shall have the right
to appeal to the Construction Board of Appeals of Essex County.
§ 307-23. Additional inspections and fees. [Added 8-11-1987 by Ord.
No. MC 2834; amended 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005
by Ord. No. MC 3306; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413; 10-14-2015
by Ord. No. MC 3553158]
The following buildings constitute life-hazard uses which are subject to
registration with the Township of Irvington Department of Public Safety
and periodic inspections that are not covered by the New Jersey State
Code, N.J.A.C. 5:70. The inspection for compliance with this provision and
registration fees for each category is as follows:
A. Multiple dwellings.
(1) All multiple dwellings with nine or more units that exit into a
common area means of egress shall be inspected once every 12
months. The registration fee shall be $128.
(2) All multiple dwellings over three stories and less than 75 feet high
shall be inspected once every 12 months. Registration fee shall be
$105.
(3) The registration fee shall be paid on or before March 1 of each year.
(4) Failure to register during any calendar year will result in a penalty
of 1/2 the amount owed for registration as well as the full year's
registration fee.
B. Education. All schools, private and public, that are covered under BOCA
Building Code, Use Group E classification, and not covered by the
N.J.A.C. 5:70. Required inspection for this group will be once every six
months. Annual registration fee by the Township will be waived for Use
Group E.
157. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-206 and N.J.S.A. 52:27D-208.
158. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 307-21 IRVINGTON CODE § 307-24
1:374
§ 307-24. Fire registration fee for non-life-hazard uses. [Added
8-6-2013 by Ord. No. MC 3497]
There is hereby established a fire registration fee for non-life-hazard uses
pursuant to the below schedule:
A. On-site inspections of non-life-hazard use: buildings, businesses and
occupancies.159
Business Fee Schedule
Use Code Fee Amount Description
0-1 $25 Office occupancy, 500 square feet or
less
0-2 $45 Any occupancy, under 1,000 square
feet
0-3 $60 Any occupancy, 1,000 to 5,999 square
feet
0-4 $90 Any occupancy, 6,000 to 9,999 square
feet
0-5 $120 Any occupancy, 10,000 square feet or
larger
M-1 $60 3 to 5 dwelling units with common
area
M-2 $60 6 to 25 dwelling units with common
area
M-3 $240 Multiple dwelling with common area,
over 25 units
159. Editor's Note: Former § 307-25, Smoke and carbon monoxide detector inspection fees,
added 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. MC 3497, which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 4-10-2018 by Ord. No. MC 3641.
§ 307-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 307-24
1:375
Chapter 313
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction code — See Ch. 240.
Fees — See § 290-5.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 365.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 550.
Subdivision and site plan review — See Ch.
560.
Zoning — See Ch. 650.
§ 307-24 IRVINGTON CODE § 307-24
1:376
ARTICLE I
Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Objectives
§ 313-1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has, in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et
seq., delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general
welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Municipal Council of the Township of
Irvington, of New Jersey does ordain as follows.
§ 313-2. Findings of fact.
§ 313-3. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
A. The flood hazard areas of Irvington are subject to periodic inundation
which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of
the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and
general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and velocities
and, when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses
that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected
from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
A. To protect human life and health;
B. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
C. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges
located in areas of special flood hazard;
F. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area
of special flood hazard; and
§ 313-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-3
1:377
§ 313-4. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
H. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 313-3 IRVINGTON CODE § 313-4
1:378
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 313-5. Word usage; terms defined.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
ADMINISTRATOR — The Township Engineer or his designee.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Township Engineer's interpretation
of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
APPEAL BOARD — All appeals for the decisions and interpretation of the
Administrator; shall be the Zoning Board of Appeals of the Township of
Irvington.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH, or VO Zone on a
community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a one-percent
annual or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one foot to
three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood
hazard.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — The Official Map
on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building (i) built in the case of a
building in an area of special flood hazard to have the top of the elevated
floor elevated above the ground level by means of piling, columns (posts and
piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water, and (ii) adequately
anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during
§ 313-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-5
1:379
a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an area of special flood
hazard, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill
or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The Official Map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report in which the
Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the
Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the
base flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 0.2
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
§ 313-5 IRVINGTON CODE § 313-5
1:380
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for the
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such
enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable nonelevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle."
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
— A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation adopted
by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
No. 97-348) includes substantial improvements and means the date the
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
A. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
C.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
D.
§ 313-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-5
1:381
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The "actual start" means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as
the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings or piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a
gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which exceeds
50% of the market value of the structure before the start of construction
of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter that
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local Code Enforcement Officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
B.
§ 313-5 IRVINGTON CODE § 313-5
1:382
ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 313-6. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Township of Irvington, Essex County, New Jersey.
§ 313-7. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
§ 313-8. Violations and penalties.160
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction, be subject to
the penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article III, Penalties, of the Township
Code, for each violation, and, in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses
involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Township
of Irvington from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent
or remedy any violation.
§ 313-9. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and any other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 313-10. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Township of Irvington,
Community No. 340184, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) A scientific and engineering report, "Flood Insurance Study, Essex
County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)," dated June 4, 2007.
(2) Flood Insurance Rate Map for Essex County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions) as shown on Index and panel numbers 0132, 0134,
0151, 0152, 0153, the effective date of which is June 4, 2007.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and maps are on file at
Municipal Building, Civic Square, Irvington, NJ 07111-2434.
160. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 313-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-10
1:383
§ 313-11. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
A. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special
flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Township of
Irvington, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 313-10 IRVINGTON CODE § 313-11
1:384
ARTICLE IV
Development Permits
§ 313-12. Development permit required; application.
§ 313-13. Designation of local administrator.
The Township Engineer is hereby appointed to administer and implement
this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in
accordance with its provisions.
§ 313-14. Duties and responsibilities of administrator.
Duties of the Township Engineer serving as the local administrator shall
include, but not be limited to:
A. A development permit shall be obtained before construction or
development begins within any area of special flood hazard established
in § 313-7. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms
furnished by the Township Engineer and may include, but not be limited
to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location
of the foregoing.
B. Specifically, the following information is required:
(1) Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures;
(2) Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any structure has
been floodproofed;
(3) Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet
the floodproofing criteria in § 313-17B; and
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
A. Permit review. The Township Engineer shall:
(1) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway, assure that the
encroachment provisions of § 313-18A are met.
§ 313-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-14
1:385
§ 313-15. Variance procedure.
B. Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood elevation
and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with § 313-7,
Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, the Township
Engineer shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other
source, in order to administer § 313-17A, Specific standards for
residential construction, and § 313-17B, Specific standards for
nonresidential construction.
C. Information to be obtained and maintained. The Township Engineer
shall:
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
(2) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
§ 313-12B(3).
(3) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Alteration of watercourses. The Township Engineer shall:
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section,
and the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood-carrying capacity
is not diminished.
E. Interpretation of DFIRM/FIRM boundaries. The Township Engineer
shall make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of
the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where
there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual
field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as
provided in § 313-15.
A. Appeal board.
§ 313-14 IRVINGTON CODE § 313-15
1:386
(1) The Planning Board as established by the Township of Irvington
shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
(2) The Planning Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Township Engineer in the enforcement
or administration of this chapter.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Planning Board, or any
taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Essex County Superior
Court, as provided in the applicable law.
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Planning Board shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive
Plan and floodplain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
§ 313-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-15
1:387
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection A(4) and the
purposes of this chapter, the Planning Board may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purposes of this chapter.
(6) The Township Engineer shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any variances
to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
B. Conditions for variances.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or
less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, provided
Subsection A(4)(a) through (k) has been fully considered. As the lot
size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification
required for issuing the variance increases.
(2) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as an historic structure and the variance is the
minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design
of the structure.
(3) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public as identified in Subsection A(4),
or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(6) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
§ 313-15 IRVINGTON CODE § 313-15
1:388
ARTICLE V
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
§ 313-16. General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required:
A. Anchoring.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
(2) All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include,
but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to
ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state
and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
C. Utilities.
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters;
(3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
(4) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
D. Subdivision proposals.
(1) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
§ 313-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-16
1:389
§ 313-17. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in § 313-7, Basis for establishing areas of special
flood hazard, or in § 313-14B, Use of other base flood and floodway data, the
following standards are required:
(2) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
(3) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage; and
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development which contain at least
50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
E. Enclosure openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings having a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall
be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped
with screens, louvers, or other covering or devices, provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Residential construction.
(1) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
to or above base flood elevation.
(2) Within any AO Zone on the municipality's DFIRM/FIRM, all new
construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth
number specified in feet (at least two feet if no depth number is
specified). Adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures shall
be required.
B. Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential
structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
§ 313-16 IRVINGTON CODE § 313-17
1:390
§ 313-18. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 313-7 are areas
designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area
due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles,
and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
elevated to the level of the base flood elevation; or, together with the
attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, shall:
(1) Require within any AO Zone on the municipality's DFIRM/FIRM
that all new construction and substantial improvement of any
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall
either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above
the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number
specified in feet (at least two feet if no depth number is specified);
and require adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes
to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures;
or
(2) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water;
(3) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
(4) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be provided to
the official as set forth in § 313-14C(2).
C. Manufactured homes.
(1) Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
§ 313-16A(2).
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the top of the lowest floor is at or
above the base flood elevation.
A. Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development, are prohibited unless a
technical evaluation demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in
any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood
discharge.
B. If Subsection A is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements must comply with Article V, Provisions for Flood Hazard
Reduction.
§ 313-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-18
1:391
C. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than 0.2 foot at any
point.
§ 313-18 IRVINGTON CODE § 313-18
1:392
Chapter 318
FLORISTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing procedure — See Ch. 290, Art. I.
§ 318-1. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or carry on the business
of selling, at retail or wholesale, in the Town, cut flowers, shrubs, growing
flowers, plants, potteries containing plants or flowers, flower stands or
flower holders containing plants or flowers, Christmas wreaths or other
types of wreaths, boughs, Christmas or other seasonal floral decorations,
ruscus, twigs or sparkle bushes, without first having obtained from the
Division of Licensing of the Town a license for that purpose.
§ 318-2. Application for license.
Any person desiring a license required by the preceding section shall file an
application with the Division of Licensing of the Town, on forms furnished
by that Division, at least 30 days prior to the date it is sought to engage
in or carry on the selling of the items listed in § 318-1. All applicants shall
answer completely all questions contained on such application form.
§ 318-3. Investigation of applicants; issuance or denial of license.
It shall be the duty of the Division of Licensing to investigate all applicants
for the license required by § 318-1 and to issue such license unless the
investigation develops that the granting of such license would be inimical to
the health, welfare, morals and safety of the residents of the Town.
§ 318-4. License fees; expiration date. [Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord.
No. MC 2622; 8-11-1987 by Ord. No. MC 2834; 12-12-1995 by Ord.
No. MC 3027; 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3134; 8-14-2001 by Ord.
No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by Ord. No. MC 3306; 12-29-2009 by Ord.
No. MC 3413]
Before any license is issued pursuant to this chapter, the applicant therefor
shall pay a fee for a florist's license or for a permit for the sale of Christmas
trees in the amount of $217 initially and $76 annually thereafter. Such
license shall expire on the first day of April after its issuance.
§ 318-5. Renewal of license.
All licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be renewed
annually, subject in all things to the same conditions, provisions and charges
as contained in and for the original license; provided that application for
§ 313-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 318-5
1:393
renewal is made not later than March 1 of the year in which the license
expires.
§ 318-6. Suspension or revocation of license.
Any license provided for by this chapter may be suspended or revoked
by the Director having jurisdiction over the Division of Licensing if there
are reasons for its revocation based upon violations of this chapter or if a
continuance of the license would be inimical to the health, welfare, morals
and safety of the residents of the Town; provided, however, that before any
license may be revoked, a hearing shall be given to the licensee on two days'
written notice sent to the licensee at the address stated in his application.
§ 318-7. License required for each location.
A license shall be required for the premises of each location where it is
sought to engage in or where there is carried on the sale of the items listed
in § 318-1.
Chapter 324
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 158.
Licensing procedure — See Ch. 290, Art. I.
Food and beverage vending machines — See
Ch. 229, Art. IV.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 402.
§ 318-5 IRVINGTON CODE § 318-7
1:394
ARTICLE I
Retail Food Establishments
[Adopted 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622 as Ch. 111, Art. I, of the
1981 Revised Code]
§ 324-1. Adoption of standards. [Amended 10-26-1971 by Ord. No.
MC 2302; 11-27-1984 by Ord. No. MC 2754; 9-10-1985 by Ord. No.
MC 2791161]
The standards in N.J.A.C. 8:24, Sanitation in Retail Food Establishments and
Food and Beverage Vending Machines, as amended, apply in the Township.
§ 324-2. License required. [Amended 11-27-1984 by Ord. No. MC
2754; 9-10-1985 by Ord. No. MC 2791; 8-13-1991 by Ord. No. MC
2929; 4-12-1994 by Ord. No. MC 2995; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC
3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]162]
§ 324-3. License fees. [Amended 10-26-1971 by Ord. No. MC 2302;
1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622; 9-28-1982 by Ord. No. MC 2668;
11-27-1984 by Ord. No. MC 2757; 8-11-1987 by Ord. No. MC 2834;
4-12-1994 by Ord. No. MC 2995; 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3027;
12-14-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3134; 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176;
A. No person shall operate a retail food establishment or temporary retail
food establishment unless a license to operate the same shall have been
issued by the Division of Licensing following approval thereof from the
health authority as defined in N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.5.
B. No person shall operate a retail food establishment that has been found
to be "Unsatisfactory," as defined by N.J.A.C. 8:24-8.11, until the
Department of Health has issued a "Satisfactory" rating pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 8:24-8.11.
C. No person shall operate a newly constructed, remodeled, converted or
altered retail food establishment without first obtaining approval of
plans and specifications related to proposed construction, remodeling,
conversion or alteration as required by N.J.A.C. 8:24-9.1 and has been
inspected as required by N.J.A.C. 8:24-9.2 and receives a "Satisfactory"
rating pursuant to N.J.A.C. 8:24-8.11.
D. Upon receipt of said application, the Department of Health shall
conduct an investigation into the plans for preparation and serving the
food, including source of food and type of equipment to be used. Upon
satisfactory evidence, based upon N.J.A.C. 8:24, the Department of
Health shall approve the application and allow the applicant to obtain a
license from the Division of Licensing.
161. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
162. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 324-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 324-3
1:395
10-12-2005 by Ord. No. MC 3306; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413;
11-10-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3589]
There shall be a charge for the license required by § 324-2 as follows:
§ 324-4. Display of license. [Amended 9-10-1985 by Ord. No. MC
2791]
A. The annual fee for a license to operate a retail food establishment shall
be $1 per square foot of the establishment not to exceed $1,000 initially
and 1/3 of the initial fee annually thereafter. A minimum annual fee of
$300 for a license to operate a retail food establishment is hereby
established. [Amended 12-28-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3593;
6-27-2017 by Ord. No. MC 3612]
B. The fee for a license to operate a temporary retail food establishment
commencing business for less than five days shall be $50. [Amended
12-28-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3593]
C. The fee for a license to operate a temporary retail food establishment
commencing business for more than five days, the licensing fee for a
period of four months shall be 25% of the established annual licensing
fee for that calendar year.
D. Late fees for licenses and permits.
(1) A monthly late fee of $25, not to exceed $300 per year, is hereby
established for all licenses purchased after the conclusion of the
grace period. [Amended 6-27-2017 by Ord. No. MC 3612]
(2) For those new establishments commencing business from October
1 through December 31 of the year, the licensing fee shall be 25%
of the established annual licensing fee for that calendar year.
(3) A five-day period of grace following the established license
deadline is hereby established.
A. Licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall be displayed in
a conspicuous place near the public entrance in such a manner that the
public may view the license.
B. Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 8:24-8.12, the placard rating of the most recent
inspection of the retail food establishment shall be posted in a
conspicuous place near the public entrance in such a manner that the
public may view the rating.163
163. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 324-3 IRVINGTON CODE § 324-5
1:396
§ 324-5. Expiration date; renewal. [Amended 11-27-1984 by Ord.
No. MC 2754; 9-10-1985 by Ord. No. MC 2791; 4-12-1994 by Ord.
No. MC 2995]
Licenses, other than for temporary retail food establishments, issued or
approved under the provisions of this article shall expire annually on
December 31 of each year, and application for renewal thereof shall be
submitted, together with the required fee, from December 1 to December
31 of each year. Temporary retail food establishment licenses shall be in
effect for the duration of the event.
§ 324-6. Suspension or revocation of license. [Amended 9-10-1985
by Ord. No. MC 2791]
§ 324-7. Temporary retail or temporary mobile retail food
establishments; itinerant establishments. [Amended 4-12-1994 by
Ord. No. MC 2995]
A. A license issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked or
suspended, and a request for a license may be denied, based upon just
cause which shall include:
(1) The violation of any of the provisions of this article;
(2) The violation of any of the provisions of any other ordinance of the
Township of Irvington;
(3) The violation of any statute, regulation or code of the State of New
Jersey dealing with health, disease control, sanitary practices or
environmental control;
(4) A misrepresentation of a material fact related to the source of food
supplies, the medical records of food handlers or epidemiological
information relating to investigation of a foodborne disease; or
(5) Failure to comply with a lawful directive of the Health Officer or his
duly appointed designee.
B. An owner or operator of a retail food establishment may appeal the
suspension, revocation or denial of a license to operate and request a
hearing thereon before the Health Officer by filing a written request
with the Health Officer within five business days from the date of
receipt of such notice of suspension, revocation or denial. Such appeal,
which shall state in detail why the suspension, revocation or denial
should be reversed, shall be acted upon and a hearing held within 10
business days of its receipt.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
TEMPORARY MOBILE RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Any
movable restaurant, truck, van, trailer, cart, bicycle, watercraft, or
other movable unit, including a hand-carried, portable container in or
§ 324-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 324-7
1:397
§ 324-8. Meat packaging. [Added 3-10-1970 by Ord. No. MC
2248164]
The Township shall comply with all state and federal regulations regarding
meat packaging.
§ 324-9. Violations and penalties; schedule of fines. [Added
9-13-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3582165]
on which food or beverages are transported, stored, or prepared for
retail sale or given away at temporary locations.[Added 11-10-2016
by Ord. No. MC 3588]
TEMPORARY RETAIL OR TEMPORARY MOBILE RETAIL FOOD
ESTABLISHMENT — Any retail food establishment which operates at
a fixed location within the Township of Irvington municipal boundaries
for a period of no more than five consecutive days in connection with a
fair, carnival, circus, public exhibitions or similar transitory gatherings
or meetings open to the general public.[Amended 11-10-2016 by
Ord. No. MC 3588]
B. No such temporary retail or temporary mobile retail food establishment
shall operate without first filing an application to operate with the
Department of Health. The application must be completed and
submitted for approval no later than 15 days prior to the event(s).
[Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No.
MC 3511]
A. Except as otherwise provided in this article, the penalties for violations
of this article are as follows:
Section
Short
Description
1st
Offense
2nd
Offense
3rd
Offense
4th Offense
Maximum
Fine;
Court
Appearance
Required
§ 324-2 Current retail
food
establishment
license
required
$250 $500 $750 $1,000
§ 324-4 Display of
retail food
establishment
license
$50 $100 $250 $500
164. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
165. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 324-7 IRVINGTON CODE § 324-9
1:398
Section
Short
Description
1st
Offense
2nd
Offense
3rd
Offense
4th Offense
Maximum
Fine;
Court
Appearance
Required
§ 324-7 Temporary
retail food
establishment
license
required
$50 $100 $250 $500
B. Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of a violation of any other
terms of this article shall be subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter
1, Article III, Penalties, of the Township Code.
§ 324-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 324-9
1:399

ARTICLE II
Food Handler's Card
[Adopted 4-24-1979 by Ord. No. MC 2565 (Ch. 111, Art. II, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 324-10. Handling food without food handler's card. [Amended
9-25-1979 by Ord. No. MC 2579; 8-13-1991 by Ord. No. MC 2929;166
8-6-2013 by Ord. No. MC 3498; 3-13-2018 by Ord. No. MC 3635;
10-10-2018 by Ord. No. MC 3669]
§ 324-11. Transfer of card. [Amended 9-25-1979 by Ord. No. MC
2579]
A. No retail food establishment license shall be issued pursuant to Article I
of this chapter unless the owner and/or manager and/or supervisor and
all employees who handle food of said retail food establishment shall
have received from the Department of Health a food handler's card.
(1) Whenever any retail food establishment has been issued a written
notice of violation for lack of a food handler's permit, all persons
employed therein shall, within 30 days of the date of such
notification, apply for a food handler's card and attend the course
of instruction provided herein. Checkout personnel and all other
persons whose employment or duties are exclusively limited to
clerical or administrative functions are exempt from the
requirements of this subsection.
(2) All persons holding a food handler's card shall renew such card
through the Town of Irvington's Department of Health, on or before
June 1 of each calendar year.
(3) For a good cause shown, the Department of Health, via the Health
Officer or other designee, may suspend or revoke the food
handler's card issued hereunder.
(4) At the written request of the holder of the food handler's card, the
Health Officer or designee shall hold a hearing to determine
whether good cause exists for the suspension or revocation of such
card.
B. Each person applying to attend the general course of instruction
provided by the Department of Health shall pay a registration fee as set
out in § 324-16. Food handler's cards may be renewed upon payment of
a renewal fee as set out in § 324-16.
166. Editor's Note: Section 4 of this ordinance provided as follows: "The issuance or
maintenance of licenses or permits under any provision of this ordinance will not be
withheld or denied if such action will jeopardize the health and safety of the citizens of
Irvington."
§ 324-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 324-11
1:401
§ 324-12. Records of employees. [Amended 9-25-1979 by Ord. No.
MC 2579]
§ 324-13. Course of instruction. [Amended 9-28-1982 by Ord. No.
MC 2668; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
A food handler's card shall be issued by the Health Officer to any person
applying therefor upon successful completion by the applicant of a general
course of instruction in basic environmental sanitation, the prevention of
food-borne disease transmission and other related health matters. Such
course of instruction shall be given by the Department of Health of the
Town of Irvington or by such other organization as said Department may
direct. Upon successful completion of the course of instruction, applicant
shall receive a card valid for a period of one year, unless sooner revoked
or suspended. Any person who is unable to attend the course of instruction
given by said Department may attend a comparable sanitation course given
by the State of New Jersey or any county or municipality thereof and
approved by said Department, and proof of having successfully completed
such course shall be deemed full compliance with the requirements of this
section.
§ 324-14. Renewals. [Amended 9-25-1979 by Ord. No. MC 2579;
9-28-1982 by Ord. No. MC 2668]
A. No person to whom a food handler's card is issued shall give, loan,
transfer or permit or suffer the same to be used by any other person for
any purpose whatsoever.
B. The holder of a food handler's card shall have the same on his person
during all working hours and shall submit the same for inspection when
demand is made upon him by the Health Officer or his authorized agent
or representative.
A. All persons engaged in the business of handling, preparing, selling,
serving or dispensing of foodstuffs or beverages intended or suited for
human consumption shall at all times maintain records of each person
employed by them containing the following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of said employee.
(2) The date of employment.
(3) The date and number of the food handler's card issued to such
employee.
(4) Any record of any communicable disease during the preceding tenyear
period and the name of the physician and/or hospital which
treated such disease.
B. All such records shall be made available at all times for inspection by
the Health Officer or by his authorized agent or representative.
§ 324-11 IRVINGTON CODE § 324-14
1:402
§ 324-15. Suspension or revocation. [Amended 9-25-1979 by Ord.
No. MC 2579]
§ 324-16. Fees. [Amended 9-25-1979 by Ord. No. MC 2579;
1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622; 9-28-1982 by Ord. No. 2668;
11-27-1984 by Ord. No. MC 2757; 8-11-1987 by Ord. No. MC 2834;
4-12-1994 by Ord. No. MC 2995; 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3027;
12-14-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3134; 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176;
10-12-2005 by Ord. No. MC 3306; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413;
7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511; 11-10-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3589;
12-28-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3593]
Each person applying to attend the general course of instruction provided
by the Department of Health shall pay a fee of $50. Food handlers' cards
may be renewed upon payment of a renewal fee of $25.
A. All persons holding a food handler's card shall renew such card through
the Town of Irvington, Department of Health on or before June 1 of each
calendar year. [Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407;
7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
B. No food handler's card shall be renewed more than five times unless the
holder thereof attends the course of instruction provided for in
§ 324-13.
A. For good cause shown, the Health Officer may suspend or revoke any
food handler's card issued hereunder. Good cause shall include:
(1) The violation of any of the provisions of this article.
(2) The violation of any of the provisions of any other health ordinance
of the Town of Irvington.
(3) The violation of any statute, regulation or code of the State of New
Jersey dealing with health or sanitary practices and procedures.
(4) A misrepresentation of a material fact on any record maintained
pursuant to § 324-12.
(5) Failure to comply with lawful directives of the Health Officer or
Department of Health. [Amended 9-28-1982 by Ord. No. 2668;
2-13-1985 by Ord. No. MC 2769; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC
3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
B. At the written request of the holder of the food handler's card, the
Department of Health shall hold a hearing to determine whether good
cause exists for the suspension or revocation of such card. [Amended
9-28-1982 by Ord. No. 2668; 2-13-1985 by Ord. No. MC 2769;
7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
§ 324-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 324-17
1:403
§ 324-17. Power to promulgate rules and regulations. [Amended
9-25-1979 by Ord. No. MC 2579]
The Health Officer shall have the power to promulgate such rules and
regulations as may be necessary to effectuate the provisions of this article.
§ 324-18. Violations and penalties; schedule of fines. [Added
9-13-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3582167]
A. Except as otherwise provided in this article, the penalties for violations
of this article are as follows:
Section
Short
Description
1st
Offense
2nd
Offense
3rd
Offense
4th Offense
Maximum
Fine;
Court
Appearance
Required
§ 324-10 Food
handler's
card required
$50 $100 $250 $500
§ 324-11 Transfer of
food
handler's
card not
permitted
$100 $250 $500 $1,000
§ 324-12 Records of
employees
required
$50 $100 $250 $500
§ 324-14 Expired food
handler's
card
$50 $100 $250 $500
B. Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of a violation of any other
terms of this article shall be subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter
1, Article III, Penalties, of the Township Code.
167. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 324-17 IRVINGTON CODE § 324-18
1:404
ARTICLE III
Hours of Operation
[Adopted 8-8-1972 by Ord. No. MC 2324 (Ch. 111, Arts. III and VI,
of the 1981 Revised Code)]
§ 324-19. Establishments to be closed between certain hours;
exception for certain convenience stores. [Amended 10-25-1988 by
Ord. No. MC 2872; 9-26-2017 by Ord. No. MC 3620]
A. All stores, establishments or places of business for the sale of meats,
groceries or provisions for consumption off the premises, located within
the Township, shall be closed to the public, and the business therein
shall be and is hereby prohibited before the hour of 6:00 a.m. and after
the hour of 11:00 p.m. on all days.
B. Exclusions. The following stores shall be excluded from the application
of § 324-19A, all being either otherwise regulated by law, deemed to
involve minimal nuisance characteristics, necessary to the public
health, safety, welfare or convenience, or some combination of the
foregoing, as follows:
(1) Convenience stores that are a minimum of 2,400 total square feet
and are designed with the following characteristics:
(a) The convenience store must contain a retail security camera
system as follows:
[1] That is approved by the Irvington Department of Public
Safety;
[2] A security camera system that operates 24 hours a day
seven days a week;
[3] At least one of the security cameras within the
convenience store must be completely dedicated to
monitoring the public entrance door;
[4] There must be a camera or cameras that monitor the
entire area of the convenience store that is accessible by
the public; and
[5] The video footage obtained by the security camera system
must be maintained by the convenience store for no less
than 30 days.
(b) The convenience store's register must meet the following
conditions:
[1] Must be visible from the adjacent street.
[2] Must maintain no more than $25 to $50 in cash after the
hours of 11:00 p.m.
§ 324-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 324-19
1:405
§ 324-20. Sales prohibited between certain hours. [Amended
10-25-1988 by Ord. No. MC 2872]
No person, firm or corporation shall sell or offer to sell in any store,
establishment or place of business located within the Township any meats,
groceries or provisions for consumption off the premises before the hour of
6:00 a.m. or after the hour of 11:00 p.m. of any day unless the premises,
exclusive of parking, occupies more than 45,000 square feet of floor space,
has a minimum of two security personnel, with one assigned indoors and
one assigned outdoors, is located at least 100 feet from residences, is
fenced pursuant to the provisions of this Code and is lit with a minimum
of five candlepower delivered to the surface of the premises. The inventory
and sales must take place indoors.
§ 324-21. Hours of operation for take-out or drive-through
restaurants. [Added 6-28-2005 by Ord. No. MC 3296; amended
1-10-2006 by Ord. No. MC 3310]
(c) The convenience store must also post the following:
[1] Store policy that no more than some predetermined
amount (often $25 to $50) is kept in the register at one
time and that the store will accept no larger than $20
denominations.
[2] Signs inside and outside the store to emphasize your
security policy on limited cash on hand and employee
inaccessibility to the safe.
[3] Fifteen-minute parking signs in parking area of
convenience store.
(d) The convenience store must install the following:
[1] A door signaling system like a buzzer/bell.
[2] Silent "hold-up" alarms should be considered.
(e) The convenience store must have a minimum of 2.0 footcandle
around the perimeter of the premises and a minimum of 2.5
footcandle in the parking lot and the entrance of the premises.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
DRIVE-THROUGH SERVICE — Provides food sales to customers in
motor vehicles only. Walk-up service is strictly prohibited.[Added
1-23-2007 by Ord. No. MC 3334]
EATERY — An eating establishment that prepares and services meals
and food, which does not have seating for dining on its premises, whose
business only consists of sales to customers for consumption outside its
premises.
§ 324-19 IRVINGTON CODE § 324-21
1:406
§ 324-22. Restaurant hours of operation. [Added 7-15-2003 by Ord.
No. MC 3225; amended 9-9-2003 by Ord. No. MC 3235]
Any restaurant with a seating capacity of 10 persons or less, and without
a public rest room, shall not be permitted to operate between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Monday through Friday and from 11:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m. Saturday and Sunday.
RESIDENTIAL ZONE — Any zone identified as R-1 (Single-Family
Residential District) or R-2 (Two-Family Residential District) as set
forth in §§ 650-14 and 650-15 of the Revised Code of the Township of
Irvington.
TAKE-OUT RESTAURANT — A restaurant in accordance with § 650-4 of
the Code of the Township of Irvington, which prepares 75% or more of
its individual purchases for consumption outside of its premises.
B. Hours of operation.
(1) Any take-out restaurant or eatery located within a residential zone,
or within 200 feet of a residential zone, or within 200 feet of two or
more buildings used exclusively for residential purposes, shall not
be permitted to conduct business between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m. inside the premises, and there shall be no drivethrough
service at such establishments between the hours of 3:00
a.m. and 6:00 a.m. [Amended 1-23-2007 by Ord. No. MC 3334]
(2) The distance of 200 feet to a residential zone is measured in a
straight line from the lot line of the take-out restaurant or eatery to
the border of the residential zone. The distance of 200 feet or two
or more buildings used exclusively for residential purposes is
measured in a straight line from the lot line of the take-out
restaurant to the lot line of the second furthest building from the
take-out restaurant used exclusively for residential purposes.
C. Violations and penalties. Any person, association or corporation who
shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article III,
Penalties, of the Township Code.168
168. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 324-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 324-22
1:407

ARTICLE IV
Access to Bathroom Facilities
[Adopted 9-28-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3127 (Ch. 111, Art. IV, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 324-23. Rest rooms and toilet facilities.
No place of public accommodation serving food or drinks shall deny those
patronizing or attempting to patronize such establishment the use of rest
room or toilet facilities.
§ 324-24. Violations and penalties.169
Any establishment or person found guilty of a violation of this article shall
be subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article III, Penalties, of the
Township Code.
169. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 324-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 324-24
1:409

ARTICLE V
Grease Traps
[Adopted 4-21-2004 by Ord. No. MC 3261 (Ch. 111, Art. VII, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 324-25. Grease traps at existing establishments.
§ 324-26. Grease traps at new establishments.
A. Grease traps are required for all waste outlets from all greaseproducing
establishments. The type and manufacture of grease traps
must be approved by the Township before installation.
B. Each grease-producing establishment shall be required to control oil
and grease discharges, as follows:
(1) Where outside space permits the installation of a grease trap of the
type shown on Diagram A (attached hereto as Appendix D),170 an
exterior grease trap shall be installed, sized as shown below, and a
bacterial pretreatment program shall be developed and
implemented.
(2) Where outside space does not permit the installation of an exterior
grease trap, an interior grease trap shall be installed, and a
bacterial pretreatment program shall be developed and
implemented. Such interior grease traps and pretreatment
program shall be approved by the Township prior to installation
and implementation, respectively.
(3) No existing or new grease traps shall be installed adjacent to or
immediately downstream from a hot-water source.
A. Grease traps shall be installed on the exterior of each new greaseproducing
establishment so as to insure that the grease-producing
establishment's effluent will meet the grease and oil limitations listed
herein.
B. Each new grease-producing establishment shall furnish the following
information to the Township prior to discharging any effluent to the
municipal wastewater collection system:
(1) Description of the establishment, including number of employees,
number of patrons, number of seats, frequency of seating, and type
of grease producing facilities;
(2) Listing of fixtures, including, but not limited to, dishwashers and
other grease producing units, describing their function and
volume;
(3) Listing of drain outlets sizes, or trap sizes, at each fixture;
170. Editor's Note: Said diagram is on file in the Township offices.
§ 324-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 324-26
1:411
(4) Total annual water use and daily minimum and maximum use; and
(5) Expected concentrations of grease and oil (as estimated from
similar establishments).
C. All exterior grease trap chambers shall be constructed of noncorrosive
materials, such as reinforced concrete or fiberglass. The chamber shall
be capable of sustaining ten-ton truck loading and shall have baffles
and fittings made of noncorrosive materials. Access shall be available
through twenty-four-inch manhole frames and covers located at each
end of the chamber. All grease traps shall be equal to the product of
Tyler Pipe/Wade Division (Tyler, Texas), Town & Country (as distributed
by Trap-Zap of South Norwalk, Connecticut), or Zurn Industries (Dallas,
Texas). See Diagram A attached.171
D. The following design method has been developed and recommended for
use by the NJDEP. The Township has elected to adopt this method for all
future grease trap sizing, with the exceptions noted below.
(1) Restaurants:
(D) x (GL) x (HR/2) x (LF) = size of grease trap in gallons
Where:
D = Number of seats in dining area
GL = Gallons of wastewater per meal (5 gallons/EPA)
ST = Storage capacity factor
Minimum 1.7
Maximum 2.5
HR = Number of hours open
LF = Loading factor
1.25 Interstate freeway
1.0 Other freeways
1.0 Recreational areas
0.8 Main highways
0.5 Other highways
(2) Hospitals, nursing homes, take-out restaurants, and establishments
with varied seating capacity:
(M) x (GL) x (ST) x (2.5) x (LF) = size of grease trap in gallons
Where:
M = Meals per day
GL = Gallons of wastewater per meal (4.5 gallon/EPA)
171. Editor's Note: Said diagram is on file in the Township offices.
§ 324-26 IRVINGTON CODE § 324-26
1:412
ST = Storage capacity factor
Minimum 1.7
Maximum 2.5
LF = Loading factor
1.25 garbage disposal and dishwasher
1.0 without garbage disposal
0.75 without dishwashing
(3) Other oil- or grease-producing establishments. Review by the
Township of other grease-producing establishments will be based
on submitted data and required pretreatment to meet the effluent
standards.
E. Exceptions to the above requirements will be considered on written
request to the Township where the above formulae require a grease
trap in excess of 1,000 gallons. In this regard, the Township will permit
the following:
(1) The Township will permit the trial installation of a single external
1,000 gallon grease trap for restaurants seating less than 100
persons, except for restaurants known to produce exceptional
quantities of grease and oil.
(2) The Township will permit the trial installation of two external 1,000
gallon grease traps in series, for restaurants seating more than 100
persons, or for restaurants known to produce exceptional
quantities of grease and oil.
F. It is the establishment owner's obligation to meet the discharge
concentration standards for oil and grease set forth in other sections of
these regulations. If subsequent tests show that the discharge
concentration standard is not being met, then the above-described
design method shall apply, and additional grease trap capacity shall be
furnished.
G. Additional requirements are as follows:
(1) The grease trap(s) shall be placed at a distance from the structure
sufficient to permit cooling and coagulation of oil and grease within
the grease trap.
(2) Piping must be arranged so that only kitchen wastes and kitchen
floor drains are tributary to the grease traps. Bathroom facilities
and all other waste outlets must bypass the grease traps.
(3) Cleanouts must be provided between the building and the grease
traps, between grease traps in series, and (as a sampling point)
downstream of the last grease trap.
§ 324-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 324-26
1:413
§ 324-27. Grease trap maintenance.
(4) The trap openings must be extended to the surface, using minimum
twenty-four-inch diameter barrels, and topped with a standard
manhole frame and cover.
(5) Every installation shall be reviewed for uplift resistance, with
groundwater assumed to be at the surface.
H. Installation of grease traps shall meet the recommendations of the
Plumbing and Drainage Institute, including locations, flow control and
venting. Grease trap installation will also require a plumbing permit
and compliance with municipal plumbing code regulations. Sampling
manholes for food service establishments shall be installed downstream
of the grease trap, but upstream of any interconnection with bathroom
sanitary service lines.
A. Each grease-producing establishment shall submit a grease trap
maintenance program to the Township for approval prior to
construction. The frequency of grease removal is dependent upon the
capacity of the interceptor and the quantity of grease in the
wastewater. Maintenance intervals may vary from once a week to once
in several weeks, but in no event less than once monthly. When the
grease removal interval has been determined for a specific installation,
regular cleaning at that interval is necessary to maintain the rated
efficiency of the interceptor. After the accumulated grease and waste
material has been removed, the interceptor should be checked to make
sure that the inlet, outlet and air relief ports are clear of obstructions
such as solidified grease.
B. Records must be kept of all maintenance on grease traps. The record
must be available for inspection by Township representatives, upon
request, during normal business hours. The record shall include the
following information: date, time, description of work done, comments
on the additional work needed, quantity of grease removed and names
of personnel performing the work. Any establishment which fails to
provide such records or provides inadequate records shall be subject to
a penalty and/or termination of service.
§ 324-26 IRVINGTON CODE § 324-27
1:414
Chapter 331
GAMES OF CHANCE
§ 324-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 324-27
1:415

ARTICLE I
Bingo and Raffles
[Adopted 2-11-1975 by Ord. No. MC 2438 (Ch. 62, Art. IV, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 331-1. License required.
No person, organization or association shall hold, operate or maintain a
game of bingo unless a license is obtained pursuant to Title 5 of the Revised
Statutes.
§ 331-2. License issuing authority.172
The issuing authority for said license shall be the Municipal Clerk, pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 13:47-1 et seq.
§ 331-3. Bingo permitted on Sunday. [Amended 2-14-1984 by Ord.
No. MC 2721]
Bingo, as defined in N.J.S.A. 5:8-24 et seq., is hereby permitted on the first
day of the week also known as "Sunday," except between the hours of 3:00
a.m. and 1:00 p.m.
§ 331-4. Raffles permitted on Sunday.
Raffles, as defined in N.J.S.A. 5:8-50 et seq., are hereby permitted on the
first day of the week, also known as Sunday, after the hour of 1:00 p.m.
§ 331-5. Nonresident organizations not to be licensed.
No bingo license or raffle license pursuant to the statutes of the state shall
be issued to any organization or association of veterans of any war in which
the United States was engaged, any church or religious, educational or
fraternal organization, civic or service club, officially recognized volunteer
fire company or officially recognized volunteer first aid or rescue squad to
hold and operate games of chance of, and restricted to, bingo and raffles,
unless the applicant therefor shall be resident within the Town or shall have
its principal office or place of business within the Town.
172. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 331-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 331-5
1:417
Chapter 336
GOLF COURSES, MINIATURE
§ 336-1. License required.
No person shall conduct or operate a miniature golf course in the Town
without first being duly licensed to do so in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.
§ 336-2. Application for license.
A person desiring to conduct and operate a miniature golf course in the
Town shall make application to the Town Clerk for a blank application
form, which shall be properly filled in by the applicant and submitted to
the Municipal Council, which shall either grant or reject the application by
resolution.
§ 336-3. License conditions.
Every license issued under this chapter shall be subject to the following
conditions:
§ 336-4. Amount of fee; term. [Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC
2622; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413]
The annual fee for a license pursuant to this chapter shall be $351 which
amount shall accompany the application. The license shall be issued to be
in force until the first Monday in June next following. It shall be signed by
the Director of Revenue and Finance and the Town Clerk, and the seal of
the Town affixed. If the license is not granted, the fee shall be returned to
the applicant.
§ 336-5. License to apply to only one course.
The license authorized by this chapter shall be issued upon condition that
each license shall apply to only one miniature golf course, which shall be
conducted in accordance with the regulations set forth in this chapter.
A. The license shall not be transferable or assignable except with the
consent of the Municipal Council, expressed by resolution, and the
business or occupation shall be conducted only at the place therein
specified.
B. Such license shall in no way operate to permit violation of any zoning or
other ordinance of the Town, but shall be evidence only of the payment
of the license fee required.
§ 331-5 IRVINGTON CODE § 336-6
1:418
§ 336-6. Display of license.
Any person making application for a license under this chapter and to
whom such license is granted shall at all times produce such license while
conducting such business or occupation and shall display it in the ticket or
other business office at all times and upon demand of any official of the
Town or of any police officer thereof.
§ 336-7. Expiration of license; proration of fee; revocation or
suspension.
Licenses issued under this chapter shall expire on the first Monday in
June next after the issuance thereof, unless sooner revoked. If the license
is issued between the first Monday in December and the first Monday in
June, then the license fee shall be 1/2 the amount specified by this chapter.
All licenses shall be granted by the Municipal Council under resolution
and may be revoked in like manner. In the event that any such license be
revoked by the Municipal Council, no part of the license fee will be returned
to the licensee. The license fee shall be imposed for revenue. The Director
of Revenue and Finance shall have the power to suspend any license if in his
judgment he may deem it necessary to do so. Such suspension shall operate
until the next regular meeting of the Municipal Council.
§ 336-8. Grounds for revocation.
Licenses issued under this chapter shall be subject to revocation by
resolution of the Municipal Council, upon complaint made of any improper
act or thing done or existing in the conduct of such miniature golf course or
of anything deemed detrimental to the welfare of the people of the Town, if
such complaint be found justified by vote of the Municipal Council.
§ 336-9. Hours of operation.
Every miniature golf course shall be closed at 12:00 midnight and shall
remain closed until 7:00 a.m. of the next morning following.
§ 336-10. Courses deemed public places.
Any miniature golf course licensed under this chapter shall be deemed a
public place within the meaning of the statutes of this state, the provisions
of this Code and the ordinances of the Town, and for any violation of such
statutes, the provisions of this Code or ordinances, the person violating the
same may be prosecuted as therein provided.
§ 336-11. Water closets and lavatories.
Every plot and premises used for paid admission to play miniature golf
and every miniature golf course charging paid admissions for play shall be
provided with at least one water closet for each sex and one lavatory. Unless
so provided, such course and business shall be closed and kept closed
§ 336-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 336-11
1:419
until so provided, or the license therefor shall be thereupon automatically
revoked.
Chapter 342
GRAFFITI
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 439.
§ 342-1. Definitions.
As used herein, the following words and phrases shall have the following
meanings:
INDELIBLE MARKER — Any felt-tip marker, china marker or similar device
containing non-water-soluble colors and which has a flat or angled writing
surface 1/2 inch or greater.
§ 342-2. Prohibited conduct.
Absent express permission to the contrary by the owner or other person
having control thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person to possess a
spray paint container, liquid paint in cans or other containers or indelible
marker in any public building or upon any public facility or private property
with intent to use the same to deface said building, facility or property.
Any person who possesses a spray paint container, liquid paint in cans
or other containers or an indelible marker in any public building or upon
any public facility or private property with no legitimate or lawful purpose
therefor shall be prima facie presumed to have possessed the same with
the intention of using such container, can, marker or paint to deface said
building, facility or property.
§ 342-3. Removal of graffiti. [Added 9-12-1995 by Ord. No. MC
3023; amended 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. MC 3101]
It is the sole responsibility of the owner or owners of any building, facilities
or properties which have been defaced in violation of § 342-2 to remove
all graffiti from said buildings, facilities or properties within 10 days after
written notification from the Township of Irvington that a violation has
occurred. The Township of Irvington shall not be responsible for the
removal of graffiti on any building and cannot accept said responsibility or
assignment of graffiti removal from an owner or owners.
§ 342-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-28-1993 by Ord. No.
MC 2988; 9-12-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3023; 9-13-2016 by Ord. No.
MC 3582173]
§ 336-11 IRVINGTON CODE § 342-4
1:420
Chapter 355
HOUSING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 307.
Pest control — See Ch. 449.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 460.
Rent control — See Ch. 472.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the penalties for
violations of this chapter are as follows:
Section
Short
Description
1st
Offense
2nd
Offense
3rd
Offense
4th Offense
Maximum
Fine;
Court
Appearance
Required
§ 324-3 Removal of
graffiti
$100 $250 $500 $1,000
B. Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of a violation of any other
terms of this chapter shall be subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter
1, Article III, Penalties, of the Township Code.
173. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 342-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 342-4
1:421

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 355-1. Enforcement officer. [Amended 9-28-1982 by Ord. No. MC
2668; 2-13-1985 by Ord. No. 2769; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407;
7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
The Director of the Department of Housing Services of the Town is hereby
designated as the officer to exercise the powers prescribed by this article,
and he shall serve in such capacity without any additional salary.
§ 355-2. Adoption of standards. [Amended 9-11-1973 by Ord. No.
MC 2376; 7-24-1984 by Ord. No. MC 2734]
A. The International Property Maintenance Code and any subsequent
additions or amendments thereto or editions thereof, is hereby adopted
as the property maintenance code, hereinafter sometimes referred to as
the "housing code," of the Township of Irvington, of which code not less
than three copies shall be filed in the office of the Clerk of the Township,
and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at
length herein, and from the date on which this section shall take effect,
the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the
Township. [Amended 1-24-2012 by Ord. No. MC 3456]
B. The following words and/or phrases shall be inserted in the place and
stead of the bracketed words and/or phrases in the following sections of
said housing code:
(1) Section PM-100.1: Township of Irvington.
(2) Section PM-109.2 Penalty. [Amended 9-8-1987 by Ord. No. MC
2835174]
(a) Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision
of this code shall be subject to the following:
[1] For the first violation: a fine of $50.
[2] For the second violation: a fine of $250.
[3] For the third violation: a fine of $500.
[4] For the fourth violation: a fine of $1,000. In addition, a
mandatory court appearance is required for the fourth
violation.
(b) Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been
served, in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof,
shall be deemed a separate offense.
(3) Section PM-111.4: 30.
174. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 355-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 355-3
1:423
§ 355-3. Nonconforming dwellings not to be occupied or rented.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or rent to another for occupancy
any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein which does
not conform to the provisions of the housing code adopted and established
by this article as the standard to be used in determining whether a dwelling
is safe, sanitary and fit for human habitation.
§ 355-4. Inspections; right of entry. [Amended 11-24-1970 by Ord.
No. MC 2270; 9-28-1982 by Ord. No. MC 2668; 2-13-1985 by Ord.
No. MC 2769; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No.
MC 3511]
§ 355-5. Access to premises by owners for repairs.
Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof or
his agent or employee access to any part of such dwelling or dwelling unit or
its premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs
or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of
this article or with any lawful rule or regulation adopted or any lawful order
issued pursuant to the provisions of this article.
§ 355-6. Notice of violations; contents; service; owner's address.
[Amended 11-24-1970 by Ord. No. MC 2270; 9-26-1972 by Ord. No.
MC 2333]
A. The Director of the Department of Housing Services or his authorized
agent is hereby authorized and directed to make inspections to
determine the condition of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and
premises located within the Town in order that he may perform his duty
of safeguarding the health and safety of the occupants of dwellings and
of the general public.
B. For the purpose of making such inspections, the Director of the
Department of Housing Services or his authorized agent is hereby
authorized to enter, examine and survey at all reasonable times all
dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and premises. The owner or
occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit and rooming unit, or the
person in charge thereof, shall give the Director of the Department of
Housing Services free access to such dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming
unit and its premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of such
inspection, examination and survey.
A. Whenever the Director of the Department of Housing Services or his
authorized agent determines that there are reasonable grounds to
believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this article or
of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, or whenever any of
the services, facilities, equipment or utilities referred to and required
by the housing code shall have been or are about to be removed from,
shut off or discontinued in any occupied dwelling let or occupied,
except for such temporary interruption as may be necessary while
§ 355-3 IRVINGTON CODE § 355-6
1:424
§ 355-7. Hearing. [Amended 11-24-1970 by Ord. No. MC 2270]
actual repairs are in progress during temporary emergencies when
discontinuation of services is authorized by the Director of the
Department of Housing Services as the public officer designated by the
housing code, and same shall continue or are likely to continue for a
period of five days, such Director or his duly authorized agent shall give
notice of the violation or impending violation to the person responsible
therefor, as hereinafter provided. [Amended 9-28-1982 by Ord. No.
MC 2668; 2-13-1985 by Ord. No. 2769; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC
3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
B. Such notice shall:
(1) Be put in writing.
(2) Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued.
(3) Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires.
(4) Be served upon such owner or his agent or upon such occupant, as
the case may require; provided that such notice shall be deemed to
be properly served upon such owner or agent or upon such
occupant if a copy thereof is served upon him personally, or if a
copy thereof is served upon him by registered mail to his last
known residence, or a copy thereof is posted in a conspicuous place
in or about the dwelling affected by the notice, or if he is served
with such notice by any other method authorized or required under
the laws of this state.
C. Such notice may contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken,
will effect compliance with the provisions of this article and with the
rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
D. Owner's address. [Added 12-11-2007 by Ord. No. MC 3360;
amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No.
MC 3511]
(1) Any owner of a building located in the Township of Irvington,
whether same be residential or commercial, shall provide his or her
actual address of domicile and the true address of the company to
the Township Department of Housing Services, Tax Collector and
Tax Assessor's office.
(2) Anyone found in violation of this subsection, requiring owners of
buildings to provide their actual address of domicile and the true
address of the company to the Township Department of Housing
Services, Tax Collector and Tax Assessor's office, shall be subject to
the penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article III, Penalties, of the
Township Code.175
175. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 355-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 355-7
1:425
§ 355-8. Action on notice after hearing; record; appeals. [Amended
11-24-1970 by Ord. No. MC 2270; 9-28-1982 by Ord. No. MC 2668;
2-13-1985 by Ord. No. 2769; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407;
7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
After the hearing provided for by § 355-7, the Director of the Department
of Housing Services shall sustain, modify or withdraw the notice referred to
in such section, depending upon his findings as to whether the provisions
of this article and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto
have been complied with. If the Director sustains or modifies such notice, it
shall be deemed to be an order. Any notice served pursuant to this article
shall automatically become an order if a written petition for a hearing is not
filed in the office of the Director within 10 days after such notice is served.
The proceedings at such hearing, including the findings and decisions of
the Director, shall be summarized, reduced to writing and entered as a
matter of public record in the office of the Director. Such record shall also
include a copy of every notice or order issued in connection with the matter.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Director or his authorized
agent may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as
provided by the laws of this state.
§ 355-9. Placarding and vacation of dwellings. [Added 11-28-1967
by Ord. No. MC 2177]
If any owner fails to comply with the Director's order to repair, alter or
improve, or, at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building, the
Director may, in order to protect the public's health and safety, cause such
A. Any person affected by any notice pursuant to § 355-6 which has been
issued in connection with the enforcement of any provision of this
article or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto may
request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the
Director of the Department of Housing Services, provided that such
person shall file in the office of the Director a written petition
requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the
grounds therefor within 10 days after the date the notice was served.
Upon receipt of such petition the Director shall set a time and place for
such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof.
[Amended 9-28-1982 by Ord. No. MC 2668; 2-13-1985 by Ord.
No. 2769; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No.
MC 3511]
B. At such hearing the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard
and to show why such notice should be modified or withdrawn. The
hearing shall be commenced not later than 10 days after the day on
which the petition was filed; provided that upon application of the
petitioner, the Director may postpone the date of the hearing for a
reasonable time beyond such ten-day period if in his judgment the
petitioner has submitted a good and sufficient reason for such
postponement.
§ 355-7 IRVINGTON CODE § 355-9
1:426
building premises to be altered, repaired or improved, or to be vacated and
closed; and further, the Director may cause to be posted upon the front or
main entrance of any such building premises a placard or notice containing
the following wording: "This building is unfit for human habitation or
occupancy or use; the use or occupation of these premises is prohibited and
unlawful."
§ 355-10. Certificate of necessity. [Added 11-28-1967 by Ord. No.
MC 2176; amended 6-10-1975 by Ord. No. MC 2451; 9-28-1982 by
Ord. No. 2668; 2-13-1985 by Ord. No. 2769; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No.
MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
A. Application. Where any owner, operator or occupant is required to
make repairs or otherwise improve his property and is unable to comply
with this chapter without having right of access to the building or
premises through or across adjoining premises not owned by him or
under his control, and where the right of access has been refused the
owner, operator or occupant or where the owner or persons responsible
for granting permission cannot be found or located, then, upon filing of
affidavit setting forth the facts with the Director of Housing Services,
such Director shall serve a ten-day written notice of a hearing in
accordance with the provisions for service contained in § 355-6 upon
the owner, operator or occupant of any adjoining premises affected by
the application.
B. Hearing. On the day fixed for hearing, the Director of Housing Services
shall provide opportunity for the owner, operator or occupant of the
adjoining property or properties to state why access should not be
granted across such adjoining properties.
C. Certificate. If the Director of Housing Services determines that access
is necessary to accomplish or complete repairs or improvements
necessary for compliance with this chapter, then the Director of
Housing Services shall issue a certificate of necessity setting forth
therein the person or persons to whom the certificate shall apply, such
conditions as shall be necessary to protect the adjoining property,
reasonable time limits during which certificate shall operate,
precautions to be taken to avoid damage and, where the Director of
Housing Services deems proper, that a surety company bond approved
by the Town Attorney be procured at the expense of any of the persons
seeking access to secure the adjoining property against damage to
persons or property arising out of such rights of access. The bond shall
not exceed in amount $25,000 and the amount set shall take into
consideration the extent, nature and duration of the repairs, the
proximity of the improvement on the premises affected and potential
risk or damage thereto. The bond shall be filed with the Director of
Housing Services.
D. Access refusal procedure. Any refusal to comply with this section or any
interference with access to premises pursuant to a certificate issued
hereunder shall be a violation of this chapter, and, in addition to
§ 355-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 355-10
1:427
§ 355-11. Emergency orders. [Amended 6-10-1975 by Ord. No. MC
2451; 9-28-1982 by Ord. No. 2668; 2-13-1985 by Ord. No. 2769;
7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
Whenever the Director of Housing Services finds that an emergency exists
which requires immediate action to protect the public health or safety, he
may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of
such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he deems
necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions of
this article, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom
such order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon petition
to the Director of Housing Services shall be afforded a hearing as soon as
possible. After such hearing, depending upon his findings as to whether the
provisions of this article and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant
thereto have been complied with, the Director of Housing Services shall
continue such order in effect, or modify or revoke it.
§ 355-12. Rules and regulations. [Amended 6-10-1975 by Ord. No.
MC 2451; 9-28-1982 by Ord. No. 2668; 2-13-1985 by Ord. No. 2769;
7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
The Director of Housing Services is hereby authorized and empowered
to make and adopt such written rules and regulations as he may deem
necessary for the proper enforcement of the provisions of this article;
provided, however; that such rules and regulations shall not be in conflict
with the provisions of this article nor in anywise alter, amend or supersede
any of the provisions thereof. The Director of Housing Services shall file a
certified copy of all rules and regulations which he may adopt in his office
and in the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 355-13. Certificate of occupancy required. [Added 9-26-1972 by
Ord. No. MC 2331; amended 6-10-1975 by Ord. No. MC 2451;
5-24-1977 by Ord. No. MC 2491]
penalties provided hereunder, the Director of Housing Services may,
upon affidavit, apply to the Judge of the Municipal Court for a warrant
authorizing access to the premises under appropriate conditions and
circumstances as provided in this section.
A. It shall henceforth be unlawful for any owner or prospective purchaser
of real property to sell, convey, deliver or transfer, and for any
purchaser to purchase, take title or possession of, any building or
premises until a certificate of occupancy to the effect that such building
or premises complies with and conforms to the provisions of this
chapter shall have been issued by the Director of the Department of
Housing Services or his designee. The certificate of occupancy shall be
issued after proper application has been executed and filed by the
owner or the purchaser, as required, and after inspection and approval
by a housing inspector designated by the Director of the Department of
Housing Services. The fee for such inspections shall be as provided for
§ 355-10 IRVINGTON CODE § 355-13
1:428
§ 355-14. Exemptions from requirement of certificate of occupancy.
[Added 11-13-1972 by Ord. No. MC 2338; amended 6-10-1975 by
Ord. No. 2451; 5-24-1977 by Ord. No. MC 2491]
The following transfers, conveyances or delivery of any building or premises
are hereby exempt from the requirement of an application for certificate of
occupancy as required in § 355-13:
in § 355-27 of this chapter. [Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC
3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
B. The procedures for obtaining the certificate of occupancy shall be as
adopted, promulgated and set forth by the Director of Housing Services
and as approved by the Municipal Council of the Town after the
Director of Housing Services has adopted, promulgated and set forth
such procedures; further, these procedures may be amended from time
to time as the need may arise, with the approval of the Municipal
Council of the Town. [Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407;
7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
C. In the event the agreement of sale, conveyance or transfer of
possession provides for or contemplates an "as is" sale, conveyance or
transfer, then a copy of said agreement shall be attached to the
application which application must be signed by both the seller, grantor
or transferor and the purchaser, grantee or transferee. If the inspection
of the building or premises reveal violations of the housing or building
code or ordinances which will not be repaired or corrected before title
closing or transfer of possession, then the Director of the Department of
Housing Services may issue a nonrenewable temporary certificate of
occupancy for a period not in excess of six months from the date of
conveyance or transfer of possession. When a temporary certificate of
occupancy is issued, the purchaser or transferee shall acknowledge
receipt of said certificate and obligation to comply with the provisions
and requirements of the housing code, building code and the Town
ordinances applicable to same. When the property that is the subject of
the temporary certificate of occupancy is more than 500 units, then the
Director of Housing Services, in his discretion, may authorize up to two
additional six-month extensions in order for the owner to cure any
violations, provided that the property owner pays for all expenses to the
Township as assessed by the Department of Housing Services, due to
the extended time period for compliance. [Amended 6-27-1995 by
Ord. No. MC 3020; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by
Ord. No. MC 3511]
D. The responsibility and liability for obtaining or not obtaining the
certificate of occupancy is both with the property owner and the
prospective purchaser. The fact that one or both have abrogated the
responsibility hereinabove shall not diminish the liability of either one
or the other to the exclusion or inclusion of the other.
§ 355-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 355-14
1:429
§ 355-15. Certificates of habitability; maximum number of
occupants. [Added 7-14-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2632]
A. Whenever a transfer, conveyance or delivery of premises is made
between immediate members of a family, including but not limited to
husband and wife.
B. Whenever a property or premises has been inspected and a certificate
of occupancy has been issued within six months prior thereto.
C. Whenever premises are purchased specifically for the building thereon
to be demolished, then, in that event, such intention shall be given to
the Director of the Department of Housing Services in writing, and the
necessary demolition permit shall be applied for from the applicable
department in the Town. [Amended 9-28-1982 by Ord. No. MC
2668; 2-13-1985 by Ord. No. 2769; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC
3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
D. Transfer or delivery of premises by reason of probate proceedings; this
shall only be exempted if the purchaser or purchasers or grantees or
grantors are heirs or beneficiaries under a probated last will and
testament.176
A. Certificate of habitability required; fees.
(1) It shall henceforth be unlawful for any owner of real property to
which this section is applicable to rent, lease or otherwise deliver
up for occupancy any dwelling unit until a temporary or permanent
certificate of habitability has been obtained therefor from the
Director of the Department of Housing Services or his designee.
[Amended 9-28-1982 by Ord. No. MC 2668; 2-13-1985 by
Ord. No. 2769; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by
Ord. No. MC 3511]
(2) The fee for the issuance of a certificate of habitability shall be $76
per dwelling unit. Each reinspection for the issuance of a certificate
of habitability shall be $39 per dwelling unit. Upon compliance with
the terms of a temporary certificate of habitability, a permanent
certificate of habitability will be issued at an additional fee of $9.
[Amended 2-10-1987 by Ord. No. MC 2824; 12-12-1995 by
Ord. No. MC 3027; 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3134;
8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by Ord. No. MC
3306; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413]
(3) The owner of real property to which this section is applicable or his
agent shall make application to the Director at least five business
days prior to the date of anticipated occupancy of a dwelling unit
for which a certificate of habitability is required. Failure of the
176. Editor's Note: Former § 119-15 of the 1981 Revised Code, Violations and penalties, which
previously followed this section, added 11-24-1970 by Ord. No. MC 2270, as amended, was
repealed 7-24-1984 by Ord. No. MC 2734.
§ 355-14 IRVINGTON CODE § 355-15
1:430
Director to inspect the dwelling unit on or before the date of
occupancy shall result in the issuance of a temporary certificate of
habitability. The Director shall then inspect the premises within 15
days of the date of occupancy. In the event that such inspection
performed subsequent to the date of occupancy reveals minor
violations, the Director shall issue a temporary certificate of
occupancy conditioned upon the property owner's remedying such
minor violations within 45 days of the date thereof. In the event
that such inspection reveals substantial violations, the Director
shall issue a temporary certificate of habitability conditioned upon
the property owner's remedying such substantial violations within
14 days of the date thereof. [Amended 10-13-1981 by Ord. No.
MC 2642]
(4) Upon inspection of any dwelling unit, the Director may issue a
temporary certificate of habitability conditioned upon the property
owner remedying such minor violations as shall be set forth
specifically therein within 45 days of the date thereof. Upon
compliance with the terms of said temporary certificate of
habitability, the Director shall issue a permanent certificate of
habitability at an additional fee as set forth in § 355-15A(2). A
temporary certificate of habitability shall not be issued in the event
that substantial violations are found to exist.
B. Contents. Certificates of habitability issued pursuant to this section
shall set forth the maximum number of persons by which the dwelling
unit may be occupied pursuant to the Town Code.
C. Notice to tenant. The owner of any real property to which this section is
applicable or his agent shall cause a true copy of said temporary or
permanent certificate of habitability to be personally delivered or
mailed to the tenant or his representative within seven days of its
issuance and a written receipt therefor executed by said tenant or
representative.
D. Unlawful occupancy. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling
unit for which a temporary or permanent certificate of habitability has
been issued to knowingly rent, lease or otherwise deliver up for
occupancy said dwelling unit to persons in excess of the number
permitted by law. It shall be unlawful for any tenant of a dwelling unit
for which a temporary or permanent certificate of habitability has been
issued to suffer or permit said dwelling unit to be occupied by persons
in excess of the number permitted by law.
E. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply:
CERTIFICATE OF HABITABILITY — A written certification issued by
the Director that a dwelling unit is in substantial compliance with
§ 355-2 of this Code.
§ 355-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 355-15
1:431
MINOR VIOLATION — A violation of the housing or other codes of the
Town of Irvington which is not a substantial violation.
OWNER OF REAL PROPERTY — The owner, landlord or managing
agent of any residential premises, except that this section shall not
apply to premises containing one to four dwelling units, at least one of
which is occupied by one or more of the owners thereof.
SUBSTANTIAL VIOLATION — A violation of the housing or other codes
of the Town of Irvington which renders the dwelling unit hazardous to
health or safety, such as exposed or deteriorated electrical wiring or
fixtures, inoperable plumbing, lack of smoke detectors, lack of second
means of egress, lack of security locks and bulging or severely cracked
ceilings.
F. Responsibility of Director. The Director shall make available for
inspection by the public at his office a clear written summary of the
housing standards upon which the issuance of a certificate of
habitability shall be based.
G. Appeals. Any person aggrieved by a denial of a temporary or permanent
certificate of habitability may appeal in writing to the Mayor, who shall
hear the appeal, render a decision thereon and file his decision with a
written statement of the reasons therefor with the Director of the
Department of Housing Services not later than five business days
following the submission of the appeal. A copy of the decision shall be
mailed by ordinary first class mail to the appellant. Failure to hear an
appeal and render and file a decision thereon within the time limits
prescribed herein shall be deemed a reversal of the decision of said
Director, and a temporary or permanent certificate of habitability, as
the case may be, shall be issued by the Director for said dwelling unit
forthwith. [Amended 9-28-1982 by Ord. No. 2668; 2-13-1985 by
Ord. No. 2769; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord.
No. MC 3511]
§ 355-15 IRVINGTON CODE § 355-15
1:432
ARTICLE II
Unfit Dwellings177
[Added 9-24-1968 by Ord. No. 2200]
§ 355-16. Enforcement officer. [Amended 6-10-1975 by Ord. No. MC
2451; 9-28-1982 by Ord. No. 2668; 2-13-1985 by Ord. No. 2769;
7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
The Director of Housing Services of the Town is hereby designated as the
Director to exercise the powers prescribed by this article, and he shall serve
in such capacity without any additional salary.
§ 355-17. Restoration of required services or utilities. [Amended
9-26-1972 by Ord. No. MC 2333; 6-10-1975 by Ord. No. MC 2451;
9-28-1982 by Ord. No. 2668; 2-13-1985 by Ord. No. 2769; 7-14-2009
by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
Whenever such dwelling referred to in the housing code shall have any of
the services, facilities, equipment or utilities required thereunder removed
therefrom, shut off or discontinued, or about to be removed therefrom, shut
off or discontinued, the Director of Housing Services of the Town or his duly
authorized agents are hereby authorized and empowered to arrange for the
prompt restoration or continuance of such items by communicating with the
owner or person in charge of such premises to accomplish such restoration
or continuance of such items.
§ 355-18. Cost of restoration of services or utilities. [Amended
9-26-1972 by Ord. No. MC 2333; 6-10-1975 by Ord. No. MC 2451;
9-28-1982 by Ord. No. 2668; 2-13-1985 by Ord. No. 2769; 7-14-2009
by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
A. Every landowner or person, firm or corporation who leases or lets to
another any dwelling unit wherein the services, facilities, equipment or
utilities referred to in the housing code are included within the terms of
the rental and who fails to maintain and continue such services,
facilities, equipment or utilities or any of same shall be, or where such
services, facilities, equipment or utilities are about to be removed from,
shut off or discontinued to such dwelling and the Director of Housing
Services or his duly authorized agents shall be unable to have same
restored or continued, as the case may be, by communicating with the
owner or his agent of such property, such Director or his duly
authorized agents are hereby authorized and empowered to arrange for
such restoration or continuance, as the case may be, by arranging for
the Town to pay the cost and expenses of such restoration or
continuation, and to certify such costs to the Municipal Council of the
Town.
177. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 200, Art. III, Unsafe Buildings.
§ 355-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 355-18
1:433
§ 355-19. Determination of unfitness. [Amended 9-28-1982 by Ord.
No. 2668; 2-13-1985 by Ord. No. 2769; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC
3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
For the purpose of this article, the Director of Housing Services may
determine that a dwelling is unfit for human habitation if he finds that
conditions exist in such dwelling which are dangerous or injurious to the
health or safety of the occupants of such dwelling, the occupants of
neighboring dwellings or other residents of the Town. Such conditions may
include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing):
defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities;
lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; dilapidation;
disrepair structural defects or uncleanliness.
§ 355-20. Adoption of standards.
Pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 21, P.L. 1946 (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1), the
New Jersey State Housing Code as approved by the Departments of Health
and Conservation and Economic Development and filed in the Secretary of
State's office is hereby accepted, adopted and established as a standard
to be used as a guide in determining the fitness of a building for human
habitation or occupancy or use. A copy of the New Jersey State Housing
Code is annexed to this article and three copies of the same have been
placed on file in the office of the Town Clerk and are available to all persons
desiring to use and examine the same.
§ 355-21. Charge of unfitness; complaint to owner; notice of
hearing. [Amended 9-28-1982 by Ord. No. MC 2668; 2-13-1985 by
Ord. No. MC 2769; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by
Ord. No. MC 3511]
Whenever a petition is filed with the Director of Housing Services by a
public authority, as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.4, or by at least five residents
of the municipality, charging that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation
as herein defined, or whenever it appears to the Director (on his own
motion) that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation, as herein defined,
he shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges,
issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest in
such dwelling a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing
B. Upon certification by the Director of Housing Services of the costs and
expenses incurred by the Town, the Municipal Council may, by
resolution, assess the amount of such certified costs and expenses
against the lands and premises involved as a paramount lien against
same, and such amount of lien shall be enforced and collected in the
same manner as assessments for local improvements and taxes past
due, and the Tax Collector or officer charged with the enforcement and
collection of assessments for local improvements and taxes shall be
charged with the same duties in regards to the collection and
enforcement of the lien herein created.
§ 355-18 IRVINGTON CODE § 355-21
1:434
a notice that a hearing will be held before the Director or his designated
agent at a place therein fixed not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days
after the serving of such complaint, that the owner and parties in interest
shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in
person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the time and place fixed in the
complaint and that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity
shall not be controlling in hearings before the Director.
§ 355-22. Findings of fact; order to owner. [Amended 9-28-1982 by
Ord. No. 2668; 2-13-1985 by Ord. No. 2769; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No.
MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
If, after such notice and hearing, the Director of Housing Services
determines that the dwelling under consideration is unfit for human
habitation, as herein defined, he shall state in writing his findings of fact
and serve upon the owner thereof and parties in interest an order requiring:
A. The repair, alteration or improvement of such building to be made by
the owner within a reasonable time, which time shall be set forth in the
order, or, at the option of the owner, to vacate or to have such building
vacated and closed within the time set forth in the order, and
B. If the building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the
health and safety of persons on or near the premises and the owner fails
to repair, alter or improve the building within the time specified in the
order, that the owner remove or demolish the building within a
reasonable time as specified in the order of removal.
C. That, if the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or
improve, or, at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building,
the Director of Housing Services may cause such building to be
repaired, altered or improved, or to be vacated and closed; that the
Director may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any building
so closed a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for
human habitation or occupancy or use; the use or occupation of this
building is prohibited and unlawful."
D. That, if the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish
the building, the Director may cause such building to be removed or
demolished or may contract for the removal or demolition thereof after
advertisement for and receipt of bids therefor.
E. That the amount of:
(1) The cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witnesses' fees, search
fees and advertising charges incurred in the course of any
proceeding taken under this article determined in favor of the
municipality, and
(2) Such cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements, or vacating
and closing, or removal or demolition, if any, or the amount of the
balance thereof remaining after deduction of the sum, if any,
§ 355-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 355-22
1:435
§ 355-23. Service of complaints or orders. [Amended 9-28-1982 by
Ord. No. MC 2668; 2-13-1985 by Ord. No. MC 2769; 7-14-2009 by
Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
Complaints or orders issued by the Director of Housing Services pursuant to
this article shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered
mail, but if the whereabouts of such persons is unknown and the same
cannot be ascertained by such Director in the exercise of reasonable
diligence, and the Director shall make an affidavit to that effect, then
the serving of such complaint or order upon such persons may be made
by publishing the same once each week for two successive weeks in a
newspaper printed and published in the Town. A copy of such complaint
or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected
by the complaint or order, and a copy of such complaint or order shall be
duly recorded or lodged for record with the county recording officer of the
county in which the dwelling is located.
§ 355-24. Powers and duties of Director. [Amended 9-28-1982 by
Ord. No. MC 2668; 2-13-1985 by Ord. No. 2769; 7-14-2009 by Ord.
No. MC 34077-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
The Director of the Department of Housing Services is hereby authorized
and empowered to exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient
realized from the sale of materials derived from such building
or from any contract for removal or demolition thereof, shall be
a municipal lien against the real property upon which such cost
was incurred. If the building is removed or demolished by the
Director, he shall sell the materials of such building. There shall
be credited against the cost of the removal or demolition thereof
the proceeds of any sale of such materials or any sum derived from
any contract for the removal or demolition of the building. If there
are no such credits or if the sum total of such costs exceeds the
total of such credits, a detailed statement of the aforesaid costs and
the amount so due shall be filed with the Municipal Tax Assessor
or other custodian of the records of tax liens and a copy thereof
shall be forthwith forwarded to the owner by registered mail. If
the total of the credits exceeds such costs, the balance remaining
shall be deposited in the Superior Court by the Director, shall
be secured in such manner as may be directed by such Court,
and shall be disbursed according to the order or judgment of the
Court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order
or judgment of such Court; provided, however, that nothing in this
section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of
the municipality to define and declare nuisances and to cause their
removal or abatement, by summary proceedings or otherwise. Any
owner or party in interest may, within 60 days from the date of the
filing of the lien certificate, proceed in a summary manner in the
Superior Court to contest the reasonableness of the amount or the
accuracy of the costs set forth in the municipal lien certificate.
§ 355-22 IRVINGTON CODE § 355-24
1:436
to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this article,
including the following in addition to others herein granted:
§ 355-25. Other ordinances not affected.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the power
of the Town or any officer or department to enforce any provisions of its
Charter or its ordinances or regulations nor to prevent or punish violations
thereof, and the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition and
supplemental to the powers conferred upon the Town by any other law or
ordinance.
A. To investigate the dwelling conditions in the Town in order to determine
which dwellings therein are unfit for human habitation.
B. To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence.
C. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations,
provided that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.
D. To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as
he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article.
E. To delegate any of his functions and powers under this article to such
officers and agents as he may designate.
§ 355-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 355-25
1:437

ARTICLE III
Requested Inspections
[Added 11-9-1971 by Ord. No. MC 2305]
§ 355-26. Application for inspection; report of inspection.
Whenever an owner, authorized prospective purchaser, mortgagee or
prospective mortgagee shall apply to the Director for an inspection of any
building used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, in order to
ascertain if any section of this chapter has been violated, the Director, upon
payment of the fees specified in § 355-27, shall cause an inspection to be
made of the premises and issue an informational certificate or report of the
inspection to the applicant, indicating therein any violations of this chapter
found on such inspected premises. The applicant for an inspection shall
state in writing, on forms provided by the Director, his full name, residence
and the reason and authority for the requested inspection. The Director
shall deny the application for failure to comply with these requirements.
§ 355-27. Inspection fees; disposition. [Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord.
No. MC 2622; 2-10-1987 by Ord. No. MC 2824; 12-12-1995 by Ord.
No. MC 3027; 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3134; 8-14-2001 by Ord.
No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by Ord. No. MC 3306; 12-29-2009 by Ord.
No. MC 3413]
There shall be a charge of $217 per dwelling unit up to and including
three dwelling units per building; $108 per dwelling unit in excess of three
dwelling units per building. Each reinspection shall require a fee of $108
per dwelling unit up to and including three dwelling units per building and
$58 per dwelling unit in excess of three dwelling units per building, for
inspections for the purpose of issuing a certificate of occupancy. All such
fees collected for said inspections shall forthwith be transmitted to the
Township Treasurer.
§ 355-28. Nonliability of Town.
In no instance shall any errors or omissions in the informational certificate
or report of the inspection be construed to impose any liability therefor on
the Town or the Director or on the servants, agents or employees of the
Town.
§ 355-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 355-28
1:439

ARTICLE IV
Elevators
[Added 9-8-1987 by Ord. No. MC 2835]
§ 355-29. Maintenance required; violations and penalties.178
All apartment buildings with elevators shall have twenty-four-hour
maintenance contracts to prevent elevators from being out of service for
any excessive length of time. All elevators shall be maintained to safely
sustain the loads to which they are subject, to operate properly and to be
free of physical and fire hazards. Any person, firm or corporation who shall
violate any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be subject to the
penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article III, Penalties, of the Township Code.
Each twenty-four-hour period that an elevator shall remain out of service
shall constitute a separate offense.
178. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 355-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 355-29
1:441

ARTICLE V
Security Requirements
[Added 9-14-1993 by Ord. No. MC 2980]
§ 355-30. Armed guard required; exemptions. [Amended 9-14-2004
by Ord. No. MC 3272; 4-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3531; 7-14-2015 by
Ord. No. MC 3544]
§ 355-31. Definitions. [Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. MC 3272]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ARMED SECURITY GUARD — A guard armed with a handgun which is
licensed or otherwise allowed by law to carry such a weapon while
performing the duties of a security guard.
DEVELOPMENTS — Any group of housing units owned or operated by
a single individual or entity. The units may be situated in one or more
buildings so long as they are referred to as a part of the single development.
A. Guard required.
(1) Except as otherwise herein provided, all public and private housing
buildings or developments in the Township of Irvington which
contain over 100 housing units shall be required to have present on
the premises an armed security guard for some portion of every
twenty-four-hour period.
(2) Garden apartment developments of more than 100 units shall be
required to post an armed security guard on the premises,
patrolling both buildings and grounds, for a minimum of eight
hours. The eight-hour shift shall be determined by the landlord or
his agent, based upon experience and statistics about the times of
maximum criminal activity in the area.
(3) Developments of more than 100 units situated in one or more
buildings of more than three stories each, with central or common
entrances for all units in each building, or gated secured
community with fencing that channels people through one
entrance, shall be required to post one armed guard at the gated
entrance.
B. Exemptions.
(1) Housing units that are situated on the grounds of hospitals, where
such grounds are patrolled by a security patrol at least once per
hour, shall exempt from the requirement of maintaining an armed
security guard on the premises.
(2) The provisions of this section shall not apply to any dwelling unit
which is a condominium development.
§ 355-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 355-31
1:443
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the definition of "developments" shall not
include dwellings developed pursuant to a general development plan
approved by the Planning Board and subject to a redevelopment agreement
with the Township.[Amended 5-14-2013 by Ord. No. MC 3492]
GARDEN APARTMENTS — Any group of housing units from one to three
stories, with multiple entrances, owned and/or operated by a single person
or entity.
HOUSING UNIT — For the purposes of this article, any building or
apartment whose function is to provide housing to families or individuals.
§ 355-32. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No.
MC 3272179]
Violations of this article by any person or corporation shall be punishable
by the penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article III, Penalties, of the Township
Code. Each day's violation of the article shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 355-33. Locks. [Added 2-10-2004 by Ord. No. MC 3255]
Each separate entrance within a building occupied as a residence shall have
a lock with a key that is separate and unique from any other key in the
same housing complex. A housing complex is defined by commonality of
ownership and not by structure type.
179. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 355-31 IRVINGTON CODE § 355-33
1:444
ARTICLE VI
Garages
[Added 2-8-2011 by Ord. No. MC 3431]
§ 355-34. Garage door requirements.
All residential properties with existing garages must have fully functioning
garage doors, so that the interior of said garages is secured and shielded
from public view.
§ 355-35. Violations and penalties.180
Violations of any provision of this article shall be punishable as follows:
§ 355-36. Notice to comply.
Upon notice to the owner or occupant of the premises of a violation of this
article, said owner or occupant shall have 30 days to abate said condition.
A. For the first violation: a fine of $50.
B. For the second violation: a fine of $250.
C. For the third violation: a fine of $500.
D. For the fourth violation: a fine of $1,000. In addition, a mandatory court
appearance is required for the fourth violation.
180. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 355-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 355-36
1:445
Chapter 360
JUNK DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing procedure — See Ch. 290, Art. I.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 443.
Pest control — See Ch. 449.
§ 360-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COLLECTOR OF WASTE MATERIALS — Includes the business of buying,
selling or collecting waste materials of any kind or description resulting
from any business, trade or industry or from any other source when such
buying, selling or collecting shall be from or with a vehicle.
JUNK DEALER — Includes the business of buying, selling or collecting
old or used rope, brass, tin, copper, lead, steel, rags, glass bottles, paper,
cardboard and any other old or used articles or materials commonly known
as "junk" when such buying, selling or collecting shall be from or with a
vehicle within the Town.
§ 360-2. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of or act in the
capacity of junk dealer or collector of waste materials, as defined by this
chapter, within the Town, without first making application, in writing, to the
Division of Licensing of the Town and receiving a license to do so from such
Division, or after such license shall have been revoked or expired.
§ 360-3. Application for license.
The written application for license referred to in § 360-2 shall be made upon
blanks to be furnished by the Division of Licensing of the Town for that
purpose and shall state the full name of the applicant, his place of residence
and the character of the business which the applicant intends to conduct,
and shall be signed by the applicant.
§ 360-4. Issuance of license; term; nontransferable; renewal.
Upon the filing of a proper application and the payment of the fees
prescribed by this chapter, the Division of Licensing shall issue to such
applicant, under the seal of the Town, a license authorizing the applicant
to engage in the business or act in the capacity requested in the aforesaid
application. Such license shall be in force from the date of issue up to and
including the 31st day of December of the year of issue. Such license shall
§ 355-36 IRVINGTON CODE § 360-4
1:446
be nontransferable and shall be subject to the terms and conditions stated
in this chapter. Renewals of such license shall be made prior to the first
day of January of each renewal year, at the renewal fees provided by this
chapter.
§ 360-5. Conditions of issuance.
The license authorized by this chapter shall be issued upon the following
conditions:
§ 360-6. Fees. [Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622; 8-11-1987
by Ord. No. MC 2834; 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3027; 12-14-1999
by Ord. No. MC 3134; 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005
by Ord. No. MC 3306; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413181]
For each license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and for
each renewal thereof, the licensee shall pay to the Division of Licensing
the sum of $1,000 annually for the first vehicle operated in connection with
such business and for each other vehicle operated in connection with such
business.
§ 360-7. License plate or tag. [Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC
2622]
There shall be issued with every license granted pursuant to this chapter a
plate of suitable material having stamped or impressed thereon the words
"Town of Irvington, License No. __________" (the number of the license
issued) and the year for which the same is issued, which license tag or plate
shall be attached in a conspicuous place on the vehicle. Duplicate plates or
tags shall be issued for each extra vehicle.
§ 360-8. Revocation of license.
Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to revocation upon
the failure of the licensee to observe any of the conditions prescribed by
A. Such license may be used only by the person to whom it was originally
issued.
B. In the conduct of the business for which it is issued, the licensee, his
agents or servants shall not use any bells or other device for making
noise and attracting attention, nor shall he or they utter any cries or
noise of any character for that purpose.
C. Such licensee shall always have such license with him while conducting
the business for which such license is granted, and shall display it upon
demand.
D. Such licensee shall display the license plate or card prominently on
each vehicle.
181. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 360-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-8
1:447
this chapter and shall also be subject to revocation upon complaint made
and proven of improper conduct on the part of the licensee, his agents
or servants while in the conduct of the business for which such license is
issued.
Chapter 365
LAND USE PROCEDURES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Escrow fees for redevelopment and
foreclosure matters — See Ch. 282.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 313.
Subdivision and site plan review — See Ch.
560.
Zoning — See Ch. 650.
§ 360-8 IRVINGTON CODE § 360-8
1:448
ARTICLE I
Planning Board
§ 365-1. Establishment; composition.
There is hereby established pursuant to c. 291, P.L. 1975, in the Town of
Irvington, a Planning Board of nine members consisting of the following
four classes:
§ 365-2. Terms of office.
A. Class I: the Mayor.
B. Class II: one of the officials of the municipality, other than a member of
the governing body, to be appointed by the Mayor; provided that if there
is an Environmental Commission, the member of the Environmental
Commission who is also a member of the Planning Board as required by
N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be deemed to be the Class II Planning Board
member if there is both a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment
and a member of the Board of Education among the Class IV members.
C. Class III: a member of the governing body, to be appointed by it.
D. Class IV: six other citizens of the municipality, to be appointed by the
Mayor.
(1) The members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal office,
except that one member may be a member of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment and one member may be a member of the Board of
Education. A member of the Environmental Commission who is also
a member of the Planning Board as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1
shall be a Class IV Planning Board member unless there be among
the Class IV members of the Planning Board both a member of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment and a member of the Board of
Education, in which case the member of the Environmental
Commission shall be deemed to be the Class II member of the
Planning Board.
(2) Alternate members. The Mayor shall appoint two alternate
members of Class IV, who shall serve for terms of two years;
provided, however, that the initial terms of such members shall be
one and two years, respectively. Such alternate members shall be
designated by the Chairman as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate
No. 2" and shall serve in rotation during the absence or
disqualification of any regular member or members of Class IV.
[Added 9-26-1978 by Ord. No. MC 2546]
A. The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond with his
official tenure. The terms of the members composing Class II and Class
III shall be for one year or terminate at the completion of their
respective terms of office, whichever first occurs, except for a Class II
member who is also a member of the Environmental Commission. The
§ 365-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-2
1:449
§ 365-3. Vacancies.
If a vacancy in any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term, it
shall be filled by appointment as above provided for the unexpired term.
§ 365-4. Officers. [Amended 3-8-1988 by Ord. No. MC 2849]
The Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from the
members of Class IV and shall also, with the Board of Adjustment, select a
Secretary who shall serve at the pleasure of the Boards and who shall be
designated as "Secretary to the Planning Board and Board of Adjustment."
§ 365-5. Attorney.
There is hereby created the office of Planning Board Attorney. The Planning
Board may annually appoint and agree upon the rate of compensation of the
Planning Board Attorney, who shall be an attorney other than the Municipal
Attorney.
§ 365-6. Experts and staff.
The Planning Board may employ or contract for the services of experts and
other staff and services as it may deem necessary.
§ 365-7. Powers and duties generally.
The Board shall adopt and may amend such rules and regulations as may be
necessary to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this chapter. It
shall also have the following powers and duties:
term of a Class II or a Class IV member who is also a member of the
Environmental Commission shall be for three years or terminate at the
completion of his term of office as a member of the Environmental
Commission, whichever first occurs. The term of a Class IV member
who is also a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment or the Board of
Education shall terminate whenever he is no longer a member of such
other body or at the completion of his Class IV term, whichever first
occurs.
B. The terms of all Class IV members first appointed pursuant to this
chapter shall be so determined that to the greatest practicable extent
the expiration of such terms shall be evenly distributed over the first
four years after their appointment as determined by resolution of the
governing body; provided, however, that no term of any member shall
exceed four years, and further provided that nothing herein shall affect
the term of any present member of the Planning Board, all of whom
shall continue in office until the completion of the term for which they
were appointed. Thereafter all Class IV members shall be appointed for
terms of four years except as otherwise herein provided. All terms shall
run from January 1 of the year in which the appointment was made.
§ 365-2 IRVINGTON CODE § 365-7
1:450
§ 365-8. Time for approval of subdivision applications.
A. To make, adopt and from time to time amend a Master Plan for the
physical development of the municipality, including any areas outside
its boundaries which in the Board's judgment bear essential relation to
the planning of the municipality, in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
B. To administer the provisions of the Land Subdivision and Site Plan
Review Ordinance of the Town of Irvington182 in accordance with the
provisions of said ordinance and the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
C. To approve conditional use applications in accordance with the
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance183 pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67.
D. To participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by state or federal law or regulations.
E. To assemble data as part of a continuous planning process.
F. To annually prepare a program of municipal capital improvement
projects projected over a term of six years, and amendments thereto,
and recommend same to the Municipal Council.
G. To consider and report to the Municipal Council within 35 days after
referral as to any proposed development regulation submitted to it
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26(a).
H. When reviewing applications for approval of subdivision plats, site
plans or conditional uses, to grant, to the same extent and subject to the
same restrictions as the Zoning Board of Adjustment, variances
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(c) from lot area, lot dimensional,
setback and yard requirements, provided that such relief from lot area
requirements shall not be granted for more than one lot. Whenever
relief is requested pursuant to this subsection, notice of a hearing on
the application for development shall include reference to the request
for a variance or direction for issuance of a permit, as the case may be.
I. To perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by ordinance
or resolution of the Municipal Council, including matters referred to it
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26(b).
A. Minor subdivisions. Minor subdivision approvals shall be granted or
denied within 45 days of the date of submission of a complete
application to the Planning Board or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant. Approval of a minor subdivision shall
expire 190 days from the date of Planning Board approval unless within
such period a plat, in conformity with such approval and the provisions
182. Editor's Note: See Ch. 560, Subdivision and Site Plan Review.
183. Editor's Note: See Ch. 650, Zoning.
§ 365-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-8
1:451
§ 365-9. Procedure for filing applications. [Amended 3-8-1988 by
Ord. No. MC 2849]
Applications for development within the jurisdiction of the Planning Board
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. shall be filed with the
Secretary to the Planning Board and Board of Adjustment. Applicants shall
file, at least 14 days before the date of the monthly meeting of the Board,
10 copies of a sketch plat, 10 copies of applications for minor subdivision
approval, 10 copies of applications for major subdivision approval or 10
copies of applications for site plan review, conditional use approval or
planned development. At the time of filing the application but in no event
of the Map Filing Law184 or a deed clearly describing the approved
minor subdivision, is filed by the developer with the county recording
officer, the Municipal Engineer and the Municipal Tax Assessor. Any
such plat or deed must be signed by the Chairman and Secretary to
the Planning Board and Board of Adjustment. [Amended 3-8-1988 by
Ord. No. MC 2849]
B. Preliminary approval of major subdivisions. Upon submission of a
complete application for a subdivision of 10 or fewer lots, the Planning
Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 45 days of the
date of such submission or within such further time as may be
consented to by the developer. Upon submission of a complete
application for a subdivision of more than 10 lots, the Planning Board
shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 95 days of the date of
such submission or within such further time as may be consented to by
the developer. Otherwise, the Planning Board shall be deemed to have
granted preliminary approval for the subdivision.
C. Ancillary powers. Whenever an application for approval of a subdivision
plat, site plan or conditional use includes a request for relief pursuant
to § 365-7H of this article, the Planning Board shall grant or deny
approval of the application within 95 days after submission by the
developer of a complete application or within such further time as may
be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to act
within the period prescribed shall constitute approval of the application
and a certificate of the Municipal Clerk as to the failure of the Planning
Board to act shall be issued on request of the applicant.
D. Final approval. Application for final subdivision approval shall be
granted or denied within 45 days of the submission of a complete
application or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant. Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days
from the date of signing of the plat unless within such period the plat
shall have been duly filed by the developer with the county recording
officer. The Planning Board may, for good cause shown, extend the
period for recording for an additional period not to exceed 190 days
from the date of signing of the plat.
184. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:26B-1 et seq.
§ 365-8 IRVINGTON CODE § 365-9
1:452
less than 10 days prior to the date set for hearing, the applicant shall also
file all plot plans, maps or other papers required by virtue of any provision
of this chapter or any rule of the Planning Board. The applicant shall obtain
all necessary forms from the Secretary to the Planning Board and Board of
Adjustment. The Secretary to the Planning Board and Board of Adjustment
shall inform the applicant of the steps to be taken to initiate the applications
and of the regular meeting dates of the Board.
§ 365-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-9
1:453

ARTICLE II
Zoning Board of Adjustment
§ 365-10. Establishment; composition; vacancy.
§ 365-11. Officers. [Amended 3-8-1988 by Ord. No. MC 2849]
The Board of Adjustment shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from its
members and shall also, with the Planning Board, select a Secretary who
shall serve at the pleasure of the Boards and who shall be designated as
"Secretary to the Planning Board and Board of Adjustment."
§ 365-12. Attorney.
There is hereby created the office of Zoning Board of Adjustment Attorney.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment may annually appoint and agree upon the
rate of compensation of the Zoning Board of Adjustment Attorney, who shall
be an attorney other than the Municipal Attorney.
§ 365-13. Experts and staff.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment may also employ or contract for the
services of experts and other staff and services as it may deem necessary.
A. A Zoning Board of Adjustment is established pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-69 et seq., consisting of seven members, all of whom shall be
residents of the Township of Irvington, appointed by the Municipal
Council to serve terms of four years from date of their appointment.
Additionally, there shall be appointed two alternate members,
designated as "Alternate 1" and "Alternate 2." Each alternate shall
serve for a period of two years, and both shall be residents of Irvington.
Alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings
but may not vote except in the absence of a regular member. A vote
shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of
an alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to
which alternate member is to vote, "Alternate 1" shall vote. Nothing in
this chapter shall, however, be construed to affect the term of any
present members and any present alternate members of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment, all of whom shall continue in office and complete
the terms to which they were appointed. [Amended 4-26-1988 by
Ord. No. MC 2854; 10-11-1988 by Ord. No. MC 2868; 1-29-1991
by Ord. No. MC 2919; 12-23-1991 by Ord. No. MC 2934;
8-11-1992 by Ord. No. MC 2953]
B. No member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment may hold any elective
office or position under the municipality.
C. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled
for the unexpired term only.
§ 365-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-14
1:455
§ 365-14. Adoption of rules and regulations.
The Board shall adopt and may amend such rules and regulations as may be
necessary to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this chapter.
§ 365-15. Powers generally.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have such powers as are set forth in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 et seq. and amendments and supplements thereto. It is
the intent of this chapter to confer upon the Zoning Board of Adjustment
as full and complete powers as may lawfully be conferred upon such Board,
including, not by way of limitation, the authority, in connection with any
case, action or proceeding before the Board, to interpret and construe the
provisions of this chapter, or any term, clause, sentence or word hereof,
and the Zoning Map, in accordance with the general rules of construction
applicable to legislative enactments.
§ 365-16. Appeals and applications.
A. The Board may, in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate
conditions and safeguards, grant variances from the terms of this
chapter in accordance with the general or specific rules contained
herein and with the general rules hereby laid down, that equity shall be
done in cases where the strict construction of the provisions of this
chapter would work undue hardship.
B. In all cases, the Board shall follow the applicable provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq. or subsequent statutes in such case made and
provided, and it shall from time to time furnish to any person requesting
the same a copy of its rules and information as to how appeals or
applications may properly be filed with the Board.
A. Appeals to the Zoning Board of Adjustment may be taken by any
interested party affected by any decision of the Building Inspector
based on or made in the enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance185 or
Official Map. An appeal shall be taken within 20 days prescribed by law
by filing a notice of appeal with the officer from whom the appeal is
taken, together with three copies of said notice with the Secretary to
the Planning Board and Board of Adjustment. Said notice of appeal shall
specify the grounds for said appeal. The officer from whom the appeal is
taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting
the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. [Amended
3-8-1988 by Ord. No. MC 2849186]
B. Applications addressed to the original jurisdiction of the Zoning Board
of Adjustment without prior application to the Building Inspector shall
be filed with the Secretary to the Planning Board and Board of
Adjustment. Eight copies of the application shall be filed. At the time of
185. Editor's Note: See Ch. 650, Zoning.
186. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 365-14 IRVINGTON CODE § 365-16
1:456
§ 365-17. Powers to reverse or modify decisions.
In exercising the powers set forth herein, the Zoning Board of Adjustment
may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify, the action, order,
requirement, decision, interpretation or determination appealed from, and
make such other requirement, decision or determination as ought to be
made, and to that end have all the powers of the administrative officer from
whom the appeal was taken.
§ 365-18. Expiration of variance.
Any variance from the terms of this chapter hereafter granted by the Zoning
Board of Adjustment, permitting the erection or alteration of any structure
or structures or permitting a specified use of any premises, shall expire by
limitation unless such construction or alteration shall have been actually
commenced on each and every structure permitted by said variance, or
unless such permitted use has actually been commenced, within one year
from the date of publication of the notice of the judgment or determination
of the Zoning Board of Adjustment; except, however, that the running of
the period of limitation herein provided shall be tolled from the date of
filing an appeal from the decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment to the
governing body or to a court of competent jurisdiction until the termination
in any manner of such appeal or proceeding.
§ 365-19. Powers granted by law.
filing the appeal or application, but in no event less than 10 days prior
to the date set for the hearing, the applicant shall also file all plot plans,
maps or other papers required by virtue of any provision of this chapter
or any rule of the Board. The applicant shall obtain all necessary forms
from the Secretary to the Planning Board and Board of Adjustment. The
Secretary to the Planning Board and Board of Adjustment shall inform
the applicant of the steps to be taken to initiate proceedings and of the
regular meeting dates of the Board. [Amended 3-8-1988 by Ord. No.
MC 2849]
C. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action in respect
of which the decision appealed from was made, unless the officer from
whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Zoning Board of Adjustment
after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that by reason
of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such cases, proceedings shall not
be stayed other than by an order of the Superior Court.
A. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have such powers as are granted
by law to:
(1) Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that
there is error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made
by an administrative officer based on or made in the enforcement of
the Zoning Ordinance.187
§ 365-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-19
1:457
§ 365-20. Additional powers.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the following additional powers:
(2) Hear and decide requests for interpretation of the Zoning Map or
Ordinance or for decisions upon other special questions upon
which such Board is authorized by the Zoning Ordinance to pass.
(3) Where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape
of a specific piece of property, or by reason of exceptional
topographic conditions, or by reason of other extraordinary and
exceptional situation or condition of such piece of property, the
strict application of any regulation in the Zoning Ordinance would
result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to, or
exceptional and undue hardship upon, the developer of such
property, to grant, upon an application or an appeal relating to such
property, a variance from such strict application, so as to relieve
such difficulties or hardship; provided, however, that no variance
shall be granted under this subsection to allow a structure or use in
a district restricted against such structure or use; and provided
further that the proposed development does not require approval
by the Planning Board of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use
pursuant to § 365-7H.
(4) Grant a variance to allow a structure or use in a district restricted
against such structure or use in particular cases and for special
reasons, but only by the affirmative vote of at least 2/3 of the full
authorized membership of the Board.
B. No variance or other relief may be granted under the provisions of this
section unless such variance or other relief can be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and will not substantially
impair the intent and purpose of the zone plan and Zoning Ordinance.
Any application under any subsection of this section may be referred to
any appropriate person or municipal agency for its report, provided
that such reference shall not extend the period of time within which the
Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act.
A. To direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for a
building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public
drainageway, flood control basin or public area reserved on the Official
Map.
B. To direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for a
building or structure not related to a street.
C. To grant, to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions as the
Planning Board, subdivision or site plan approval pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-37 et seq., or conditional use approval pursuant to N.J.S.A.
187. Editor's Note: See Ch. 650, Zoning.
§ 365-19 IRVINGTON CODE § 365-20
1:458
§ 365-21. Time for decision.
40:55D-67, whenever the Board is reviewing an application for
approval of a variance pursuant to § 365-19A(4). All such applications
shall be referred to the Planning Board for its report, but such
reference shall not extend the period of time within which the Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall act. The Planning Board shall render its
report not later than 45 days after the date said application is referred
to it by the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
A. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall render its decision not later than
120 days after the date an appeal is taken from the decision of an
administrative officer or the submission of a complete application for
development to the Board pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-72b.
B. Failure of the Board to render a decision within such one-hundredtwenty-
day period or within such further time as may be consented to
by the applicant shall constitute a decision favorable to the applicant.
§ 365-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-21
1:459

ARTICLE III
Provisions Applicable to Both Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment
§ 365-22. Conflicts of interest.
No member of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act
on any matter in which he has either directly or indirectly any personal or
financial interest. Whenever any such member shall disqualify himself from
acting on a particular matter, he shall not continue to sit with the Board
on the hearing of such matter nor participate in any discussion or decision
relating thereto.
§ 365-23. Meetings.
§ 365-24. Minutes.
Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall include
the names of the persons appearing and addressing the Board and of the
persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the Board, the findings,
if any, made by it and reasons therefor. The minutes shall thereafter be
made available for public inspection during normal business hours at the
office of the Municipal Clerk. Any interested party shall have the right
to compel production of the minutes for use as evidence in any legal
proceeding concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such interested
party may be charged a fee for reproduction of the minutes for his use as
provided for in the rules of the Board.
§ 365-25. Fees and escrow deposits.
A. Meetings of both the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall be scheduled no less often than once a month, and any meeting so
scheduled shall be held as scheduled unless canceled for lack of
development applications.
B. Special meetings may be held at the call of the Chairman or on the
request of any two Board members.
C. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present.
D. All actions shall be taken by majority vote of a quorum except as
otherwise required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
E. All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the
public. Notice of all such meetings shall be given in accordance with the
requirements of the Open Public Meetings Law, N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
A. Development application fees. [Amended 8-11-1987 by Ord. No. MC
2834; 3-8-1988 by Ord. No. MC 2849; 6-14-1988 by Ord. No. MC
2859; 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3027; 12-14-1999 by Ord. No.
MC 3134; 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176; 5-28-2003 by Ord. No.
§ 365-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-25
1:461
MC 3221; 9-9-2003 by Ord. No. MC 3233; 10-12-2005 by Ord. No.
MC 3306; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413; 4-21-2016 by Ord.
No. MC 3568; 9-12-2017 by Ord. No. MC 3616]
(1) There is hereby established in connection with various applications
for development and other matters which are the subjects of
Chapter 365, Land Use Procedures, the following schedule of fees:
(a) Redeveloper's application fee.
[1] Each redeveloper's application shall be accompanied by an
application filing fee. The filing fee is a nonrefundable flat
fee to cover administrative expenses associate with
processing the application.
[2] The redeveloper application fee is $75 for each application
submitted to the Department of Economic Development
and Grants Oversight for review and consideration.
(b) Subdivisions and site plans.
[1] Each application for subdivision or site plan approval shall
be accompanied by both a filing fee and a technical review
fee as provided below. The filing fee is a nonreturnable flat
fee to cover administrative expenses. The technical review
fee is established to cover the costs, legal, engineering and
other professional services connected with the review of
the application. Each deposit for technical review fees
shall be held by the Township in a trust account separate
from the general funds of the Township and separate from
any other such account. Sums not utilized in the review
process shall be returned to the applicant. If additional
sums are deemed necessary, the applicant shall be notified
as to the required additional amount and shall add such
sum to the trust account.
Type Filing Fee
Technical Review
Fee
Concept plan $300 See § 365-25D
through K
Minor subdivision: See § 365-25D
through K
Simple lot line
change
$250
Other $450
Major subdivision: See § 365-25D
through K
Preliminary plat $1,150
Final plat $600
§ 365-25 IRVINGTON CODE § 365-25
1:462
Type Filing Fee
Technical Review
Fee
Site plans: See § 365-25D
through K
Minor $500
Major
preliminary
$750
Final $500
Preliminary
(multifamily)
$700
Final
(multifamily)
$500
Site plan waiver $200
[2] Requisitions for concurrent approvals shall pay combined
fees.
(c) Conditional and temporary uses: $250 plus applicable
subdivision or site plan fee.
(d) Variances and appeals.
[1] Errors or refusals:
[a] Appeals from decision of a Construction or Zoning
Official pursuant to errors or refusals: $350.
[b] Error or refusal: hear and decide appeals where it is
alleged by the appellant that there is error in any
order, requirement, decision or refusal made by an
administrative officer based on or made in the
enforcement of the zoning regulations.
[2] Exceptions or interpretations.
[a] Interpretation of the Zoning Map or the zoning
regulations or for decisions on other special questions
pursuant to exceptions or interpretations: $700.
[b] Exceptions or interpretations: hear and decide, in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 365, Land
Use Procedures, requests for interpretation of the
Zoning Map or the zoning regulations or for decisions
upon other special questions upon which the Board is
authorized to pass by any zoning regulation or official
map ordinance.
[3] Variance of area or yard requirements.
§ 365-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-25
1:463
[a] Variances pursuant to variance of area or yard
requirements from lot area, dimensional, setback and
yard requirements: $150 per variance.
[b] Variance of area or yard requirements where, by
reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or
shape of a specific piece or property or by reason of
exceptional topographic conditions or by reason or
other extraordinary and exceptional situation or
condition of such piece of property, the strict
application of any regulation of Chapter 365, Land
Use Procedures, would result in peculiar and
exceptional practical difficulties or to exceptional and
undue hardship upon the developer of such property,
grant, upon an application or an appeal relating to
such property, a variance from such strict application
of such regulation so as to relieve any difficulties or
hardships, including a variance for a conditional use;
provided, however, that no variance shall be granted
under this subsection to allow a structure or use in a
district restricted against such structure or use; and
provided further that the proposed development does
not require approval by the Planning Board of a
subdivision, site plan or conditional use in conjunction
with which the Planning Board shall review a request
for a variance pursuant to Chapter 365, Land Use
Procedures.
[4] Variance of use regulations.
[a] Variances from use regulations pursuant to variance
of use regulations: $780
[b] Variance of use regulations: in particular cases and for
special reasons, grant a variance to allow departure
from regulations pursuant to Chapter 650, Zoning,
including but not limited to allowing a structure or use
in a district restricted against such structure or use,
but only by affirmative vote of at least five members of
the Board of Adjustment.
[5] Building permits.
[a] Buildings in streets or other areas.
[i] Issuance of a permit for a building or structure in
the bed of a mapped street or public drainageway,
flood control basin or public area reserved on an
Official Map: $550.
[ii] Building permit for a building in a mapped street
or other area: direct issuance of a building permit
§ 365-25 IRVINGTON CODE § 365-25
1:464
for the construction of a building or structure
within the bed of a mapped street or public
drainageway, flood control basin or public area as
shown on a duly adopted official map ordinance
of the municipality whenever one or more parcels
of land within said bed cannot yield a reasonable
return to the owner unless a building permit is
granted. The Board may grant such relief only
by an affirmative vote of a majority of the full
authorized membership of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, ensuring that such relief will tend to
cause a minimum change of the Official Map and
will not significantly add to the cost of opening
any proposed street. The Board shall impose
reasonable requirements as a condition of
granting the building permit so as to promote the
health, morals, safety and general welfare of the
public.
[b] Buildings not related to a street.
[i] Issuance of a permit for a building or structure
not related to a street: $300.
[ii] Building permit for a building not related to a
street: direct issuance of a building permit for the
construction of a building or structure on a lot not
abutting a street which is shown on a duly
adopted Official Map of the municipality or which
is an existing state, county or municipal street or
highway, a street shown upon a plat approved by
the Municipal Planning Board or a street on a plat
duly filed in the office of the county recording
officer. The Board may grant such relief only
where the enforcement of the statute
requirement, that a building lot abut a street,
would entail practical difficulty or necessary
hardship, or where the circumstances of the case
do not require the building or structure to abut a
street. The Board shall impose requirements or
conditions that will provide adequate access for
firefighting equipment, ambulances and other
emergency vehicles necessary for the protection
of health and safety and will protect any future
street layout shown on the Official Map or on the
general circulation plan element of the Municipal
Master Plan.
(e) The fees in Subsection A(1)(d) inclusive above shall be in
addition to any applicable fee in connection with a subdivision
or site plan as provided in Subsection A(1)(b).
§ 365-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-25
1:465
(f) Appeals to the Township Council: $550.
(g) Copy of decision of governing body to interested party in
connection with an appeal: $75.
(h) Publication in newspaper of decision of governing body on an
appeal: cost of publication.
(2) Where one application for development includes more than one
approval request, the sum of the individual required fees shall be
paid.
(3) If an applicant desires a certified court reporter, the cost of taking
testimony and transcribing it and providing a copy of the transcript
to the Township shall be at the expense of the applicant who shall
also arrange for the reporter's attendance.
(4) Carbon monoxide alarms; gas-fired, oil boiler or hot water heaters.
(a) The fee for inspection of one to 20 carbon monoxide alarms
shall be $50.
(b) The fee for inspection of more than 20 carbon monoxide alarms
shall be $100.
(c) When a gas-fired or oil boiler or hot water heater is newly
installed or replaced the fee should be appropriately charged.
(5) The fee for the approval or denial of a zoning permit application
shall be: [Amended 5-15-2018 by Ord. No. MC 3642]
(a) Residential structure, one to three dwelling units: $60.
(b) Commercial use(s) or mixed uses: $100.
(6) Fences permits.
(a) Residential structure, one to four dwelling units: $100.
(b) Commercial use(s) or mixed uses: $200.
B. An additional fee, to be known as a hearing fee, shall be paid by the
applicant to the official stenographer designated by each Board188 in
accordance with § 365-26E hereinbelow.
C. Fees for any service by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment or any member of their administrative staffs which are not
otherwise provided for by ordinance may be provided for as part of the
rules of the Board and copies of said rules or of the separate fee
schedule shall be available to the public. Such fees may be altered from
time to time to maintain their relationship to all costs incurred directly
188. Editor's Note: Refers to Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment.
§ 365-25 IRVINGTON CODE § 365-25
1:466
or indirectly by the Town of Irvington with respect to said applications
or services.
D. Escrow deposits for professional services. [Added 9-12-2017 by Ord.
No. MC 3616]
(1) The reviewing board shall require fees for technical and/or
professional services and testimony employed to the board in
reviewing an application, including the review services of the
Director of Public Works, Township Planner, Board Attorney, Board
Consultant, any other Township official and such other experts as
may be deemed necessary (i.e., traffic, environmental, soils, etc.).
(2) Fees for technical and professional services shall be in addition to
any and all other required fees. [Amended 5-15-2018 by Ord.
No. MC 3642]
Type Fee
Concept plan $150
Minor subdivision/simple lot
change
$200
Major subdivision/preliminary
plat
$150 per lot width with a
minimum of $1,500
Final plat $60 per lot with a minimum of
$600
Site plans
Minor $300
Major (preliminary) $30 per 1,000 square feet of lot
area or fraction thereof;
$30 per 1,000 square feet of
floor area or fraction thereof;
Minimum review fee: $750
Major (final) $15 per 1,000 square feet of lot
area or fraction thereof;
$10 per 1,000 square feet of
floor area or fraction thereof;
Minimum review fee: $500
Preliminary (multifamily) $120 per dwelling unit
Final (multifamily) $60 per dwelling unit; minimum
review fee $500
E. Submission of escrow deposits. [Added 9-12-2017 by Ord. No. MC
3616]
§ 365-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-25
1:467
(1) Initial escrow deposit for all applicants will be $2,500. The
applicant shall submit the required escrow deposit to the Planning
or Zoning Board of Adjustment Secretary prior to the application
being reviewed for completeness. No application shall be
determined complete, reviewed by professional staff or placed on
the agenda for public hearing until the required escrow deposit is
paid.
(2) Required escrow deposits shall be in the form of a money order or
certified check payable to the Township of Irvington.
F. Escrow for informal review. [Added 9-12-2017 by Ord. No. MC
3616]
(1) Whenever an applicant requests an informal review of an
application for development involving technical or professional
advisors, an escrow deposit shall be required in accordance with
the schedule for formal applications. The deposit must be received
prior to professional review.
(2) Any escrow deposit received for informal review shall be credited
to the required escrow deposit for formal applications. The cost for
professional services involved in the informal review shall be
considered part of the formal application review and charged to the
escrow account.
G. Review of escrow deposit amount. [Added 9-12-2017 by Ord. No. MC
3616]
(1) Prior to making a determination of completeness upon any
application, the Board shall review said application to determine
whether the escrow amount set forth above is sufficient. If the
amount set forth is determined insufficient by the reviewing board
to cover professional costs anticipated for the application,
additional funds in the amount of 33 1/3% of the initially required
escrow fee shall be deposited by the applicant prior to declaring
the application complete. The application shall not be declared
complete or placed on the agenda for public hearing until such
additional escrow deposit is received.
(2) Further additional escrow deposit fees may be required at any time
upon determination by the reviewing board. All approvals shall be
conditional upon receipt of such additional fees deposited by the
applicant in increments of 1/3 of the initially required escrow fee,
when and as determined necessary by the reviewing board.
H. Appeal of escrow deposit. In the event that the applicant believes the
escrow deposit to be unreasonable, the Planning Board or the Board of
Adjustment shall hear and decide whether such fees are reasonable,
and the applicant may appeal the decision of the Planning Board or
Board of Adjustment to the governing body, provided that the applicant
shall provide the governing body such transcripts of the Planning Board
§ 365-25 IRVINGTON CODE § 365-25
1:468
or Board of Adjustment hearing on fees at his cost, and such hearing
shall be on record. The governing body shall set a hearing date, with
notice to all parties, and the applicant shall provide a court-certified
stenographer to record said hearing. The governing body may reverse
a Planning Board or Board of Adjustment decision only if the Board's
decision is not sustained by the preponderance of the evidence. [Added
9-12-2017 by Ord. No. MC 3616]
I. Escrow accounts over $5,000; conditions. Whenever an amount of
money in excess of $5,000 shall be deposited by an applicant with the
municipality for professional services employed by the municipality to
review applications, the money, until repaid or applied to the purposes
for which it is deposited, including the applicant's portion of the
interest earned thereon, except as otherwise provided for herein, shall
continue to be the property of the applicant and shall be held in trust by
the municipality. Money deposited shall be held in escrow. The
municipality shall deposit it in a banking institution or savings and loan
association in this state insured by an agency of the federal government
or in any other funds or depository approved for such deposits by the
state in an account bearing interest at the minimum rate currently paid
by the institution or depository time on savings deposits. The
municipality shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the name and
address of the institution or depository in which the deposit is made and
the amount of the deposit. The municipality shall not refund an amount
of interest paid on a deposit which does not exceed $100 for the year. If
the amount of the interest exceeds $100, that entire amount shall
belong to the applicant and shall be refunded to him by the municipality
at the time the deposit is repaid or applied to the purpose for which it
was deposited, as the case may be; except that the municipality will
retain for administrative expenses a sum equivalent to no more than
33 1/3% of that entire amount which shall be in lieu of all other
administrative and custodial expenses. [Added 9-12-2017 by Ord.
No. MC 3616]
J. Accounting of escrow deposits. In the event that any applicant desires
an accounting of the expenses or fees paid by him for professional
review, he shall request such in a letter directed to the Secretary of the
Planning Board or Board of Adjustment. The applicant shall be
responsible for any costs incurred by the Planning Board or the Board
of Adjustment in having its professional and administrative staff
prepare an accounting of the fees expended. Such additional amount as
may be required for said accounting shall be paid to the Planning Board
or Board of Adjustment prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy in
the event that there are insufficient escrow funds to pay for said
accounting. [Added 9-12-2017 by Ord. No. MC 3616]
K. Refunds. All escrow funds described herein shall be utilized by the
appropriate board to pay the cost of any technical and/or professional
services incurred by the Board for review and/or testimony in
connection with the particular application. All funds not expended shall
§ 365-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-25
1:469
§ 365-26. Hearings.
§ 365-27. Notice requirements for hearing.
Whenever a hearing is required on an application for development pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. or pursuant to the determination of the
municipal agency in question, the applicant shall give notice thereof as
follows:
be refunded to the applicant within 60 days after the final
determination by the appropriate board with respect to such
application. No amount shall be refunded prior to certification by the
Board Secretary that said application has been finally determined.
[Added 9-12-2017 by Ord. No. MC 3616]
A. Rules. The Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment shall make
rules governing the conduct of hearings before such bodies, which rules
shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
or of this chapter.
B. Oaths. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he may
designate shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
evidence, including witnesses and documents presented by the parties,
and the provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law of
1953 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
C. Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer and the right of cross-examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
D. Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the
hearing, but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.
E. Recording. Each Board shall from time to time designate an official
stenographer to provide a verbatim recording of all proceedings
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10(f). Such official stenographer shall set a
hearing fee and such other fees respecting the preparation of a
transcript as may be necessary, which fees shall be approved by each
Board. The official stenographer shall furnish a transcript of the
proceedings on request to any interested party at his expense.
A. Public notice shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of
the municipality at least 10 days prior to the hearing date.
B. Notice shall be given to the owners of all real property as shown on the
current tax duplicate or duplicates located within 200 feet in all
directions of the property which is the subject of such hearing and
§ 365-25 IRVINGTON CODE § 365-27
1:470
whether located within or without the municipality in which applicant's
land is located. Such notice shall be given by serving a copy thereof
on the owner as shown on the said current tax duplicate, or his agent
in charge of the property, or by mailing a copy thereof by certified
mail to the property owner at his address as shown on the said current
tax duplicate. A return receipt is not required. Notice to a partnership
owner may be made by service upon any partner. Notice to a corporate
owner may be made by service upon its president, a vice president,
secretary or other person authorized by appointment or by law to
accept service on behalf of the corporation.
C. Notice of all hearings on applications for development involving
property located within 200 feet of an adjoining municipality shall be
given by personal service or certified mail to the Clerk of such
municipality, which notice shall be in addition to the notice required to
be given pursuant to Subsection B hereof.
D. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the County
Planning Board of a hearing on an application for development of
property adjacent to an existing county road or proposed road shown on
the Official County Map or on the County Master Plan, adjoining other
county land or situate within 200 feet of a municipal boundary.
E. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to a state highway.
F. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Director of the Division of State and Regional Planning in the
Department of Community Affairs of a hearing on an application for
development of property which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling
units. Such notice shall include a copy of any maps or documents
required to be on file with the Municipal Clerk pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-10(b).
G. All notices hereinabove specified shall be given at least 10 days prior to
the date fixed for hearing and the applicant shall file an affidavit of
proof of service with the Board holding the hearing on the application
for development.
H. Any notice made by certified mail as hereinabove required shall be
deemed to be complete upon mailing in accordance with the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-14.
I. Form of notice. All notices required to be given pursuant to the terms of
this chapter shall state the date, time and place of the hearing, the
nature of the matters to be considered, an identification of the property
proposed for development by street address, if any, or by reference to
lot and block numbers as shown on the current tax duplicate in the
Municipal Tax Assessor's office, and the location and times at which any
maps and documents for which approval is sought are available as
required by law.
§ 365-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-27
1:471
§ 365-28. List of property owners requiring notice. [Amended
9-13-1977 by Ord. No. MC 2505189]
§ 365-29. Decisions.
§ 365-30. Publication of decision. [Amended 3-8-1988 by Ord. No.
MC 2849]
A brief notice of every final decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the municipality. Such publication shall be arranged by the
J. Accompanying the filing of an application with the Planning Board or
Board of Adjustment by a food establishment shall be a floor plan of the
premises which floor plan shall have been preliminarily approved by the
Director of the Department of Housing Services or his designee.
[Added 2-23-1982 by Ord. No. MC 2652; amended 9-28-1982 by
Ord. No. MC 2668; 2-13-1985 by Ord. No. MC 2769; 7-14-2009 by
Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
A. Upon written request of an applicant to the Town Engineer and to the
Tax Assessor, the Town Engineer or his designee shall promptly prepare
and furnish to the Irvington Tax Assessor a plot plan showing the lots
and blocks of all the rear property on the current tax duplicate map
within 200 feet in all directions of the property which is the subject of
the application and hearing within the Town of Irvington and showing
whether said 200 feet extends into any adjoining municipality.
B. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12c, the Tax Assessor or
designee shall, within seven days after the receipt of said written
request by the applicant and upon receipt of payment of a sum not to
exceed $0.25 per name, or $10, whichever is greater, make and certify a
list from said current tax duplicates of names and addresses of owners
to whom the applicant is required to give notice pursuant to § 365-27.
A. Each decision on any application for development shall be set forth in
writing as a resolution of the Board and shall include findings of fact
and conclusions based thereon.
B. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Board within 10 days of the
date of decision to the applicant, or if represented, then to his attorney,
without separate charge. A copy of the decision shall also be mailed to
all persons who have requested it and who have paid the fee prescribed
by the Board for such service, if any. A copy of the decision shall also be
filed in the office of the Municipal Clerk, who shall make a copy of such
filed decision available to any interested party upon payment of a fee
calculated in the same manner as those established for copies of other
public documents in the municipality. A copy of the decision shall also
be filed with the Municipal Council, Building Inspector and Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be.
189. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 365-27 IRVINGTON CODE § 365-30
1:472
Secretary to the Planning Board and Board of Adjustment without separate
charge to the applicant. Said notice shall be sent to the official newspaper
for publication within 10 days of the date of any such decision.
§ 365-31. Payment of taxes. [Amended 8-13-1991 by Ord. No. MC
2929190]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39 and 40:55D-65,
applications for approval by the Planning Board of either subdivisions or
site plans, or both, and for approval by the Board of Adjustment for zoning,
respectively, shall be accompanied by proof that no taxes or assessments
for local improvements are due or delinquent on the property which is the
subject of such application or, if it is shown that taxes or assessments are
delinquent on said property, any approvals or other relief granted by either
Board shall be conditioned upon either the prompt payment of such taxes or
assessments or the making of adequate provision for the payment thereof in
such manner that the municipality will be adequately protected.
§ 365-32. Appeals to Municipal Council.
An appeal from any final decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment or
Planning Board may be taken to the Municipal Council, provided that
such appeal shall be taken in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-17.
190. Editor's Note: Section 4 of this ordinance provided as follows: "The issuance or
maintenance of licenses or permits under any provision of this ordinance will not be
withheld or denied if such action will jeopardize the health and safety of the citizens of
Irvington."
§ 365-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-32
1:473

ARTICLE IV
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 365-33. Definitions.
Whenever a term is used in this chapter which is defined in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-2 et seq., such term is intended to have the meaning set forth in the
definition of such term found in said statute, unless a contrary intention is
clearly expressed from the context of this chapter.
§ 365-34. Pending applications.
All applications for development filed prior to the effective date of this
chapter may be continued, but any appeals arising out of decisions made on
any such applications shall be governed by the provisions of § 365-32.
§ 365-35. Filing of copy of chapter.
Immediately upon adoption of this chapter, the Municipal Clerk shall file a
copy with the Essex County Planning Board as required by law. The Clerk
shall also file with said County Planning Board copies of all other ordinances
of the municipality relating to land use, including the Subdivision, Zoning
and Site Plan Review Ordinances.191
191. Editor's Note: See Ch. 560, Subdivision and Site Plan Review; and Ch. 650, Zoning.
§ 365-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 365-35
1:475
Chapter 369
LAUNDROMATS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Coin-operated machines — See Ch. 229.
Licensing procedure — See Ch. 290, Art. I.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 307.
§ 365-35 IRVINGTON CODE § 365-35
1:476
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 369-1. Definitions. [Added 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. MC 3344]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DRY-CLEANING PLANT — Any establishment in which clothing is dry
cleaned on the premises. Such an establishment may or may not include
customer drop-off and pickup.
DRY-CLEANING SHOP — A retail establishment used primarily for the
purpose of dropping off or picking up clothing by customers for dry-cleaning
purposes. No dry cleaning is conducted on the premises, but clothing is sent
for dry-cleaning purposes off premises.
LAUNDRY/LAUNDERETTE — A business premises equipped with individual
clothes-washing machines for use of retail customers, exclusive of laundry
facilities provided as an accessory use in a residential structure.
§ 369-2. Operation in residential buildings.192
No laundry or launderette shall be conducted in any building devoted
exclusively to residential occupation or in any residential portion of a
building, except that there may be established in any portion of a building,
except that there may be established in any such building one or more
washing or laundry facilities which shall be used solely by and for the
convenience and service of the residents of such building. Such washing
and laundering facilities shall be constructed and operated in accordance
with the regulations and conditions set forth in and under the provisions of
this chapter which are applicable thereto.
§ 369-3. Maintenance of premises; lighting and ventilation.
The entire premises devoted to the business of a laundry or launderette
shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition at all times, and all areas
where the work of washing or laundering is performed shall be adequately
ventilated and provided with sufficient natural or artificial light.
§ 369-4. Walls to be covered with impervious material.
All walls in premises devoted to the business of a laundry or launderette
shall be covered with nonabsorbent paint or cement or other impervious
material.
§ 369-5. Flooring, drainage and plumbing.
The flooring in any room or area of a laundry or launderette where the
work of washing or laundering is performed shall be of impervious material
192. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 229, Art. V, Laundry Machines Located in Apartment Buildings.
§ 369-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 369-5
1:477
and shall be graded and sloped to a drain properly trapped and vented to
prevent flooding or collection of wastewater due to overflow and dripping.
All plumbing work in such premises shall conform to the provisions of
the applicable codes and ordinances of the Town and any amendment or
revision of such codes and ordinances as well as provisions of applicable
laws of the state.
§ 369-6. Water supply.
There shall be available in all premises devoted to the business of a laundry
or launderette an adequate supply of water for flushing and cleaning
purposes. There shall be a separate water service from the curb sufficiently
large to adequately supply all laundry devices and in no case less than 1 1/
2 inches in diameter.
§ 369-7. Machines to be kept clean; separate hot-water heating
facilities required.
Machines used for washing or laundering in laundries and launderettes
shall be thoroughly clean before any clothes or other materials are placed
therein for cleaning. Separate hot-water heating facilities sufficient in size
and capacity to deliver water to each machine at 160° F. at all times during
the cleaning process shall be provided.
§ 369-8. Machines to be cushioned.
All machines used in any laundry or launderette shall be mounted and
cushioned so as to prevent unreasonable noises and vibration to the
detriment of the neighbors in the immediate vicinity of the premises.
§ 369-9. Handling or receiving contaminated articles prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator, or any agent or employee
thereof, of any laundry or launderette to knowingly receive, or for any
person to deliver to any laundry or launderette, for any handling, service
or treatment whatever, any household washing, garments, bedclothes or
other articles which come from the occupants of any house or premises
under quarantine for a communicable disease. To this end, every laundry
or launderette shall keep a record of those who bring articles to their
establishment for handling by them, and they shall also post a notice in
a prominent part of the room where the articles are received that it is
unlawful for them to be received or delivered for handling under such
circumstances.
§ 369-10. Articles containing bodily discharges not to remain
outside premises.
No laundry or launderette shall permit infants' diapers or any other
materials containing bodily excrements or discharges to remain on the
exterior portion of its premises.
§ 369-5 IRVINGTON CODE § 369-11
1:478
§ 369-11. Hours of operation. [Amended 8-13-2002 by Ord. No. MC
3200193; 1-28-2003 by Ord. No. MC 3213; 3-13-2007 by Ord. No. MC
3336]
§ 369-12. Fire protection regulations; attendant on duty.
§ 369-13. Location. [Added 4-10-2007 by Ord. No. MC 3344]
Within the confines of the Township of Irvington, no dry-cleaning plants,
dry-cleaning shops, laundries or launderettes shall be located within 1,000
feet of each other. The distance between dry-cleaning plants, dry-cleaning
shops, laundries or launderette businesses shall be measured from the
nearest entrance of the existing business to the nearest entrance of the
proposed new business, along the route that a pedestrian would normally
walk. This section shall apply to new businesses only when measuring from
an existing dry-cleaning plant, dry-cleaning shop, laundry or launderette.
A. The operation of any laundry or launderette shall commence not earlier
than 6:00 a.m. and shall not continue after 11:00 p.m.
B. All machines shall be off and not in operation no later than 11:00 p.m.
No customers shall be allowed inside the premises after 9:30 p.m. for
the purpose of using the laundry facilities. However, any customers
inside the facility shall be allowed to complete the processing of their
garments.
A. In all laundries and launderettes there shall be provided suitable first
aid fire protection in accordance with the Standard for Portable Fire
Extinguishers (N.B.F.U. No. 10). There shall be no spotting operations
using flammable liquids, and no flammable liquids or solids of any kind
shall be used or stored on the premises.
B. All lint refuse shall be removed from all traps after the close of each
day's work and shall be deposited in approved waste cans and removed
from the premises for disposal. At all other times trap covers shall be
kept securely in place.
C. Flammable liquids shall not be used for cleaning floors of the premises.
D. There shall be an attendant present at all times when the premises are
in operation for the proper maintenance and supervision of the
premises and machinery for the protection of the health, safety and
welfare of the public.
193. Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor; said veto was overridden
9-10-2002.
§ 369-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 369-13
1:479

ARTICLE II
Licensing
§ 369-14. License required.
No person shall operate any laundry or launderette without first securing a
license to do so, upon application to the Division of Licensing of the Town.
§ 369-15. Separate license for each location.
If the applicant for a license required by § 369-14 operates a laundry
or launderette at more than one location, each location shall require a
separate license.
§ 369-16. Investigations and certifications prerequisite to issuance.
[Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
As a condition precedent to the issuance of a license pursuant to this
chapter by the Division of Licensing of the Town, there shall be certified to
the Division of Licensing by the Health Officer, the Department of Public
Safety, the Division of Building Inspection and the Plumbing Inspector of
the Town that they respectively have investigated the application and see
no objections to the issuance of such license.
§ 369-17. Fees. [Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622;
11-27-1984 by Ord. No. MC 2757; 8-11-1987 by Ord. No. MC 2834;
12-12-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3027; 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3134;
8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by Ord. No. MC 3306;
12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413]
The annual license fee, or for any fraction of a year, for the operation of a
laundry or launderette under this chapter shall be $888 initially and $347
annually thereafter.194
§ 369-18. Expiration date.
Every license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall expire
on the 31st day of December following the date of its issuance.
194. Editor's Note: Original § 131-15B of the 1981 Revised Code, which contained an
exemption from the license fee for war veterans, which previously followed this section,
was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 369-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 369-18
1:481

ARTICLE III
Violations
[Added 9-13-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3582195]
§ 369-19. Violations and penalties; schedule of fines.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the penalties for
violations of this chapter are as follows:
Section
Short
Description
1st
Offense
2nd
Offense
3rd
Offense
4th
Offense
Maximum
Fine;
Court
Appearance
Required
§ 369-2 Operation
in
residential
buildings
$100 $250 $500 $1,000
§ 369-9 Handling
or
receiving
contaminated
articles
prohibited
$50 $250 $500 $1,000
§ 369-11 Hours of
operation
$250 $500 $750 $1,000
§ 369-14 License
required
$250 $500 $750 $1,000
§ 369-15 Separate
license for
each
location
$250 $500 $750 $1,000
B. Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of a violation of any other
terms of this chapter shall be subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter
1, Article III, Penalties, of the Township Code.
195. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 369-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 369-19
1:483
Chapter 374
LIBRARY RULES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 439.
§ 374-1. Materials required to be charged out.
No person shall remove or borrow any books, articles or library materials
from the premises of the Irvington Free Public Library or any of its branches
unless and until said removal of books, articles or materials has been
consented to, recorded and charged out at the circulation desk of the Main
Library or any of its branches.
§ 374-2. Keeping materials beyond due date.
It shall be unlawful for any person to retain or fail to return any books,
articles or materials beyond the date designated by the library employee or
officer at the time said book, article or material is removed by consent of the
library and charged out to the person removing same at the Main Library
or any of its branches, or any extension of time granted in writing by the
library or its branches.
§ 374-3. Assessment of fine or late charge.
Any person failing to return any book, article or other material on or
before the date designated as provided in § 374-2 shall be liable for fine
or late charge for each day of such retention as provided by the rules
and regulations of the Irvington Library Board. If the offending person or
borrower of the book, articles or materials is under 18 years of age, then the
parent or guardian of such person shall be notified by certified mail of the
default and violation of the provisions of this chapter. The failure to return
the books, articles or materials within 10 days after mailing of such notice
by certified mail shall cause said fine and late charge to be assessed against
such parent or guardian.
§ 374-4. Use of false name or address.
It shall be unlawful for any person to register or furnish a false name or
address or to forge or furnish false identification or card not belonging to
said person for the purpose of borrowing or removing any book, article or
materials from the Main Library or its branches.
§ 374-5. Filing of complaint.
The Director of the library or any person authorized by the Director may file
a complaint in the Irvington Municipal Court against any person violating
§ 369-19 IRVINGTON CODE § 374-5
1:484
the provisions of this chapter if a certified letter, return receipt requested, is
mailed by the library administration to the offending person, informing such
person that the book or books, articles or materials are more than six weeks
overdue and that failure to return the books, articles or materials within 10
days shall cause a complaint for prosecution to be filed for violating this
chapter and that such failure to return is presumed to be intentional to
defraud and retain library property. In the event the original violator is a
minor, the said certified notice may also be sent to the parent or guardian
of said minor.
§ 374-6. Defacing or damaging books or materials.
It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, deface, cut, tear, disfigure
or destroy any books, articles or other library materials or any part thereof
which belong to or were borrowed from the Main Library or any of its
branches.
§ 374-7. Trespassing upon grounds.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to enter upon the lawn or
other public grounds of the Irvington Public Library or any of its branches
when forbidden to do so by an official sign posted on such grounds or by
other official notification.
§ 374-8. Loitering or obstructing passage.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to loiter in or upon any
library lands or building or to obstruct or molest the free passage of other
persons in and from said library lands or buildings at the Main Library or
its branches.
§ 374-9. Causing breach of the peace.
No person shall loiter on the library lands or in its buildings in such a
manner as to create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace
or whereby a breach of the peace may be occasioned.
§ 374-10. Annoying others; offensive noises.
No person shall obstruct, annoy, molest, hinder, threaten, insult or interfere
with any person legally enjoying the privileges and use of the Main Library
or its branches, nor shall such offending person make or cause to be made
any loud, disturbing or offensive noises or remarks in and upon the grounds
and premises of the library or its branches.
§ 374-11. Vandalism.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to willfully or maliciously
commit any vandalism or injury or damage to or upon the lands or buildings
of the Irvington Main Library or any of its branches or any of its real or
personal property, including, but not by way of limitation, any furniture,
§ 374-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 374-11
1:485
fixtures, shelving, equipment, books, pictures, articles and all other
materials belonging to or in the possession of the Main Library or any of its
branches.
§ 374-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord. No.
MC 2622]
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
be punishable as provided in the general penalty provisions as set forth in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article III.
Chapter 380
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 428.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 460.
Solid waste and recycling — See Ch. 535.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 555.
§ 374-11 IRVINGTON CODE § 374-12
1:486
ARTICLE I
Litter Regulations, Handbills and Posting Notices
[Adopted 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622 as Ch. 134, Art. I, of the
1981 Revised Code]
§ 380-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER — Garbage, refuse and rubbish, as defined herein, and all other
waste material which, if thrown, deposited or stored as prohibited by this
article, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.
PERSON — Any natural person, corporation, firm, partnership, association,
or other entity, acting or benefiting from the actions whether named in the
poster, flyer or other advertisement or not, publicizing an establishment,
premises, location, or business, regardless of the number of different
corporations, partnerships, proprietorships, individuals or other forms of
enterprise related to or having any interest in the establishment, premises,
location or business.[Added 1-27-2004 by Ord. No. MC 3250]
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling house, building or other structure
designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant,
including any yard, ground walk, driveway, porch, steps or vestibule
belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling house building or other
structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any streets, sidewalks, alleys or other public ways and
any public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings.
PUBLIC STRUCTURE OR BUILDING — Any structure or building owned
or operated by the federal, town, county or state government or any
governmental agency.
REFUSE — All putrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including
garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned
automobiles, dismantled automobiles and parts thereof, scrap metal, junk,
machinery and solid market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes, consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes,
cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery,
building materials and similar materials.
§ 380-2. General prohibition.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk
or other public place within the Town except in public receptacles or in
authorized private receptacles for collection or in official Town dumps.
§ 380-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-3
1:487
§ 380-3. Placing litter in receptacles.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried
or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public
place.
§ 380-4. Maintaining gutters and sidewalks free of litter.
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public
place within the Town the accumulation of litter from any building or lot
or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or
occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of
litter.
§ 380-5. Litter from places of business. [Amended 4-26-1994 by
Ord. No. MC 2996]
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the Town the
accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private
sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business
within the Township shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business
premises free of litter, and in addition, within 30 minutes of opening and
closing for business and between the hours of 12:00 p.m. and 1:00 p.m.,
including weekends and holidays, when open for business, merchants shall
sweep their sidewalks and an area 18 inches out from the curb, and in
addition, such business merchants shall pick up and deposit all paper,
debris and sweepings resulting from sweeping and cleaning their sidewalks.
§ 380-6. Litter from vehicles.
No person while a driver or passenger in a vehicle shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or other public place within the Town.
§ 380-7. Litter from trucks and truck tires.
§ 380-8. Litter in parks.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the Town except
in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented
A. No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the
Town unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any
load or contents of litter from being blown or deposited upon any street,
alley or other public place.
B. No person shall drive or move any vehicle or truck within the Town the
wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or
other public place any mud, dirt, sticky substances or foreign matter of
any kind.
§ 380-3 IRVINGTON CODE § 380-8
1:488
from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the part of
the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles
are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the
person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.
§ 380-9. Litter in bodies of water; stagnant water. [Amended
11-11-1974 by Ord. No. MC 2428]
§ 380-10. Litter from aircraft.
No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the Town
any litter, handbill or any other object.
§ 380-11. Distributing handbills.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the
Town. No person shall hand out or distribute or sell any commercial handbill
in any public place; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful on
any sidewalk, street or other public place within the Town for any person
to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any
noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it.
§ 380-12. Placing handbills in or upon vehicles.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any vehicle; provided, however, that it shall not be
unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute, without
charge to the receiver thereof, a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of
a vehicle who is willing to accept it.
§ 380-13. Placing handbills on vacant private premises.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or
continuously uninhabited or vacant.
A. No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake,
stream, bay, municipal sewer or sewer line or any body of water in a
park or elsewhere within this Town.
B. No person shall pollute or allow the existence of conditions which cause
or threaten pollution of any water, or other liquid existence or presence
which causes or threatens injury to the health, comfort or property of
inhabitants of this Town.
C. No person shall allow the existence or presence of any water or other
liquid in which mosquito larvae breed or exist, or any other liquid
existence or presence which causes or threatens injury to the health,
comfort or property of the inhabitants of this Town.
§ 380-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-14
1:489
§ 380-14. Placing of handbills on private premises. [Amended
1-10-2006 by Ord. No. MC 3311]
It shall be unlawful for any person to deliver or deposit, or for any person,
firm or corporation to cause the delivery or deposit, of any unsolicited
newspapers, shoppers, circulars, leaflets, flyers and other like printed
matter to or upon private premises within the Township of Irvington except
in accordance with the terms herein. For purposes of this section,
"unsolicited" shall mean the printed matter referred to herein which has not
been ordered, subscribed or requested by the recipient.
§ 380-15. Posting notices on poles and buildings. [Amended
7-11-2006 by Ord. No. MC 3320]
A. Such printed matter shall be placed only within a permanently installed
appurtenance to the premises designed and designated for the receipt
of such printed matter or by handing or transmitting the handbill
directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present.
B. Excepted from Subsection A shall be such printed matter which plainly
bears upon it either in the masthead or on the front page setting forth
the name, telephone number and address of the person responsible for
its circulation to whom may be addressed a written notice by any
recipient indicating the recipient's desire to cease future delivery of the
particular item of printed matter. The notice shall be a minimum 11
point, bold type in size and shall appear in each publication.
C. There shall be no intentional delivery whatsoever of any such
unsolicited printed matter to premises after the owner or tenant of such
premises has notified the person responsible for its circulation, as
referred to in Subsection B herein, by certified mail, return receipt
requested, and by first class mail that future delivery shall cease.
D. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who violates this section
shall be subject to the fines and penalties set forth in § 380-24,
Violations and penalties; schedule of fines.196
A. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the following
meanings indicated:
PERSON — Any individual, political candidate, political committee,
person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company,
organization, or other entity of any kind.
SIGN — Includes any bill, poster, placard, handbill, flyer, painting,
notice, advertisement, or other similar object or matter that contains
printed or written matter in words, symbols, pictures, or any
combination of them.
196. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
Former § 134-15 of the 1981 Revised Code, Distribution on private premises generally,
which previously followed this section, was superseded 1-10-2006 by Ord. No. MC 3311.
See now § 380-14.
§ 380-14 IRVINGTON CODE § 380-15
1:490
B. Postings prohibited. No person may post, place, or affix a sign:
(1) On any building owned, leased or controlled by the Township of
Irvington;
(2) On or within the confines of any public park, recreation area, or
other landscaped grounds owned or operated by the Township of
Irvington;
(3) On any flagpole or tree owned by the Township of Irvington;
(4) On any traffic-control sign or device, including, but not limited to,
stop lights and their standards, stop signs, yield signs, one-way
street signs, and any other sign or device that directs traffic or
controls traffic signals, or on the supporting post of any trafficcontrol
sign or device;
(5) That in any way:
(a) Blocks a motorist's, cyclist's, or pedestrian's view of a trafficcontrol
sign or device so as to create a hazard;
(b) Protrudes into a street or sidewalk so as to interfere with the
safe passage of the public; or
(c) Otherwise poses a hazard to motorists, pedestrians, or cyclists;
(6) On any other property owned, leased, or controlled by the
Township; or
(7) On any pole, building or property that is owned, leased, or
controlled by a public utility and located within or on any public
street, alley, or other public property.
C. Removal of illegal signs.
(1) From Township property; by Department of Public Works. For any
sign posted in violation of Subsection B(1) through (6) of this
section, the Department of Public Works may: [Amended
7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC
3511]
(a) Summarily remove the sign; or
(b) Send written notice to the person responsible, as described in
Subsection D of this section, ordering that person to remove
the sign within the time specified in the notice.
(2) From Township property; by others. For any sign posted in violation
of Subsection B(1) through (6) of this section, any individual may:
(a) Summarily remove the sign; and
[1] Discard the sign in an appropriate manner; or
§ 380-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-15
1:491
[2] Submit the sign to the Department of Public Works for
further enforcement proceedings. [Amended 7-14-2009
by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
(b) Make submission to the Department of Public Works for
further enforcement proceedings. The submission: [Amended
7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC
3511]
[1] Must be accompanied by an affidavit, in the form and tenor
required by the Department of Public Works, that
describes the circumstances of the violation and removal;
and
[2] May designate a nonprofit community or neighborhood
association listed with the Department of Public Works to
share in any fines that might be collected in the matter. An
association so designated is entitled to receive 50% of any
fine collected.
(3) From public utility property. For any sign posted in violation of
Subsection B(1) through (6) of this section:
(a) The public utility may summarily remove the sign; or
(b) The public utility or the Department of Public Works may send
written notice to the person responsible, as described in
Subsection D of this section, ordering that person to remove
the sign within the time specified in the notice. [Amended
7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC
3511]
D. Liability for costs and expenses.
(1) In general. Any person who posts a sign in violation of this section
and any other person responsible for the sign, as described in
§ 380-1, is liable to the Township for the costs of:
(a) Removing the sign; and
(b) Repairing any damage caused by the placement or removal of
the sign.
(2) Persons responsible.
(a) Political campaigns. In the case of a political campaign, a
candidate for any office and the chairperson and treasurer of
any registered political committee shall be presumptively
liable for the costs of sign removal imposed by Subsection D(1),
provided that the candidate or the committee was responsible
for the printing of the sign. If such liability is contested, the
burden of overcoming the presumption is on the contesting
party.
§ 380-15 IRVINGTON CODE § 380-15
1:492
§ 380-16. Depositing litter on occupied private property.
No person shall throw, deposit or store litter on any occupied private
property within the Town, whether owned by such person or not; except
that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain
authorized private receptacles for collection and removal of same in such
manner that same shall not be unsightly and detrimental to the surrounding
neighborhood.
§ 380-17. Depositing litter on vacant lots.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the Town, whether owned by such person or not.
§ 380-18. Maintenance of private property free of litter.
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this section
shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for
collection.
§ 380-19. Enforcement. [Amended 9-8-1987 by Ord. No. MC 2835;
7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
The Director of the Department of Public Works is hereby authorized and
empowered to enforce the provisions of this chapter relating to litter on
(b) Other cases. In all other cases, it shall be presumed that the
person whose name, event, business, location, or merchandise
is written on the sign shall be liable to the Township for
charges imposed by Subsection D(1), and the burden of
overcoming the presumption is on the contesting party.
E. Enforcement; penalties.
(1) Enforcement by citation.
(a) In addition to any other civil or criminal remedy or
enforcement procedure, this section may be enforced under
§§ 380-21 and 380-22.
(b) The issuance of a citation to enforce this section does not
preclude pursuing any other civil or criminal remedy or
enforcement action authorized by law.
(2) Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who violates this section
shall be subject to the fines and penalties set forth in § 380-24,
Violations and penalties; schedule of fines. Each posting (sign) shall
be treated and deemed as a separate offense. [Amended
2-13-2008 by Ord. No. MC 3372197]
197. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 380-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-19
1:493
private property. Complaints brought to the attention of any other officer
or agent of the Town relative to investigation or the enforcement of the
provisions of the chapter shall immediately be forwarded by such officer or
agent to the Director of the Department of Public Works for investigation
and enforcement thereof.
§ 380-20. Right of entry. [Amended 9-8-1987 by Ord. No. MC 2835;
7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
The Director of the Department of Public Works or his designee is hereby
authorized and empowered to go upon any public or private premises within
the Town for the purpose of inspections or for the removal or elimination of
violations of this chapter.
§ 380-21. Notice to property owner to remove litter. [Amended
9-8-1987 by Ord. No. MC 2835; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407;
7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
The Director of the Department of Public Works shall notify the owner
or tenant of any private property within the Town, or the agent of such
owner, to properly remove or dispose of any litter located on such property
which is dangerous to the public health, safety or general welfare of the
public within 10 days from the date of notice. Such notice may be served
personally or sent by registered mail addressed to the owner or his agent at
his last known address, and to the tenant, if any.
§ 380-22. Procedure on noncompliance. [Amended 9-8-1987 by Ord.
No. MC 2835; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No.
MC 3511]
Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner, tenant or agent notified
pursuant to the provision of § 380-21 to properly dispose of litter dangerous
to the public health, safety or general welfare of the public within 10 days
after receipt of written notice provided for in said § 380-21 or within 10
days after the date of such notice in the event that the same is returned by
the post office to the Town because of its inability to make delivery thereof,
provided that the same was properly addressed to the last known address
of the owner or agent, the Director of the Department of Public Works shall
order the removal or disposal of such litter. The Director of the Department
of Public Works shall require the services of the Department of Public Works
in carrying out such provision, and the Director of Public Works is hereby
empowered and authorized to effect the removal or disposal of litter from
private property within the Town.
§ 380-23. Cost of removal; lien. [Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No.
MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
When the Town has effected the removal of litter from private property in
the Town in accordance with § 380-22, the cost thereof shall be certified by
the Director of Public Works to the Municipal Council, which shall examine
§ 380-19 IRVINGTON CODE § 380-23
1:494
the certificate and, if found correct, shall cause the cost as shown thereon
to be charged against the lands. The amount so charged shall forthwith
become a lien upon such lands and shall be added to and become and form
part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon such lands, the same to
bear interest at the same rate as taxes, and shall be collected and enforced
by the same officers and in the same manner as taxes.
§ 380-24. Violations and penalties; schedule of fines.198
A. Schedule of fines. Except as otherwise provided in this article, the
penalties for violations of this article are as follows: [Added 1-26-2016
by Ord. No. MC 3563]
Section
Short
Description
1st
Offense
2nd
Offense
3rd
Offense
4th Offense
Maximum
Fine;
Court
Appearance
Required
§ 380-3 Placing litter
in receptacles
$150 $250 $500 $750
§ 380-4 Maintaining
gutter and
sidewalks
free of litter
$50 $250 $500 $750
§ 380-5 Litter from
places of
business
$150 $250 $500 $750
§ 380-6 Litter from
vehicles
$150 $250 $500 $750
§ 380-7 Litter from
trucks and
truck tires
$150 $250 $500 $750
§ 380-11 Distributing
handbills
$250 $500 $750 $1,000
§ 380-12 Placing
handbills in
or upon
vehicles
$250 $500 $750 $1,000
§ 380-13 Placing
handbills on
vacant
private
premises
$250 $500 $750 $1,000
198. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 380-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-24
1:495
Section
Short
Description
1st
Offense
2nd
Offense
3rd
Offense
4th Offense
Maximum
Fine;
Court
Appearance
Required
§ 380-14 Placing
handbills on
private
premises
$250 $500 $750 $1,000
§ 380-15 Posting
notices on
poles and
buildings
$250 $500 $750 $1,000
§ 380-16 Depositing
litter on
occupied
private
property
$500 $750 $1,000 $1,500
§ 380-17 Depositing
litter on
vacant lots
$500 $750 $1,000 $1,500
§ 380-18 Maintenance
of private
property free
of litter
$50 $250 $500 $750
B. Except as otherwise provided in this article, any person, association or
corporation who shall violate any other of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to the following fines:
(1) For the first violation: a fine of $50.
(2) For the second violation: a fine of $250.
(3) For the third violation: a fine of $500.
(4) For the fourth violation: a fine of $1,000. In addition, a mandatory
court appearance is required for the fourth violation.
§ 380-24 IRVINGTON CODE § 380-24
1:496
ARTICLE II
Clean Communities Program
[Adopted 12-12-1989 by Ord. No. MC 2894 (Ch. 134, Art. II, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 380-25. Placement and servicing of litter receptacles.
§ 380-26. Discarding solid waste.
No person shall discard or dump any household or commercial solid waste
in any place not specifically designated for the purpose of solid waste
storage or disposal.
§ 380-27. Parking on private property. [Amended 8-15-2017 by Ord.
No. MC 3614; 3-11-2019 by Ord. No. MC 3690]
No person shall park or cause to be parked any type of motor vehicle
in/on lawns, rear yards, front yards, side yards, across sidewalks, across
driveways, across garages, across carports, in/on vacant lots, etc., nor shall
they jump the curb (driving over a curb without an apron) to park in areas
that are not delineated as parking spaces.
§ 380-28. Storage of inoperable or unregistered vehicles.
No person shall keep inoperable or unregistered vehicles on streets, vacant
lots or residential lawns.
§ 380-29. Debris on construction sites.
No person shall allow the accumulation of debris on or around construction
sites or its storage in such a manner that it is likely to be removed by natural
forces onto adjacent property.
A. Litter receptacles and their servicing are required at the following
public places which exist in the municipality, including: sidewalks used
by pedestrians in active retail commercially zoned areas, such that at a
minimum there shall be no single linear quarter-mile without a
receptacle; buildings held out for use by the public, including schools,
government buildings and railroad and bus stations; parks; drive-in
restaurants; all street vendor locations; self-service refreshment areas;
construction sites; gasoline service station islands; shopping centers;
parking lots; and at special events to which the public is invited,
including sporting events, parades, carnivals, circuses and festivals.
The proprietors of these places or the sponsors of these events shall be
responsible for providing and servicing the receptacles such that
adequate containerization is available.
B. "Litter receptacle" means a container suitable for the depositing of
litter.
§ 380-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-30
1:497
§ 380-30. Property maintenance.
Every owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or person in charge of any building or
structure shall keep or cause to be kept the sidewalk and curb abutting said
building or structure free from obstruction and nuisances of every kind, and
to keep said sidewalks, areaways, backyards, courts and alleys free from
litter and other offensive material.
§ 380-31. Violations and penalties; schedule of fines. [Added
1-26-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3563; amended 9-13-2016 by Ord. No.
MC 3582; 3-13-2018 by Ord. No. MC 3635]
A. Except as otherwise provided in this article, the penalties for violations
of this article are as follows:
Section
Short
Description
1st
Offense
2nd
Offense
3rd
Offense
4th Offense
Maximum
Fine;
Court
Appearance
Required
§ 380-27 Parking on
residential
lawns
$50 $250 $500 $750
§ 380-28 Storage of
inoperable or
unregistered
vehicles
$50 $250 $500 $750
§ 380-29 Debris on
constriction
sites
$250 $500 $750 $1,000
§ 380-30
Property
maintenance
$50 $250 $500 $1,000
B. Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of a violation of any other
terms of this article shall be subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter
1, Article III, Penalties, of the Township Code.
§ 380-30 IRVINGTON CODE § 380-31
1:498
ARTICLE III
Dumping and Littering
[Adopted 10-12-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3585]
§ 380-32. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Antidumping and Littering Ordinance"
and may be so cited.
§ 380-33. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FEEDING — The intentional or unintentional placement or discarding of
consumable/edible, prepared or unprepared food or food product which
could potentially be consumed by an animal, without regard for whether the
item will actually be consumed by an animal.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from either
the handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of food.
LITTER — Garbage, refuse and rubbish, as such are defined herein, and all
other waste materials which are thrown or deposited as herein prohibited
and tend to create a danger to the public health, safety and welfare.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling, house, building or other structure
designed or used either wholly or in part for residential purposes, whether
inhabited or temporarily or continuously inhabited or vacant, and shall
include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, step, vestibule or mailbox
belonging to or appurtenant to such dwelling, house or building or other
structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Includes all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or
other public walkways and all public parks, squares, spaces, docks, grounds
and buildings.
PUTRESCIBLE — Decomposing organic matter usually composed of rotten
or foul-smelling solid waste.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, except body
wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles and boats and solid market and industrial waste,
specifically including abandoned furniture, household equipment, scrap
building materials, scrap lawn and garden tools and machinery and other
such similar items.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrapping, cigarettes, cigars and
tobacco wastes, cardboard, tin cans, yard, garden or lawn clippings, leaves,
wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar material.
§ 380-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-33
1:499
SOLID WASTE — Any garbage, refuse and other discarded materials from
industrial, commercial and agricultural operation and from domestic and
community activities, and includes all other waste material, including
liquids.
VEHICLE OR OTHER INSTRUMENT — Every device in, upon or by which
any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway,
including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
§ 380-34. Dumping prohibited; violations and penalties.
§ 380-35. Improper disposal of liquid waste; violations and
penalties.
A. Prohibition of dumping. No person shall, regardless of intent, engage or
be permitted to engage in the disposal of any garbage, litter, refuse,
rubbish or solid waste in any amount greater than 0.148 cubic yard of
solids or 30 United States gallons of liquids, each of which is roughly
equivalent to one thirty-gallon trash bag or garbage container, at any
site within any private premises or public place in the Township of
Irvington which has not received authorization from the Department of
Environmental Protection and/or the Board of Public Utilities for the
acceptance of such materials. Any person found to have engaged in the
improper disposal of more than 0.148 cubic yard of solids or 30 United
States gallons of liquids shall be subject to the penalties as provided in
Subsection B of this section. In the event that the amount disposed of is
less than the amount mentioned in this section, the provisions of this
article which follow shall apply.
B. Violations and penalties. Any person violating provisions of Subsection
A of this section shall be subject to a disorderly persons offense and fine
of a minimum amount of $2,500 per day first offense; maximum $5,000
per day second offense; maximum $10,000 per day maximum and/or
imprisonment in the county jail for a term not to exceed six months, or
both. Furthermore, any vehicle or other instrument utilized in the
commission of a violation of Subsection A shall be subject to immediate
confiscation by the Public Safety Department and forfeiture. Each and
every violation of Subsection A of this section or each day that the
violation of Subsection A continues unabated shall be construed as a
separate and distinct violation thereof.
A. Improper disposal of liquid waste. No person shall, regardless of intent,
be permitted to engage in the disposal of any liquid waste, such as
antifreeze, transmission fluid, vehicle battery acid or motor oil, on any
residential or public property by permitting said fluids and/or
substances to drain onto the ground, soil, grass, paved or covered
surface or into a storm sewer.
B. Violations and penalties. Any person found to have permitted such
drainage from any vehicle of any of the above-mentioned fluids shall be
subject to a fine of a minimum amount of $1,000 for the first offense not
§ 380-33 IRVINGTON CODE § 380-35
1:500
§ 380-36. Littering prohibited; violations and penalties.
§ 380-37. Accidental spills.
Any person found to have accidentally caused the improper disposal of
any liquids or solids through any incidental spills, automobile accidents
or otherwise, provided that said spill does not concern hazardous or toxic
waste otherwise controlled by state statute, shall have 48 hours from the
time of such accident to take corrective action to fully clean up the
accidental spill. In the event that said person fails to take the necessary
corrective action to clean up the accidental spill, the other provisions of this
article shall take full force and effect as if the spill were not of an accidental
nature.
to exceed $5,000 and a minimum of $5,000 second offense not to
exceed $10,000 and a maximum amount of $10,000 third offense or
imprisonment in the county jail for a term not to exceed six months,
or both. Furthermore, any vehicle or other instrument utilized in the
commission of a violation of Subsection A or from which any such
discharge occurs shall be subject to immediate confiscation by the
Public Safety Department and forfeiture. Each and every violation of
Subsection A of this section or each day that the violation of Subsection
A continues unabated shall be construed as a separate and distinct
violation thereof.
A. Littering in public or private places prohibited. No person shall sweep,
throw, deposit or dump any garbage, litter, refuse, rubbish, solid waste
or other waste material on any street or sidewalk or any public or
private premises, whether vacant or not, except in public or private
receptacles for the collection of such materials. No person shall use any
private receptacle which is owned or rented by another without the
express permission of the person who owns or rents the private
receptacle.
B. Violations and penalties. Any person violating provisions of Subsection
A of this section shall be subject to a fine in a minimal amount of $100
and a maximum amount of $500 or imprisonment in the county jail for a
term not exceeding 90 days, or both. Each and every violation of
Subsection A of this section or each day that the provisions of
Subsection A are violated shall be construed as a separate and distinct
violation thereof. Furthermore, any vehicle or other instrument utilized
in the commission of a violation of Subsection A or from which said
garbage, litter, refuse, rubbish, solid waste or other waste material is
discharged or disposed shall be subject to immediate confiscation by
the Public Safety Department and forfeiture. Each and every violation
of Subsection A of this section or each day that the violation of
Subsection A continues unabated shall be construed as a separate and
distinct violation thereof.
§ 380-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-38
1:501
§ 380-38. Enforcement.
All provisions contained within this article shall at all times be subject to
enforcement by the following department personnel: police, fire prevention,
housing and building construction, health and public works. In addition,
the Mayor, Business Administrator and Director of Health shall have the
authority to declare a public health emergency and immediately and
without prior notice abate any violation contained within this article with
the costs for same to be subject to restitution to the Township of Irvington
for all costs incurred in the removal.
§ 380-39. Removal of waste; notice to comply.
In addition to the issuance of a summons above, a representative of police,
fire prevention, housing and building construction, health and public works,
in addition, the Mayor, Business Administrator and Director of Health are
authorized and empowered to order the immediate removal and proper
disposal of any garbage, litter, refuse, rubbish or solid waste or any waste
material. In the event that such material is not immediately removed, the
aforesaid are authorized to notify the appropriate owner of any private
premises or vacant land, or the tenant or agent of such owner, or the
person or persons responsible for the disposal of any garbage, litter, refuse,
rubbish, solid waste or other waste material upon any public property, to
properly remove and dispose of such material within seven days after the
receipt of notice. Any written notice shall be by registered or certified mail,
return receipt requested, addressed to the responsible person or his agent
at his last known address or serviced upon such responsible person. This
section shall apply to cleanup of the affected property only and shall not
preclude enforcement of any other section of this article.
§ 380-40. Removal by Township.
Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of owner, tenant or agent so notified
to dispose properly of said garbage or litter within 10 days after the date
of such notice or in the event that said notice is returned to the Township
by the post office because of an inability to make delivery thereof, provided
that the notice was properly addressed to the last known address of the
owner, tenant or agent, the serving officer of the Township or his/her
duly designated agent is authorized and empowered to pay for disposing
of such litter or to order its disposal by the Township, after obtaining
the appropriate authorization from the Mayor, Business Administrator or
Director(s) of Public Works, Housing and Building Construction and/or
Health.
§ 380-41. Costs to become lien.
A. When the Township has effected the removal of garbage or litter or has
paid for its removal, the actual cost thereof shall be chargeable to the
property owner responsible for the removal and disposal. When the full
amount due the Township is not paid by the owner within 30 days after
§ 380-38 IRVINGTON CODE § 380-41
1:502
the disposal of such garbage or litter, then and in that case, the
Department of Public Works shall certify the cost thereof to the
Township Tax Collector, which shall examine the certificate and, if
found to be correct, shall cause the cost as shown thereon to be
charged against said lands. The amount so charged shall constitute a
lien on the property and shall remain in full force and effect for the
amount due in the principal and interest, plus costs of court, if any, for
collection, until final payment has been made.
B. Said costs and expenses shall be collected in the manner fixed by law
for the collection of taxes and shall be subject to a delinquent penalty at
the same rate as in the case of taxes in the event they are not paid in full
on or before the date the tax bill upon which the charge appears
becomes delinquent. The certification of the Township Tax Collector in
accordance with the provisions hereof shall be prima facie evidence
that all legal formalities have been complied with and that the work has
been done properly and satisfactorily and shall be full notice to every
person concerned that the amount of the statement, plus interest,
constitutes a charge against the property designated or described in
the statement and that the same is due and collectible as provided by
law. Any legal costs associated with said collection shall also be borne
by the responsible party or owner and shall likewise be assessed as a
lien.
§ 380-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 380-41
1:503
Chapter 397
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 439.
§ 380-41 IRVINGTON CODE § 380-41
1:504
ARTICLE I
Noise Regulations
[Adopted 11-23-1976 by Ord. No. MC 2475 (Ch. 139, Art. I,
§§ 139-23 through 139-25, 139-26 through 139-28, of the 1981
Revised Code)]
§ 397-1. Loud and unnecessary noises prohibited; liability.
[Amended 5-9-2017 by Ord. No. MC 3603]
§ 397-2. Enumeration of prohibited noises.
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, unnecessary,
disturbing and a danger to the health, safety and welfare of the community
and its people, in violation of § 397-1, but the enumerations thereof shall not
be deemed to be exclusive:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be
made or continued, directly or indirectly, including on any private
property within the Township, any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise,
or any noise which does or is likely to annoy, disturb, injure or endanger
the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others within the
Township.
B. The owner and/or occupier of private property in violation of this
section shall be responsible for any fines and/or penalties.
A. Horns, signaling devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or signaling
device on any automobile, motorcycle, streetcar, bus or other vehicle in
the Town except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any
such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; the
sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable
period of time; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by
engine, exhaust or by compressed air or gas or by vacuum; and the use
of any signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up.
B. Radios, televisions, phonographs, tape recorders, etc. The using,
operating or permitting to be played, used or operated, either indoors
or outdoors, of any radio receiving set, television receiver, musical
instrument, phonograph, tape recorder or other machine or device for
the producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as to disturb
the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any
time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for
the person or persons who are in the room, vehicle, chamber or
premises in which such machine or device is operated and who are
voluntary listeners thereto.
C. Loudspeakers, amplifiers. The using, operating or permitting to be
played, used or operated of any receiving set, musical instrument,
phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier, tape recorder or other
machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is
cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising
§ 397-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 397-2
1:505
or for any other purpose, except as authorized by governmental
authorities in connection with law enforcement or public emergencies,
provided that such devices may be employed in connection with
nonprofit, charitable, educational, civic, religious or recreational
activities in accordance with permits first obtained therefor from the
Municipal Council pursuant to § 397-4 hereof.
D. Animals, birds, etc.
(1) The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or
long-continued noise, shall disturb the comfort or repose of any
persons in the vicinity.
(2) It shall constitute a nuisance to the neighboring residents for any
owner or guardian of any dog and/or cat to permit it to make
excessive, continuous or unwarranted barking or howling or
whining or other excessive noises during daytime or nighttime,
whether or not the dog or cat is confined to the grounds or
premises of the owner or guardian. [Added 3-8-1983 by Ord. No.
MC 2688]
E. Nonvehicular whistles, horns and other signaling devices. The sounding
of any whistle, horn or other signaling device except to give notice of
the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger, upon
request of proper Town authorities, or as may be required by general
rule or ordinance.
F. Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam
engine, stationary jet or internal-combustion engine or motor vehicle
except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent
loud or explosive noises therefrom.
G. Vehicles and their loads. The use of any automobile, motorcycle, truck
or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or operated in such a manner as to
create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise.
H. Drums. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the
purpose of attracting attention to any performance, show or sale except
in connection with any school or civic activity or where a parade permit
has been issued.
I. Hawkers, peddlers. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and
vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood.
J. Construction or repairing of buildings. The erection (including
excavating), demolition, alteration or repair of any building other than
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day of the week,
except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and
safety, and then only with a permit from the Building Inspector, which
permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three days or less
while the emergency continues and which permit may be renewed for a
period of three days or less while the emergency continues.
§ 397-2 IRVINGTON CODE § 397-2
1:506
K. Blowers, fans, pumps. The use of any blower, fan, pump, engine or
motor in connection therewith, including by way of example and not by
way of limitation air-conditioning systems, compression devices and
pool filter systems, if such use creates loud, penetrating or continuous
noises that disturb the comfort or repose of persons residing in the
vicinity.
L. Schools, courts, churches, hospitals and public office buildings. The
creation of any excessive noise adjacent to any school, institution of
learning, house of worship, judicial court, libraries or public office
buildings while the same are in use or operation, or adjacent to any
hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the working or operation
of the institution or which disturbs or unduly annoys the patients in the
hospital or disturbs or unduly annoys the persons using or employed in
the use and operation of any school, institution of learning, house of
worship, judicial court, library or public office building.
M. Miscellaneous night noise. Any of the following activities when
occurring in close proximity to residences between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m.: the warming up or idling of buses, trucks or tractors, and the
unnecessary and repeated idling, acceleration and deceleration or
starting and stopping of automobiles and motorcycles.
N. Outdoor gatherings. Outdoor concerts except in accordance with
permits first obtained therefor from the Director of Parks and
Recreation.
O. Pile drivers, hammers, etc. The operation between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer,
derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliance, the use of which is
attended by loud or unusual noise, unless required by an emergency
situation and permitted by a special permit issued by the Director of the
Department of Public Works. [Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC
3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
P. Sound trucks, mechanical loudspeakers. The use of mechanical
loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving vehicles for
advertising or other purposes except where a specific license or permit
is granted by the Municipal Council.
Q. The playing or permitting the playing of any radio, stereo device, tape
recorder, portable television set, phonograph, compact disc or any
sound-producing device by any passenger on public transportation or
by any customer or invited person attending a theater or place of public
assembly or as a customer or employee in a supermarket, retail store,
auto service station or garage or in any publicly attended
establishment, public sidewalks, parks, athletic fields, playgrounds,
library or church grounds, residential entrances and yards or public
buildings in such a manner and volume so as to be heard beyond the
hearing range of the carrier or operator of said device so as to disturb
the quiet, comfort, peace or repose of any person or persons in public
§ 397-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 397-2
1:507
§ 397-3. Allowable sound-pressure levels.
No person shall use or operate any facility, machine or instrumentality, or
produce or cause to be produced any sound in the Town, when the same
shall produce noise, the sound-pressure level of which measured at the
point of annoyance complained of shall exceed 65 decibels between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. or 50 decibels between the hours of 8:00
p.m. and 8:00 a.m., or that which shall be more than 10 decibels above
the existing background sound level, as measured on the A-weighting of a
sound-level meter which conforms to the specifications of the United States
of America Standards Institute. The "background sound level" is defined
as the sound level present when the offending noise source is silenced. In
no instance, however, shall it be necessary to reduce the noise level below
40 decibels between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. or 30 decibels
between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. This section is applicable
when and where the character and nature of any sound or noise lends itself
places at any time; except or unless such radio, stereo, tape or record
player, listening device or machine or sound-producing device is
equipped with a personal ear-listening device so as to be heard only
by the user. Any personal listening device used on said equipment
shall not be worn while crossing or walking on any street or in such
other places within the Township where such use may endanger the
individual wearer or others. [Added 8-11-1981 by Ord. No. MC
2636; amended 2-11-1985 by Ord. No. MC 2805; 10-28-1986 by
Ord. No. MC 2816199]
R. The playing or permitting of the playing of any radio, stereo, tape
recorder or machine or device producing loud sound in any motor
vehicle parked on any public street, public or private parking lot or
driveway or yard or in any moving vehicle which sounds are in such
volume so as to unreasonably annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, peace
or repose of any person or persons present or living or working in the
vicinity of said parked or moving motor vehicle. [Added 2-11-1986 by
Ord. No. MC 2805; amended 10-28-1986 by Ord. No. MC 2815]
S. Engaging in recreational activities on public streets is prohibited. In the
absence of a permit to do so, public streets shall not be used for
recreational activities. This includes, but is not limited to the playing of
any sports, games or other activities on public streets, except as
authorized by governmental authorities in connection with nonprofit,
charitable, educational, civic, religious or recreational activities in
accordance with permits first obtained therefor from the Municipal
Council pursuant to § 397-4 hereof. [Added 11-24-2009 by Ord. No.
MC 3410]
199. Editor's Note: This ordinance further provided that any person violating the provisions of
this subsection shall have said device held as evidence by the Irvington Police Department
(now Department of Public Safety) pending disposition of the matter by the appropriate
authority.
§ 397-2 IRVINGTON CODE § 397-3
1:508
to measurement, but nothing in this section shall be construed in any way
to limit any other portion or part of this article.
§ 397-4. Permits for use of loudspeakers and amplifiers. [Amended
1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622; 8-11-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2636]
A. The Director of the Irvington Public Safety Department or his designee
in his Department may issue permits required by the provisions of
§ 394-2 for the use of loudspeakers and amplifiers in connection with
nonprofit, charitable, educational, civic, religious, recreational or
political activities, provided that the Director of the Public Safety
Department shall find that the activities will not unduly or
unnecessarily annoy, disturb, injure or endanger the comfort, repose,
health, peace or safety of others and that the activities or use of said
sound equipment will not violate any other provisions of any ordinance
or law or create a public nuisance and that the public health and safety
will not be endangered thereby. Permits issued hereunder shall be for
use for any permitted three days designated within a specified five-day
period indicated by the applicant and shall be conditioned and subject
to the following provisions and rules: [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord.
No. MC 3553]
(1) The permits shall specify the dates and hours of the permitted use
and activity, which shall not be permitted before the hour of 10:00
a.m. nor after the hour of 8:00 p.m. and not permitted on Sundays
or religious holidays (except as permitted in direct connection in a
specific religious celebration or parade).
(2) The use of such loudspeakers or amplifiers shall not be permitted
or operated at or in the immediate vicinity of any hospital, nursing
home, school, institution of learning, house of worship, judicial
court, library or public office building while said school, institution
of learning, house of worship, library or public office building or
hospital or nursing home is in session or operation.
(3) Use of loudspeakers or amplifiers shall not be permitted in a
residential neighborhood if said equipment is set in a fixed location
so as to unduly annoy and disturb the peace, quiet, comfort, repose
or health of the residents in the vicinity.
(4) Permits shall not be issued less than three business days before the
specified date for use of the equipment.
B. The Director of the Public Safety Department is authorized to adopt and
use such forms of application as may be required. Each application for a
permit shall contain the name of the applicant, and, if the applicant is a
corporation or association, the application shall recite the name of the
authorized officer or person signing the application. The application
shall state the name or names of the particular users and operators of
the sound equipment and the name and description of the mobile
§ 397-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 397-4
1:509
§ 397-5. Exceptions as to noise prohibitions.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to apply to church bells or chimes,
nor to the playing of bands or orchestras in a hall or building in a manner
which will not annoy the peace, comfort and quiet of the neighboring
inhabitants, nor to municipal, county, state or federal government agencies
in connection with any emergency, nor to normal working activities of or
activities sponsored by the Municipal Council, nor to warning devices on
other vehicles used only for traffic safety purposes.
§ 397-6. Enforcement of noise provisions.
In addition to public law enforcement officers and others who by law are
entitled to enforce or bring complaints under this article, the officers who
are designated hereunder for the issuance of permits as well as the Code
Enforcement Officer shall have the power to enforce and bring complaints
under this article.
§ 397-7. Violations and penalties; schedule of fines. [Amended
9-13-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3582201]
vehicle unit to be used. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC
3553]
C. The fee for a permit for the use of loudspeakers and amplifiers in
connection with nonprofit, charitable, educational, civic, religious or
recreational activities shall be $150. [Amended 12-12-1995 by Ord.
No. MC 3027; 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3134; 8-14-2001 by
Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by Ord. No. MC 3306; 12-29-2009
by Ord. No. MC 3413200]
A. Any person, association or corporation who shall violate the provisions
of §§ 397-1 and 397-2 shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalty
set forth in Chapter 1, Article III, Penalties, of the Township Code.
B. Except as otherwise provided in this article, the penalties for violations
of this article are as follows:
200. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
201. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 397-4 IRVINGTON CODE § 397-7
1:510
Section
Short
Description
1st
Offense
2nd
Offense
3rd
Offense
4th Offense
Maximum
Fine;
Court
Appearance
Required
§ 397-4 Permits for
use of
loudspeakers
and amplifiers
$50 $150 $250 $750
§ 397-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 397-7
1:511
Chapter 402
NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH
§ 402-1. Adoption of standards by reference.
The Public Health Nuisance Code of the State of New Jersey is hereby
adopted by reference pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 26:3-69.6, and any
subsequent additions or amendments thereto are hereby adopted by
reference and established by the Township of Irvington as if set out at
length herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the
Township.
§ 402-2. Availability of copies.
Not less than three copies of said Public Health Nuisance Code of the State
of New Jersey shall be on file in the office of the Township Clerk.
Chapter 409
OBSCENE MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 439.
§ 409-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate, within the confines of state law,
the public display by retailers of obscene materials, particularly where such
materials are likely to be viewed by minors.
§ 409-2. Definitions. [Amended 2-10-1994 by Ord. No. MC 2990]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
KNOWINGLY —
OBSCENE MATERIAL — Any description, narrative account, display or
depiction of a specified anatomical area, or specified sexual activity,
contained in or consisting of a picture or other representation, publication,
sound recording, live performance, film or language which, by means of
posing, composition, format or animated sensual details, emits sensuality
Having knowledge of the character and content of the material
described herein; or
A.
Having failed to exercise reasonable inspection which would disclosure
its character and content.
B.
§ 397-7 IRVINGTON CODE § 409-2
1:512
with sufficient impact to concentrate prurient interest on the area or
activity depicted or described.
RETAILER — Any person who operates a store, newsstand, booth,
concession or similar business with unimpeded access for persons under
18 years old, who is in the business of making sales of periodicals or
other materials, including clothing, at retail containing pictures, drawings
or photographs.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREA —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY —
§ 409-3. Display of obscene materials by retailers. [Amended
2-10-1994 by Ord. No. MC 2990]
§ 409-4. Obscene candy. [Added 5-17-1994 by Ord. No. MC 2999]
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttock or female breasts below a point immediately above the
top of the areola; or
A.
B. Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if covered.
A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; or
Any act of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or deviate sexual
intercourse; or
B.
Fondling or other erotic touching or covered or uncovered human
genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breasts.
C.
A. It shall be a petty disorderly persons offense for a retailer to knowingly
display or permit to be displayed at her or his business premises any
obscene materials, as defined herein, at a height of less than five feet or
without a blinder or other covering placed or printed on the front of the
material displayed.
B. Public display of the obscene material, as defined herein, shall
constitute presumptive evidence that the retailer knowingly made or
permitted the display.
A. The public sale of candy with sexual connotations is hereby prohibited.
"Sexual connotation" shall mean any depiction of a specified anatomical
area, or specified sexual activity, which emits sensuality with sufficient
impact to concentrate prurient interest on the area or activity depicted
or described.
B. It shall be a petty disorderly persons offense for a retailer to knowingly
sell candy with sexual connotations at her or his business.
§ 409-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 409-5
1:513
§ 409-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-10-1994 by Ord. No.
MC 2990; 5-17-1994 by Ord. No. MC 2999202]
Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a petty disorderly persons
offense and shall be subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article III,
Penalties, of the Township Code.
Chapter 415
PARADES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 439.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 555.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 620.
§ 415-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Department of Public Safety of the
Town.203[Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
PARADE — Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or
procession of any kind or any similar display in or upon any street, park or
other public place in the Town.
PARADE PERMIT — A permit as required by this chapter.
§ 415-2. Permit required; exceptions.
A. No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade
unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the Director of
the Department of Public Safety. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No.
MC 3553]
B. This chapter shall not apply to:
(1) Funeral processions.
(2) Students going to and from school classes or participating in
educational activities, provided that such conduct is under the
immediate direction and supervision of the proper school
authorities.
(3) A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
202. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
203. Editor's Note: The definition of "Chief of Police," which previously preceded this
definition, was repealed 1-12-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3562.
§ 409-5 IRVINGTON CODE § 415-3
1:514
§ 415-3. Application for permit. [Amended 1-12-2016 by Ord. No.
MC 3562]
A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with
the Director of Public Safety on forms provided by such officer.
A. An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the Director of
Public Safety not less than seven nor more than 30 days before the date
on which it is proposed to conduct the parade.
B. The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following
information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to
conduct such parade.
(2) If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of or by an
organization, the name, address and telephone number of the
headquarters of the organization and of the authorized and
responsible heads of such organization.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be
the parade chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct.
(4) The date when the parade is to be conducted.
(5) The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination
point.
(6) The approximate number of persons who will constitute or partake
in and, if animals are to be included in the parade or line of march,
the specific type of animal, whether domestic or wild, and the
number and description of the motor vehicles or any other type
vehicle expected to be used in the parade, march, ceremonies,
show, exhibit or procession.
(7) The hours when such parade will start and terminate.
(8) A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a
portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed.
(9) The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade.
(10) The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any
such assembly area or areas.
(11) The interval of space to be maintained between units of such
parade.
(12) If the parade is designed to be held by and on behalf of or for any
person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall
file with the Director of Public Safety a communication in writing
from the person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the
applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf.
§ 415-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-3
1:515
§ 415-4. Issuance of permit; favorable findings.
The Director shall issue a permit as provided for hereunder when, from a
consideration of the application and from such other information as may
otherwise be obtained, he finds that:
(13) A statement of the purpose of the parade.
(14) Any additional information which the Director shall find reasonably
necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should be
issued.
C. If the parade will use or traverse any state or county road or highway
within the Town, the application shall be accompanied by a written
consent or other written authorization to hold such parade on the date
and at the time requested, issued by the public agency or body having
jurisdiction and control over such road or highway.
D. The Director, when good cause is shown therefor, shall have the
authority to consider any application hereunder which is filed less than
seven days before the date such parade is proposed to be conducted.
A. The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and
orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route.
B. The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a
number of law enforcement personnel of the Town to properly police
the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent
normal police protection for the Town.
C. The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a
number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to
portions of the Town other than that to be occupied by the proposed line
of march and areas contiguous thereto.
D. The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points
of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police
protection of or ambulance service to areas contiguous to such
assembly areas.
E. The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of
firefighting equipment en route to a fire.
F. The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to
persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a
disturbance.
G. The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of
termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route.
H. The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any
product, goods or event and is not designed to be held purely for private
profit.
§ 415-3 IRVINGTON CODE § 415-5
1:516
§ 415-5. Denial of permit.
If the application shall be disapproved, the Director shall give written notice
thereof to the applicant, by mail, setting forth the reasons for the denial of
the permit.
§ 415-6. Appeal of denial.
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade
permit to the Municipal Council. The appeal shall be taken within five days
after notice of the denial.
§ 415-7. Alternate permit. [Amended 1-12-2016 by Ord. No. MC
3562]
The Director, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be
empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time
or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant
desiring to accept an alternate permit shall file a written notice of
acceptance with the Director of Public Safety at least two days prior to the
date when the parade is to be conducted. An alternate parade permit shall
conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of a parade permit
under, this chapter.
§ 415-8. Notice of issuance of permit.
Immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit, notice thereof shall be
forwarded by the Director of Police to the following:
§ 415-9. Contents of permit.
Each parade permit shall state the following information:
A. The Mayor.
B. The Town Attorney.
C. The Fire Chief.
D. The Director of the Department of Public Works. [Amended
7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
E. The general manager or responsible head of each public transportation
utility, the regular routes of whose vehicles will be affected by the route
of the proposed parade.
A. Starting time.
B. Minimum speed.
C. Maximum speed.
§ 415-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-9
1:517
§ 415-10. Responsibilities of permittees.
§ 415-11. Interference; parking restrictions.
§ 415-12. Revocation of permit; hearing.
The Director shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued
hereunder upon violations of the standards for issuance as herein set forth.
The person to whom the permit has been issued shall be granted a hearing
by the Director upon request of such person.
D. Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the
parade.
E. The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the
parade.
F. The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof.
G. Such other information as the Director shall find necessary to the
enforcement of this chapter.
A. A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and
conditions and with all applicable laws of the state, provisions of this
Code and other ordinances of the Town.
B. The parade chairman or other person heading or leading such activity
shall carry the parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the
parade.
A. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede or interfere
with any lawful parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle
or animal participating or used in a parade.
B. No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons
comprising a lawful parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion
and are conspicuously designated as a parade.204
C. The Director of the Department of Public Safety shall have the
authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking
of vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of the
route of a parade. The Director of Public Safety shall post signs to such
effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave
unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for
parking on a street unposted in violation of this chapter. [Amended
1-12-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3562]
204. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 415-9 IRVINGTON CODE § 415-13
1:518
§ 415-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord. No.
MC 2622]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punishable as provided in the general penalty provisions as set
forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article III.
Chapter 419
PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 249. Peace and good order — See Ch. 439.
§ 419-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to reduce the incidence of misconduct by
juveniles by requiring proper supervision on the part of the custodial
parents or parent.
§ 419-2. Definitions.
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this chapter, they shall
be construed to have the following meanings:
CUSTODIAL PARENT/PARENTS — A parent/parents or legal guardian of a
juvenile who has legal custody of said juvenile.
JUVENILE — A person age 12 years old to 17 years old.
PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY — A custodial parent of an unemancipated
juvenile residing with such custodial parents shall be presumed, by virtue of
his/her uniquely intimate and ongoing relationship to the juvenile, to have
the greatest obligation and the greatest opportunity to deter delinquent
behaviors.
§ 419-3. Prohibited conduct.
Every custodial parent has a duty to properly supervise his or her child. Any
custodial parent whose juvenile is convicted of a Municipal Code violation
twice within a six-month period or three or more times within a twelvemonth
period is guilty of failing to properly supervise said juvenile. The
six- and twelve-month periods shall be measured from the date of the first
conviction.
§ 419-4. Defenses.
A. The following shall be defenses to a violation of § 419-3:
§ 415-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 419-4
1:519
§ 419-5. Violations and penalties.205
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall be subject
to the penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article III, Penalties, of the Township
Code.
Chapter 428
PARKS AND RECREATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 380.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 439.
Smoking — See Ch. 524.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 571.
(1) Where the parent has made all reasonable and available efforts
under the circumstances to prevent the juvenile misconduct.
(2) Where the parent can provide specific evidence of enrollment or
ongoing participation in parenting classes, family therapy, or group
counselling. (This is not to exclude other such activities associated
with making a reasonable effort at enhancing one's parenting
effectiveness.)
(3) Where the parent was not legally responsible for the supervision of
the juvenile at the time the misconduct occurred.
(4) Where the parent has a physical or mental disability or
incompetency rendering them incapable of supervising the juvenile
at the time the misconduct occurred.
(5) Where the parent reported the act to the appropriate authorities.
B. It is not a defense where the parent assigns his or her parental
responsibility to another, except pursuant to legal proceeding, which
results in a court order effectuating the same.
205. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 419-4 IRVINGTON CODE § 419-5
1:520
ARTICLE I
General Regulations
[Adopted 9-25-1984 by Ord. No. MC 2747 (Ch. 136, Art. II, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 428-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide rules and regulations for the use of
and conduct in the parks and recreation areas of the Township of Irvington.
§ 428-2. Applicability; designation of approving agency.
This article shall apply to and in all parks and recreation areas under the
jurisdiction of the Township, unless expressly exempted. For the issuance of
permits, temporary designations, authorizations, granting of approval and
other actions, the approving agency shall be the Department of Parks and
Recreation.
§ 428-3. Construal of provisions.
In the interpretation of this article, the provisions shall be construed as
follows:
§ 428-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL — Includes cats, dogs, horses, any fowl or birds and any living
creatures within the jurisdiction of the park and recreation area.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Department of Parks and Recreation.
PARK ATTENDANT — Any person employed by the Township as a park
attendant to perform duties or tasks within the park and recreation areas.
PERMIT — Any written license issued by or under the authority of the
Director permitting a special event or activity on park facilities.
PERSON — Any natural person, corporation, company, association, firm or
partnership.
A. Any requirement or prohibition of any act shall respectively extend to
and include the causing and procuring, directly or indirectly, of such
act.
B. No provision hereof shall make unlawful any act necessarily performed
by any officer or employee of the Township in the line of duty or work as
such, or by any person, his agent or employees in the proper and
necessary execution of the terms of any agreement with the Township.
C. Any act otherwise prohibited by this article shall be lawful if performed
under, by virtue of and strictly within the provisions of a permit so to do
and to the extent authorized thereby.
§ 428-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 428-4
1:521
VEHICLE — Any conveyance (except baby carriages), including motor
vehicles, trailers of all types, campers, tricycles, bicycles, motorized or
not, sleds, sleighs, pushcarts or vehicles propelled by other than muscular
power.
§ 428-5. Structures, plants, trees, earth and rubbish.
It shall be unlawful for any person in a public park or recreation area to:
A. Mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or remove any
buildings, bridges, tables, benches, playground equipment, fireplaces,
railings, fences, nets, paving or paving materials, waterlines or other
public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or
placards, whether temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts
or other boundary markers or other structures or equipment, facilities
or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, whether real or
personal.
B. Fail to cooperate in maintaining rest rooms and washrooms in a neat
and sanitary condition.
C. Dig or remove any soil, rock, sand, stones, trees, shrubs or plants or
other wood or materials or make any excavation by tool, equipment or
other means or agency.
D. Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind, whether
permanent or temporary, or run or string any public service utility into,
upon or across such lands, except on special written permit issued
hereunder.
E. Damage, cut, carve, mark or remove any plant or injure the bark or pick
flowers of any tree or plant, dig in or otherwise disturb grass areas or in
any other way injure the natural beauty or usefulness of any area.
F. Climb any tree or shrub or climb, stand or sit upon monuments, vases,
planters, fountains, railings, fences or upon any other property not
designated or customarily used for such purpose.
G. Attach any rope or cable or other contrivance to any tree, fence, railing,
bridge, bench or other structure.
H. Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the water
in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain
flowing into such water any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid,
which will or may result in the pollution of said waters.
I. Take into, carry through or put into any park any rubbish, refuse,
garbage or other material. Such refuse and rubbish shall be deposited
in receptacles so provided. Where receptacles are not provided, all such
rubbish or waste will be carried away from the park by the person
responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.
J. Bring any glass container into any park or recreation area.
§ 428-4 IRVINGTON CODE § 428-5
1:522
§ 428-6. Vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person in a public park or recreation area to:
§ 428-7. Firearms and weapons.
It shall be unlawful for any person other than a law enforcement officer
to bring into or have in his possession in any park or recreation area any
destructive device or weapon as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:39-1.
§ 428-8. Explosives and fireworks; smoking.206
K. Cause or permit any animal to run loose.
L. Tie or hitch any animal to any tree or plant.
M. Violate any of the provisions of §§ 397-1 through 397-3, inclusive
(noise), of the Revised Code regarding prohibited noises.
A. Drive any vehicle on any area.
B. Park a vehicle anywhere except on a designated parking area.
C. Leave a bicycle in a place other than a bicycle rack when such is
provided and there is space available.
D. Leave a bicycle lying on the ground or paving or set against trees or in
any place or position where other persons may trip over or be injured by
them.
E. Wash any vehicle.
F. Use the parks, park drives, parking places or parkways for the purpose
of demonstrating any vehicles or for the purpose of instructing another
to drive or operate any vehicle, nor shall any person use any park area,
including parking places, for the repairing or cleaning of any vehicle,
except in an emergency.
G. Cause or permit a vehicle in tow of another vehicle to enter the parks or
proceed therein, except that in case of a breakdown a disabled vehicle
may be towed to the nearest exit; or operate or drive a vehicle
containing any person or object projecting or hanging outside of or
beyond the sides or the rear thereof.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession, sell,
distribute or set off any fireworks or explosives.
B. No smoking in public parks; penalties. [Added 3-13-2001 by Ord. No.
MC 3165]
(1) The smoking of cigarettes, e-cigarettes, cigars or pipes at Township
public parks within the Township of Irvington is hereby prohibited.
206. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 524, Smoking.
§ 428-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 428-8
1:523
§ 428-9. Advertising, assemblages and entertainment.
§ 428-10. Sale of merchandise.
No person shall expose or offer for sale any article in any park or recreation
area without a license.
§ 428-11. Fires and lighted materials.
No person shall kindle, build, maintain or use a fire except in places
provided for such purposes. Any fire shall be continuously under the care
and direction of a competent person from the time it is kindled until it is
extinguished. No person shall throw away or discard any lighted match,
cigar, cigarette, tobacco, paper or other material within or against any
building, boat or vehicle or under any tree or in underbrush.
The appropriate signage of no smoking at all in the Township
public parks will be installed by the Recreation Department of the
Township. Complaints may be issued by any citizen or enforcement
officer. [Amended 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. MC 3499]
(2) Unless otherwise provided by law, statute or ordinance, any person
violating the above prohibition shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a
penalty of not less than $50 nor more than $100 for each such
offense. Any person under the age of 18 convicted of the offense
herein shall not be subject to a fine but shall be required to perform
community service or attend an educational program, as
determined by the Municipal Court Judge.207
A. No person shall post, paint, affix, distribute, deliver, place, cast or leave
about any bill, billboard, placard, ticket, handbill, circular or
advertisement.
B. No person shall do any of the following without a permit, provided that
no permit shall be required for any action or event sponsored by the
Township:
(1) Display any advertising signs or other advertising matter, provided
that a sign attached to a vehicle to identify the vehicle or a sign
lawfully on a taxi or bus is not prohibited.
(2) Operate for advertising purposes any musical instrument,
soundtrack or drum.
(3) Hold public assemblages.
(4) Conduct exhibitions.
(5) Hold a parade.
207. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 428-8 IRVINGTON CODE § 428-12
1:524
§ 428-12. Alcoholic beverages, alms and gambling.
While in a public park or recreation area, no person shall:
§ 428-13. Additional prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person in a park or recreation area to:
§ 428-14. Picnics.
It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to hold a picnic in any
park, except in areas set aside or specifically designated as picnic areas. A
permit must be secured for any picnic with more than 20 participants.
§ 428-15. Closing hours. [Amended 11-13-1996 by Ord. No. MC
3045; 12-26-1996 by Ord. No. MC 3052; 3-15-2011 by Ord. No. MC
3434]
A. Bring alcoholic beverages or drink or use the same at any time, nor
shall any person be under the influence of intoxicating liquor.
B. Solicit contributions for any purpose, whether public or private.
C. Play any game of chance or have possession of any instrument or device
for gambling.
D. Play, engage or take part in any game or competitive sport for money or
other valuable thing without a written permit.
A. Camp or stay overnight.
B. Take part in the playing of any games involving thrown or otherwise
propelled objects except in those areas designated for such forms of
recreation.
C. Play football, baseball, basketball, soccer or lacrosse, except in areas
designed for such games.
D. Roller-skate or use skateboards except in those areas specifically
designated for such pastimes.
E. Enter an area posted as "closed to the public."
F. Fail to produce and exhibit any permit he claims to have, upon request
of any authorized person who shall desire to inspect the same for the
purpose of enforcing compliance with any ordinance or rule.
G. Disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party occupying
any area or participating in any activity under the authority of a permit.
H. Erect or occupy any tent, stand or other structure in any park or
playground or sell or give away from any such tent, stand or other
structure any food, drink or other thing without a permit.
§ 428-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 428-15
1:525
§ 428-16. Regulated activities.
The following activities are permitted only at times and in areas so
designated for that purpose and are prohibited elsewhere within the parks:
§ 428-17. Permits.
A. No person shall be in any park after the closing hours of parks as
follows:
(1) During eastern standard time, November through February, 7:30
a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
(2) During daylight saving time, March, April, May, 7:30 a.m. to 9:00
p.m.
(3) During June through October, 7:30 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
B. All supervised Township of Irvington organized recreational teams are
hereby exempt from the park closing hours as included in this chapter.
A. Baseball.
B. Horseshoe pitching.
C. Tennis.
D. Picnicking.
E. Football and track.
F. Basketball.
G. Soccer.
H. Roller-skating.
A. Permits for special events in parks and recreation areas shall be
obtained by application to the Director or his designee in accordance
with the following procedure:
(1) A person seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall file an
application stating:
(a) The name and address of the applicant.
(b) The name and address of the person, persons, corporation or
association sponsoring the activity, if any.
(c) The day and hours for which the permit is desired.
(d) The park or portion thereof for which the permit is desired.
§ 428-15 IRVINGTON CODE § 428-17
1:526
(e) Any other information reasonably necessary to make a
determination as to whether a permit should be issued
hereunder.
(f) Variances required from park rules and regulations.
(2) Standards for issuance of a use permit shall include the following
findings:
(a) That the proposed activity or use of the park will not
unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general
public's enjoyment of the park.
(b) That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the promotion of public health,
welfare, safety and recreation.
(c) That the proposed activity or uses that are reasonably
anticipated will not induce violence, crime or disorderly
conduct.
(d) That the proposed activity will not entail extraordinary or
burdensome expense to the Township, including police
protection.
(e) That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use
on the date and hour requested in the application.
B. Appeal. Within 10 days after the receipt of any application, the Director
shall advise an applicant in writing of his decision to grant or deny a
permit. In the event of a denial, the notification shall include the reason
for the denial. Any aggrieved person shall have the right to appeal to
the Township by serving written notice thereof on the Township Clerk
within five business days of said refusal. A copy of said notice shall also
be served on the Director within the same time, and said Director shall
immediately forward the application and the reasons for his refusal to
the Municipal Council. The Municipal Council shall hear and decide the
matter within 14 days from the receipt of the appeal by the Township
Clerk or at its first meeting after the appeal is received, whichever is
later.
C. A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all
applicable ordinances as fully as though the same were inserted in said
permit.
D. An applicant for a permit shall be required to submit evidence of
liability insurance covering injuries to members of the general public
arising out of such permitted activities in such amounts as may be from
time to time determined by the Director prior to the commencement of
any activity or issuance of any permit.
§ 428-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 428-17
1:527
§ 428-18. Enforcement. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC
3553]
The Township Public Safety Department, the Director and any park
attendant shall have the authority to order any person or persons acting in
violation of this article to leave the park and recreation area.
§ 428-19. Violations and penalties.
E. Revocation. The Director shall have the authority to revoke a permit
upon a finding of violation of any rule or ordinance or upon good cause
shown.
A. Any person, association or corporation who shall violate the provisions
of §§ 428-5, 428-6, 428-9, 428-10, 428-14, 428-15, and 428-16 shall,
upon conviction, be fined not less than $50 for each violation nor more
than $1,000 or imprisoned for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both, at
the discretion of the court. Upon a second or subsequent conviction,
any person, association or corporation who shall violate the provisions
of §§ 428-5, 428-6, 428-9, 428-10, 428-14, 428-15, and 428-16 shall be
fined not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 or imprisoned for a term
not to exceed 90 days, or both, at the discretion of the court.
B. Any person, association or corporation who shall violate the provisions
of §§ 428-7, 428-8, 428-11, 428-12 and 428-13 shall, upon conviction, be
fined not less than $100 for each violation nor more than $1,000 or
imprisoned for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both, at the discretion
of the court.
§ 428-17 IRVINGTON CODE § 428-19
1:528
Chapter 439
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 158.
Drug-free zones — See Ch. 266.
Graffiti — See Ch. 342.
Noise — See Ch. 397.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 402.
Obscene materials — See Ch. 409.
Parental responsibility — See Ch. 419.
Smoking — See Ch. 524.
§ 428-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 428-19
1:529

ARTICLE I
Miscellaneous Offenses
[Adopted 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622 as Ch. 139, Art. I, §§ 139-1
through 139-22, 139-25.1, 139-29 through 139-33, 139-43 through
139-51, of the 1981 Revised Code]
§ 439-1. Annoying, disturbing or interfering with others generally.
No person shall, within the Town, act in such a manner as to annoy, disturb,
interfere with or obstruct others.
§ 439-2. Shouting at night.
No person shall, within the Town, shout or make a noise either outside or
inside a building during the nighttime to the annoyance or disturbance of
any considerable number of persons.208
§ 439-3. Jostling, crowding, picking pockets.
No person shall, within the Town, interfere with any person in any place by
jostling against such person or unnecessarily crowding him or by placing a
hand in the proximity of such person's pocket, pocketbook or handbag.
§ 439-4. Insulting remarks to pedestrians.
No person shall, within the Town, stand on sidewalks or street corners
and make insulting remarks to or about passing pedestrians or annoy such
pedestrians.
§ 439-5. Unlawful assemblages.
No persons shall, within the Town, collect in bodies or crowds for unlawful
purposes to the annoyance or disturbance of citizens or travelers.
§ 439-6. Begging.
No person shall, within the Town, station himself on the streets or follow
pedestrians for the purpose of soliciting alms, or solicit alms on the streets
unlawfully.
§ 439-7. Maintaining house of ill fame.
No person shall keep or maintain a disorderly house or a house of ill fame
in the Town.
208. Editor's Note: Original § 139-3, Motor vehicle alarm, siren or horn; authority of police;
towing and storage charges, which previously followed this section, added 1-26-1971 by
Ord. No. MC 2275, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I).
§ 439-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 439-8
1:531
§ 439-8. Permitting premises to be used by prostitutes, gamblers,
vagrants.
No person shall allow or permit his house, shop, store or other place to be
used, frequented or resorted to by riotous or disorderly persons, prostitutes,
gamblers, vagrants or any mendicant within the Town.
§ 439-9. Disturbing the peace.
No person shall, within the Town, make or aid, countenance or assist in
making any improper noise, riot, disturbance or breach of the peace in the
streets and highways or elsewhere within the Town.
§ 439-10. Disturbing religious worship.
It shall be unlawful for any person to disquiet or disturb any congregation
or assembly met for religious worship in any church or other building by
making a noise or by rude or indecent behavior or profane discourse within
the place of worship.
§ 439-11. Discharging firearms, slingshots, bows.
Except as otherwise provided by § 439-14, no person shall discharge or
use any air rifle, air gun, spring gun, slingshot, bow and arrow, shotgun or
firearm of any kind or any other missile-projecting device or contrivance of
any kind within the Town.
§ 439-12. Responsibility of parents regarding firearms, other
weapons.
Except as otherwise provided by § 439-14, no parent, guardian or person
standing in loco parentis of any minor under the age of 16 years shall
purchase for such minor or shall knowingly permit such minor, who is in his
care or custody, to purchase, have, hold, possess, own, use, handle or play
with any of the articles or guns or devices described in § 439-11.
§ 439-13. Sale of bows and arrows, slingshots.
No person shall offer for sale any bows and arrows to any person under
16 years of age, and no person shall offer for sale any slingshots or similar
device in the Town.
§ 439-14. Nonapplicability of §§ 439-11 and 439-12.
The provisions of §§ 439-11 and 439-12 shall not apply to any of the
following or under any of the following circumstances:
A. Any member of any police department or any other person duly
authorized by law to use such weapons or devices nor any person
warranted when circumstances require the use of such weapons in the
defense of his life, limb or property.
§ 439-8 IRVINGTON CODE § 439-14
1:532
§ 439-15. Fortune-telling.
It shall be unlawful for any person to pursue or practice within the Town
the business, vocation, profession or art of fortune-teller, clairvoyant, spirit
medium (except where same is part of a religious belief and practice),
necromancer, palmist or other crafty or occult art or pretended art of telling
past events of another's life or other's lives or affairs or in anywise revealing
things of the past or in the future of a secret or hidden nature, or of
giving advice or assistance in matters of business or affairs of any other
kind or nature by means of such art, or of purporting to so tell, foretell,
reveal or give advice or assistance by means of such art; and no person
shall so pursue or practice within the Town any such business, vocation or
profession whether for a fee, gratuity, thing of value or whether by offer or
upon request.
§ 439-16. Advertising the practice of fortune-telling.
The maintenance, display, posting or advertisement, or the causing or
permitting to be maintained, displayed, posted or advertised, of any sign,
card, bill or announcement of any kind whatever indicating the pursuit or
practice of any business, vocation, profession or art set forth in § 439-15 or
B. Any person not under the age of 16 years who carries such weapon to
any place outside the Town for hunting or any other lawful purposes.
C. Any person not under 16 years of age who carries, fires or uses any
such instrument within the Town for the purpose of military drill under
competent supervision or for the purpose of competition or target
practice in and upon a firing range approved by the Municipal Council.
D. Any person under the age of 16 years who carries, fires or uses any
such instrument or weapon in the presence of his father, guardian or
some other responsible adult person or for the purpose of military drill
under competent supervision or for the purpose of competition or
target practice in and upon a firing range approved by the governing
body or the Director of Public Safety of the municipality in which such
range is located. [Amended 1-12-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3562]
E. Any person under the age of 16 years while carrying any bow and arrow
to any target range; provided that prior thereto the accredited
organization or person conducting any such military drill, competition
or target practice shall notify the Director of Public Safety of the time
and place of such event and a list of the person under 16 years of age
who intend to carry a bow and arrow to such place; and provided
further that such minor shall have a certificate of such organization or
person authorizing the carrying of such bow and arrow and designating
the time when and places between which such bow and arrow is to be
carried; and provided further that while such bow and arrow is being
carried to or from such place, the string on such bow shall not be taut
so as to be able to project any arrow. [Amended 1-12-2016 by Ord.
No. MC 3562]
§ 439-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 439-16
1:533
indicating an offer to render service in such pursuit or practice, shall, upon
proof thereof, be sufficient evidence against the person so maintaining,
displaying, posting or advertising, or so causing or permitting the same to
be done, of a violation of this article.
§ 439-17. Applicability of §§ 439-15 and 439-16 to theatrical
performances.
Nothing contained in §§ 439-15 and 439-16 shall be construed to make
unlawful any act described in §§ 439-15 and 439-16 when such act is a part
of any theatrical performance or entertainment open to the public upon the
payment of a regular admission charge.
§ 439-18. Drinking alcoholic beverages on public grounds
prohibited. [Amended 2-13-1973 by Ord. No. MC 2345]
§ 439-19. Entering on public grounds when entry prohibited.
[Amended 10-27-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2645]
§ 439-20. Use of sidewalks for games of chance; violations and
penalties. [Added 2-11-1997 by Ord. No. MC 3056]
A. No person shall drink, imbibe or consume any alcoholic beverage upon
any portion of lawn or other public grounds within the Town, including
but not limited to public places, playgrounds and municipal grounds
surrounding municipal buildings.209
A. Unless permitted by special permit or by an official sign posted on the
public grounds or premises, no person shall enter or remain after 10:00
p.m. in or upon any portion of any public school buildings, school
playgrounds, school lawns, school parking lots, municipal buildings,
municipal playgrounds, lawn, parks, Public Library buildings or lawns
or parking lots or other public grounds or premises.
B. Violation of the aforementioned provisions shall constitute trespass and
shall be subject to penalty provided by the Municipal Code.210
A. No person, persons or group shall use the sidewalks in the Township of
Irvington to play or engage in any game of chance, including the rolling
of dice, playing of cards or any other activity promoting games of
chance or gambling.
B. Any person found in violation of this provision shall be subject to a fine
as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article III.
209. Editor's Note: Original § 139-19B, which pertained to a special permit for consumption at
picnics or other activities, which previously followed this subsection, was repealed
9-26-2017 by Ord. No. MC 3619.
210. Editor's Note: Original § 139-21, Loitering in public places, amended 9-12-1967 by Ord.
No. MC 2171 and 11-9-1971 by Ord. No. MC 2304; and original § 139-22, Loitering near
churches, amended 9-12-1967 by Ord. No. MC 2171, both of which previously followed this
section, were deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 439-16 IRVINGTON CODE § 439-21
1:534
§ 439-21. Record shops. [Added 4-22-1997 by Ord. No. MC 3065]
Record shops located in the Township of Irvington shall be open no later
than 9:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, and 6:00 p.m. on Sunday.
§ 439-22. Peeping or spying.
No person shall, within the Town, loiter in or upon any private property not
his own or not lawfully in his possession and then and there pry into the
privacy or security of the persons then and there being in such home by
peeping or by any other sly or furtive method of spying upon, watching or
keeping under observation the people occupying such home.
§ 439-23. Causing disturbance in public conveyances.
No person shall, within the Town, cause a disturbance in any railroad car or
other public conveyance by running through it or climbing through windows
or upon the seats, or otherwise annoy passengers or employees therein.
§ 439-24. Rental of water-damaged buildings. [Added 11-26-1974 by
Ord. No. MC 2429]
§ 439-25. Riots or breach of peace.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make or aid in riot, disturbance of
breach or the peace in the streets and highways or elsewhere within the
Town, and it shall be unlawful for any persons to collect in bodies or crowds
for unlawful purposes.
§ 439-26. Soliciting crimes against nature.
No person shall, within the Town, frequent or loiter about any public place
soliciting men or women for the purpose of committing a crime against
nature or other lewdness.
A. On and after November 26, 1974, it shall be unlawful for any owner or
other person in charge, as hereinafter defined, to offer for rerental to
any prospective tenants any apartment in any building used for
residential purposes, which apartment has received damage from the
discharge of surface waters accumulated during a rainfall, after such
apartment has been repaired and such owner or other person in charge,
as hereinafter defined, offers same for rerental, without first notifying
in writing each prospective tenant of the details of the prior water
damage and of the danger of such water damage occurring in the future
from the same cause.
B. "Owner or other person in charge," as used in this section, shall include
any person, firm or corporation, mortgagee, vendee in possession,
assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee, agent or other
person, firm or corporation directly or indirectly in charge of such
building or any portion thereof.
§ 439-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 439-27
1:535
§ 439-27. Recruiting for employment in industry engaged in strike
or lockout.
§ 439-28. Certain weeds declared nuisances.
The act of permitting ragweed, goldenrod, poison ivy, poison sumach or
other noxious or poisonous weeds injurious to health to grow upon any lot
within the Town is hereby declared to constitute a nuisance.
§ 439-29. Duty of owner to remove weeds; notice.
The owner, lessee, tenant or occupant of any lot shall remove all ragweed,
goldenrod, poison ivy, poison sumach or other noxious or poisonous weeds
injurious to health, at his own expense, within five days after receiving
notice to remove the same from the Health Officer of the Town.
§ 439-30. Manner of serving notice to remove.
The notice to remove mentioned in § 439-29 shall be given by delivering
to the owner, lessee, tenant, or occupant of such lot a written demand,
signed by the Health Officer of the Town, for the removal of such ragweed,
goldenrod, poison ivy, poison sumac or other noxious or poisonous weeds
from such lot, or by leaving such demand at the residence of the owner,
lessee, occupant or tenant with a member of the family above the age of 14
years, or in case the owner, lessee, occupant or tenant is a nonresident, by
mailing the same to such owner, lessee, tenant or occupant at his last known
post office address, postage prepaid.
§ 439-31. Interference with duties of policemen. [Added 9-12-1967
by Ord. No. MC 2170]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person not directly involved in a strike or
lockout to recruit any person for employment or to secure or to offer to
secure for any person any employment when the purpose thereof is to
have such person take the place in employment of an employee in an
industry or business where a labor strike or lockout exists.
B. Employment agents licensed as such under the laws of the state and the
state employment service shall not be affected by this section, but no
such employment agent and no person acting on behalf of the state
employment service shall knowingly refer an applicant for employment
to an employer any of whose employees are then engaged in a strike or
have been locked out.
A. No person shall resist or interfere with or hinder or obstruct any law
enforcement personnel in the Department of Public Safety, police
matron or other law enforcement officer in the discharge of his duties
as such officer. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
§ 439-27 IRVINGTON CODE § 439-31
1:536
§ 439-32. Time for moving into or vacating apartment. [Added
9-8-1970 by Ord. No. MC 2262]
No person or persons who are changing their residence into or from a
house or building having more than one family residing therein shall move,
transfer, carry or haul furniture or the contents of any apartment, tenement
or flat during the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. of the following day.
§ 439-33. Operating, tampering with or destroying water system
equipment. [Added 8-10-1971 by Ord. No. MC 2292; amended
10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
No person except an authorized employee of the Commonwealth Water
Company or an authorized firefighting personnel in the Department of
Public Safety or employee of the Town shall at any time or in any manner
open or operate the main cocks, gates, valves, fire hydrants or other
appurtenances of the water system, or tamper with or damage any part of
the aforementioned. No person shall damage, destroy or remove any part of
the main cocks, gates, valves, fire hydrants or other appurtenances of the
water system.
§ 439-34. Persons authorized to turn water on or off at service stop.
[Added 8-10-1971 by Ord. No. MC 2292; amended 7-14-2009 by Ord.
No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
Only authorized employees of the Commonwealth Water Company or
authorized employees of the Town shall turn the water on or off at the
water service stop; provided, however, that licensed master plumbers may
turn water off and on for emergency repairs. In no other case shall a
licensed master plumber turn water on or off except by express permission
of the Commonwealth Water Company or the Director of the Department of
Public Works of the Town or his authorized representative. In all such cases
the licensed plumber shall immediately notify the Commonwealth Water
Company and the Department of Public Works of such turn-on action.
§ 439-35. Violations and penalties; schedule of fines. [Amended
9-13-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3582211]
B. No person shall in any manner assist any other person in the custody of
any policeman, police matron or other law enforcement officer to
escape or attempt to escape from such custody.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this article, the penalties for violations
of this article are as follows:
211. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 439-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 439-35
1:537
Section
Short
Description
1st
Offense
2nd
Offense
3rd
Offense
4th Offense
Maximum
Fine;
Court
Appearance
Required
§ 439-18 Drinking
alcoholic
beverages on
public
grounds
$50 $150 $250 $750
§ 439-19 Entering on
public
grounds when
entry
prohibited
$50 $150 $250 $750
§ 439-28 Certain weeds
declared
nuisances
$50 $250 $500 $1,000
B. Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of a violation of any other
terms of this article shall be subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter
1, Article III, Penalties, of the Township Code.
§ 439-35 IRVINGTON CODE § 439-35
1:538
ARTICLE II
Public Health Nuisances212
[Adopted 12-28-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3138 (Ch. 139, Art. VII, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 439-36. Unlawful acts.
The following public health nuisances are deemed unlawful acts:
§ 439-37. Enforcement. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC
3553]
These provisions shall be solely enforced by the Irvington Department of
Public Safety.
A. To make an indecent exposure or exhibition of any kind in or upon any
street, road, highway, place, alley or lane, public or private, in the
Township.
B. To expose to public view, within the aforesaid Township, his or her
genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region or pubic hair
region.
C. To make any indecent exposure of his or her private parts or engage in
any lewd or indecent act or behavior.
D. To urinate or defecate in public places or streets, or on the lawns or
yards of private homes and residences, or in the public view.
E. To possess, discharge, set off, fire or light any roman candle, carbide
cannon, dynamite cap, rocket, firecracker or other fireworks within the
Township.
F. To sleep in a parked vehicle in any location in the Township.
212. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 402, Nuisances, Public Health.
§ 439-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 439-37
1:539

ARTICLE III
Public Urination
[Adopted 1-11-2000 by Ord. No. MC 3139 (Ch. 139, Art. VIII, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 439-38. Public urination unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the act of public urination
upon the streets, sidewalks, alleyways or any other place where they may
be observed by the general passing public in the Township of Irvington.
§ 439-39. Violations and penalties.213
Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of a violation of any other terms
of this article shall be subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article
III, Penalties, of the Township Code.
213. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 439-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 439-39
1:541

ARTICLE IV
Prostitution and Solicitation Offenders
[Adopted 8-15-2000 by Ord. No. MC 3153214 (Ch. 139, Art. IX, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 439-40. Publication of names of arrested and convicted persons.
The names of all persons arrested and convicted for said offenses as herein
outlined shall be forwarded for publication to the Irvington Herald or any
other news publication detailing the nature of their conviction.
214. Editor's Note: The preamble of this ordinance outlined the offenses referred to and reads
as follows: "WHEREAS, throughout the years residents of the Township of Irvington have
constantly complained to the Irvington Police Department, the Mayor's Office and to the
Municipal Council, about the amount of prostitution and solicitation taking place in their
neighborhoods; and" "WHEREAS, of what purports to be the lack of sufficient manpower
and strict enforcement by the Township's Police Department to stop or curtail these
repugnant and illegal activities plaguing their neighborhoods; and" "WHEREAS, it is the
governing body of Irvington's position that those who dare to come into the Township's
neighborhoods to solicit prostitution and are arrested and convicted of such an activity
should have their names published in the local newspaper so that the residents know and
can identify those committing such acts; and" "WHEREAS, the Municipal Council of the
Township of Irvington believes that the publication of the names of those who solicit
prostitution or those so called "Johns" could serve as a means of deterring others from
engaging in such activity."
§ 439-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 439-40
1:543
Chapter 443
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing procedure — See Ch. 290, Art. I.
Junk dealers — See Ch. 360.
Sales — See Ch. 478.
Secondhand dealers — See Ch. 491.
§ 439-40 IRVINGTON CODE § 439-40
1:544
ARTICLE I
Peddling and Hawking
§ 443-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PEDDLER — A person, commonly referred to either as a peddler or hawker,
who goes from place to place or from house to house by traveling on the
streets and carries with him goods, wares and merchandise for the purpose
of selling and delivering them to consumers, or any person who has goods,
wares and merchandise of any description sent from place to place or from
house to house, by traveling on the streets, for the purpose of selling and
delivering them to consumers.
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, voluntary
association, incorporated association and principal and agent thereof.
§ 443-2. License required; peddling on streets.
§ 443-3. Exemptions from license requirements.
A. It shall be unlawful for any peddler to sell, solicit, dispose of or offer any
goods, wares or merchandise within the Town of Irvington without first
obtaining a license and having paid the license fee hereinafter referred
to.
B. It shall be unlawful for any peddler to prosecute his business of
peddling or hawking within the boundaries of any street within the
Town of Irvington. This prohibition applies only to the act or acts of
offering, soliciting, selling or delivering merchandise within the
boundaries of the streets and not to transportation of merchandise
within such streets from place to place.
C. It shall be unlawful for any peddler to misrepresent the character or
quality of merchandise offered for sale, to importune or otherwise
annoy any person for the purpose of effecting or inducing a purchase or
to conduct himself otherwise than honestly and courteously.
A. The requirements of this article as to procuring a license shall be held
not to apply to the following persons, who are expressly exempt:
(1) Any person selling fruits, vegetables and other farm products
raised or produced on his farm.
(2) Any person honorably discharged from the military, naval or marine
forces of the United States, holding a license issued according to
Chapter 141, P.L. 1904, the supplements and amendments
thereto.215
215. Editor's Note: Currently, see N.J.S.A. 45:24-9.
§ 443-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 443-3
1:545
§ 443-4. Application for license. [Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord. No.
MC 2622]
Any person desiring a license under this article shall apply in writing to
the Chief License Clerk, Division of Licensing, on forms supplied by him
and verified by the applicant, and shall state upon such application the kind
or kinds of goods, wares or merchandise to be sold or attempted to be
sold by the licensee; the name of the applicant; permanent home address;
name and address of firm represented; the names and addresses of the
persons from which goods making up the stock were or are to be purchased;
three business references; the place or places of residence of the applicant
for the preceding three years; the length of time for which the license is
desired; whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a crime or
misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance and the nature of the
offense, if any, for which convicted; and if the applicant is an employee
or representative of any person, the application shall contain a verification
from the firm for which he purports to work, authorizing the applicant to
act as its representative.
§ 443-5. Granting of license. [Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC
2622; 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
Following the filing of the application, an investigation shall be made
concerning the facts therein set forth. Upon the application's being so
presented and approved by the Director of the Department of Revenue
and Finance and upon payment of the prescribed fee, the license shall
be issued. The license issued shall not authorize any person except the
designated person named in said license to engage in business thereunder
and shall not be transferable from the person to whom issued to any other
person. A separate license must be obtained by a licensed peddler for every
agent or employee working for him. Upon the issuing of such license the
Chief License Clerk shall furnish the licensee with a plate, badge or other
evidence bearing a number corresponding to the number of the license and
the year in which it was granted. The plate, badge or other evidence shall
be displayed at all times in a conspicuous part of the vehicle used by the
licensee, if any, in the conduct of his business, and if no vehicle is used, shall
be carried by him and exhibited on demand of any of the citizens of the Town
(3) Any person who is an exempt member of a volunteer fire
department, holding a license issued under Chapter 133, P.L. 1911,
the supplements and amendments thereto.216
(4) Any person who conducts a sale pursuant to statute or court order.
(5) Any person who is otherwise exempt by law.
B. The exemptions herein granted to honorably discharged soldiers and
sailors and exempt firemen shall not in any way relieve their employers
of the necessity of securing a license as herein provided.
216. Editor's Note: Currently, see N.J.S.A. 45:24-9.
§ 443-3 IRVINGTON CODE § 443-5
1:546
or members of the Public Safety Department thereof. Such license shall be
good only in the year in which it is issued; it shall be effective from the first
day of January in each year, and any licensee applying for or obtaining a
license after January 1 in any year shall pay the license fee for the full year.
§ 443-6. Fees for licenses. [Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC
2622]
§ 443-7. Licenses for special occasions.
A. The license fees to be imposed under this article for each year shall be
$308 initially and $77 annually thereafter. Any person who is the
proprietor of any peddling business carried on within the Town of
Irvington shall pay a license fee (subject to transfer as hereinafter
provided) for each wagon, pushcart, automobile or other vehicle.
[Amended 11-27-1984 by Ord. No. MC 2757; 8-22-1987 by Ord.
No. MC 2834; 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3027; 12-14-1999 by
Ord. No. MC 3134; 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005
by Ord. No. MC 3306; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413]
B. Each license in one classification shall entitle the licensee to peddle the
class of goods mentioned in the specific class and also the goods
mentioned in each class having a lower license fee but not any goods
classified under a higher license fee.
C. For each salesman, in addition to the other fees, a fee $49 shall be paid,
except that a license for one salesman shall be issued without charge
with the license for each wagon, pushcart, automobile or other vehicle.
[Amended 11-27-1984 by Ord. No. MC 2757; 8-22-1987 by Ord.
No. MC 2834; 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3027; 12-14-1999 by
Ord. No. MC 3134; 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005
by Ord. No. MC 3306; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413]
D. Any wagon or automobile license provided for in this article shall be
transferable by the licensee to any other wagon or automobile used by
such licensee in the class or classes of business for which such license
was issued.
E. The licenses above provided for may be revoked by the Director of the
Department of Revenue and Finance for the violation of any of the
provisions of this article, upon notice and hearing; provided, however,
that a license may be suspended for not more than two weeks at any
one time by the Director of the Department of Revenue and Finance
without hearing. Should any license be revoked, no part of the license
fee shall be returned.
A. In addition to the yearly license provided for herein, licenses may be
issued to hawkers or peddlers for special occasions. The manner of
applying for and the method prescribed for the issuing of such special
license and for the evidence of its having been issued shall be the same
as heretofore prescribed and provided for the yearly licenses.
§ 443-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 443-7
1:547
§ 443-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord. No.
MC 2622]
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in the general penalty
provisions as set forth in Article IV of this chapter.
B. Such licenses for special occasions shall be effective for a period not to
exceed one week or for such shorter period as shall be designated in
such particular license. The fee for such license shall be $53. Such
licenses may be revoked by the Director of the Department of Revenue
and Finance by reason of the violation of any of the provisions of the
license or for fraudulent, dishonest or discourteous conduct in carrying
on such business. In the case of revocation of license, the license fee
paid under the provision of this section shall be returned. [Amended
1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622; 11-27-1984 by Ord. No. MC
2757; 8-22-1987 by Ord. No. MC 2834; 12-12-1995 by Ord. No.
MC 3027; 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3134; 8-14-2001 by Ord.
No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by Ord. No. MC 3306; 12-29-2009 by
Ord. No. MC 3413]
§ 443-7 IRVINGTON CODE § 443-8
1:548
ARTICLE II
Canvassing and Soliciting
§ 443-9. Permit required. [Amended 9-8-1970 by Ord. No. MC 2263;
1-12-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3562]
No person, except as in this article provided, shall canvass, solicit,
distribute circulars or other matter or call from house to house, or hire
or employ or cause others to canvass, solicit, distribute circulars or other
matter or call from house to house, in the Town of Irvington, without first
having reported to and received a written permit from the Director of Public
Safety or the officer in charge at police headquarters.
§ 443-10. Issuance of permit; denial; revocation. [Amended
1-12-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3562]
The Director of Public Safety or, in his absence, the officer in charge at
police headquarters shall have power to grant a permit to canvass, which
permit shall specify the number of hours or days that the permit will be
in effect, and such officer shall refuse to issue a permit in all cases where
the application of the canvasser or further investigation, to be made at the
discretion of such officer, shows that the canvasser is not of good character
or that he is canvassing for a project not free from fraud. The Director of
Public Safety or, in his absence, the officer in charge at police headquarters
shall revoke the permit for failure or refusal on the part of the permittee to
observe the rules and regulations herein set forth.
§ 443-11. Application procedure.
Before the permit may be issued, the canvasser shall make an application to
canvass, giving his or her full name and address, age, height, weight, place
of birth, whether married or single, length and place of residence, whether
or not previously arrested or convicted of crime, by whom employed,
address of employer, clothing worn and a description of the project for
which he or she is canvassing. Each applicant shall be fingerprinted and
photographed before a permit shall be issued.
§ 443-12. Rules and regulations. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No.
MC 3553]
No person shall canvass within the Town except between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 5:00 p.m. A copy of the permittee's photograph shall be carried on
his or her permit, which photograph shall be furnished by the applicant. The
permittee shall exhibit his or her permit to any law enforcement personnel
in the Department of Public Safety or other person upon request. The
permittee shall be courteous to all persons in canvassing and shall not
importune nor annoy any of the inhabitants of the Town and shall conduct
himself or herself in a lawful manner. Upon expiration of the permit, the
holder thereof shall surrender the same to the officer in charge at police
headquarters.
§ 443-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 443-13
1:549
§ 443-13. Exception.
This article shall not affect any person engaged in the delivery of goods,
wares or merchandise or other articles or thing in the regular course of
business to the premises of persons ordering or entitled to receive the
same.217
217. Editor's Note: Former § 142-14 of the 1981 Revised Code, Violations and penalties, as
amended 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622, which previously followed this section, was
repealed 9-8-1987 by Ord. No. MC 2835. See now Art. IV, Violations and Penalties, of this
chapter.
§ 443-13 IRVINGTON CODE § 443-13
1:550
ARTICLE III
Transient Merchants and Itinerant Vendors
§ 443-14. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or conduct the business
of transient merchant or itinerant vendor, as defined by N.J.S.A. 45:24-1,
without first obtaining a license to do so as provided by N.J.S.A. 45:24-1 to
45:24-8 and this article.
§ 443-15. Licensing official. [Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC
2622]
The Chief License Clerk is hereby designated as the licensing official who
shall issue licenses to transient merchants and itinerant vendors under this
article.
§ 443-16. Fee for license; duration. [Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord.
No. MC 2622; 11-27-1984 by Ord. No. MC 2757; 8-22-1987 by Ord.
No. MC 2834; 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3027; 12-14-1999 by Ord.
No. MC 3134; 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by Ord.
No. MC 3306; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413]
The license fee for every transient merchant or itinerant vendor shall be
$538 and every such license shall expire 180 days after the day of issuance.
§ 443-17. License not transferable.
The license provided for by this article shall not be transferable, and in the
event that such license shall be revoked no part of the license fee will be
returned to the licensee.
§ 443-18. Bond required. [Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC
2622]
Before any license provided for in this article shall be issued, the applicant
therefor shall execute and deliver to the Chief License Clerk a good and
sufficient bond as provided for in N.J.S.A. 45:24-1 to 45:24-8 and shall
further furnish the statements and instruments in writing provided for in
such sections.
§ 443-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 443-18
1:551

ARTICLE IV
Violations and Penalties
§ 443-19. Violations and penalties.218
A. Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of a violation of Article I or
II of this chapter shall be subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter 1,
Article III, Penalties, of the Township Code.
B. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:24-8, any person, firm or corporation found
guilty of a violation of Article III of this chapter, regarding transient
merchants and itinerant vendors, shall be subject to a fine of not less
than $25 nor more than $200 or imprisonment for not more than 90
days, or both.
218. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 443-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 443-19
1:553
Chapter 449
PEST CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Demolition of buildings — See Ch. 200. Property maintenance — See Ch. 460.
§ 443-19 IRVINGTON CODE § 443-19
1:554
ARTICLE I
Rodent Control
[Adopted 11-28-1978 by Ord. No. MC 2550 (Ch. 154, Art. I, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 449-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
BUILDING — Any lands or premises within the Town of Irvington and any
structure or appurtenance thereon.
ERADICATION — The elimination or extermination of rodents within a
building or on the lot or parcel of land upon which said building is located,
by any or all accepted measures, such as poisoning, fumigation, trapping
and clubbing.
HARBORAGE — Any condition that provides shelter or protection for rats,
thus favoring their multiplication and continued existence in, under or
outside any building.219
OCCUPANT — The individual, partnership or corporation that has the use
of or occupies any building or a part or fraction thereof, whether the actual
owner or tenant. In the case of vacant buildings or any vacant portion of a
building, the owner, agent or other person having custody of the building
shall have the responsibility of an "occupant" of a building.
OWNER — The actual owner of the building, whether individual,
partnership or corporation; the managing agent of the building; a
mortgagee in possession; or any other person having control or custody or
management of the building or to whom the rent is paid. In the case of
commercial or industrial buildings or portion thereof leased with a clause
in the lease specifying that the lessee is responsible for maintenance or
repairs, the lessee shall be considered in such cases as the "owner" for the
purpose of this article.
RATPROOFING or RATPROOFED — A form of construction that prevents
the ingress and egress of rats from one place to another. It consists of
treating with materials impervious to rat gnawing all actual or potential
openings in exterior walls, ground or first floors, basements, roofs and
foundations that may be reached by rats by climbing or by burrowing.
WRITTEN NOTICE — A letter, placard or other writing signed by code
enforcement personnel, advising the owner or occupant of violations of this
article and giving the date by which all such violations are to be abated.
Such "written notice" may be delivered to the owner or occupant by first
class mail, telegram, hand delivery or posting on the building.220
219. Editor's Note: Original definition of "Health Officer," as amended, which previously
followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
220. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 449-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 449-2
1:555
§ 449-2. Infestation prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any building within the
Town of Irvington to maintain such building in a rodent-infested condition or
to permit any such building to become infested with or to provide harborage
for rodents. The existence of any such building is hereby declared to be a
nuisance hazardous to the public health.
§ 449-3. Ratproofing as part of all construction and remodeling.221
It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any building within the
Town of Irvington hereafter to construct, repair or remodel same unless
such construction, repair or remodeling shall render the building ratproof
in accordance with the standards prescribed herein or promulgated by the
code enforcement personnel as authorized by the provisions of this article.
§ 449-4. Demolition of buildings.222
It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any building within the
Town of Irvington to demolish same until such building is examined for
evidence of rodents by the code enforcement personnel and a certificate
issued as herein provided. In the event inspection reveals evidence of
rodent infestation, the code enforcement personnel shall require a program
of eradication undertaken and completed by a reputable professional
exterminator. The program of eradication shall include the use of rat
baiting, approved rodenticides, trapping and other accepted means of
extermination approved by the code enforcement personnel. After
completion of the eradication program as required herein, the code
enforcement personnel shall reinspect the premises and, upon a
determination that such program has been effective, shall issue a certificate
signifying his approval of said demolition.
§ 449-5. Storage of foodstuffs in buildings.
It shall be unlawful for any person hereafter to occupy any building wherein
foodstuffs are to be stored, kept, handled, sold or offered for sale unless said
building shall be ratproofed in accordance with the standards prescribed
herein.
§ 449-6. Feeding of animals in the open; storage of feed.223
No person shall place food in the open for the feeding of any fowl, bird
or animal except in such containers as will prevent the scattering of such
food upon the ground. After such feeding, such food shall not be allowed to
remain where it is accessible to rodents.
221. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
222. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
223. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 167, Art. IV, Feeding Wildlife on Public Property.
§ 449-2 IRVINGTON CODE § 449-7
1:556
§ 449-7. Elimination of harborages.224
All building material, lumber, boxes, cartons, barrels, containers,
machinery, raw material, fabricated goods and any other substance which
may afford harborage or provide food for rodents shall be kept, stored or
handled in a manner acceptable to the code enforcement personnel.
§ 449-8. Inspection of buildings.225
The code enforcement personnel may make or cause to be made an
inspection of any building in the Town of Irvington which he has reason
to believe is infested with or provides harborage to rodents or is not in a
ratproofed condition or is otherwise in violation of this article.
§ 449-9. Duty of owner upon notice of inspection.226
After the owner or occupant of any building inspected by the code
enforcement personnel pursuant to this article shall have received written
notice that such building is infested with or provides harborage to rodents,
it shall be the duty of such owner or occupant to take immediate measures
to cause the eradication of such infestation or harborage and to render such
building ratproofed. Measures to cause the eradication of such infestation
or harborage shall be completed within five days of the date of such written
notice. Measures to render such building ratproofed shall be completed
within 15 days of the date of such notice. The time periods provided for
herein may be enlarged by the code enforcement personnel, for good cause,
upon the written application of said owner or occupant.
§ 449-10. Responsibilities of exterminators.227
It shall be unlawful for any person to commence rodent eradication on
or within any building in the Town of Irvington without first having filed
with the code enforcement personnel a written statement that shall include
the method of: ectoparasite control; eradication, including the toxicant of
choice; removal of dead rodents; ensuring against accidental poisoning of
humans and domestic animals; and such other information as the code
enforcement personnel may require. If an acute toxicant is used, exterior
areas and accessible environments shall be conspicuously posted by the
exterminating firm with signs of such size, design and content as the code
enforcement personnel may require. All signs shall remain posted as long
as the eradication treatment is in progress.
224. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
225. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
226. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
227. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 449-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 449-11
1:557
§ 449-11. Maintenance of buildings in ratproofed condition.228
Owners and occupants of all buildings which shall have been ratproofed at
the direction of the code enforcement personnel shall maintain the same in
a ratproofed condition.
§ 449-12. Interference with ratproofing.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, damage or destroy any
part of any building or any appurtenance thereto intended to protect such
building against ingress or egress of rats, or in any other way to create a
condition by which ingress or egress of rats is made possible; provided that
this section shall not apply where the interference with the ratproofing is
made necessary in connection with a lawful construction, in which event,
however, the ratproofing shall be promptly restored.
§ 449-13. Promulgation of rules and regulations.229
The code enforcement personnel shall have the power to promulgate such
rules and regulations as may be necessary to effectuate the provisions of
this article.
§ 449-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-8-1987 by Ord. No.
MC 2835; 9-13-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3582230]
A. Except as otherwise provided in this article, the penalties for violations
of this article are as follows:
Section
Short
Description
1st
Offense
2nd
Offense
3rd
Offense
4th Offense
Maximum
Fine;
Court
Appearance
Required
§ 449-2 Rodent
infestation
prohibited
$100 $250 $500 $1,000
§ 449-3 Lack of
ratproofing
$100 $250 $500 $1,000
§ 449-4 Building
demolition
without
inspection
$250 $500 $750 $1,000
228. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
229. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
230. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 449-11 IRVINGTON CODE § 449-14
1:558
Section
Short
Description
1st
Offense
2nd
Offense
3rd
Offense
4th Offense
Maximum
Fine;
Court
Appearance
Required
§ 449-6 Scattering of
food when
feeding
animals in
public
$100 $250 $500 $1,000
§ 449-8 Rat infestation
or harborage
$100 $250 $500 $1,000
§ 449-11 Failure to
maintain rat
proofing
$100 $250 $500 $1,000
§ 449-12 Removal of
ratproofing
$100 $250 $500 $1,000
B. Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of a violation of any other
terms of this article shall be subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter
1, Article III, Penalties, of the Township Code.
§ 449-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 449-14
1:559

ARTICLE II
Pesticide Reduction
[Adopted 10-12-2006 by Ord. No. MC 3326 (Ch. 154, Art. II, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 449-15. Findings.
§ 449-16. Adoption of policy.
The Township does hereby adopt Integrated Pest Management as the pest
control policy and strategy to be employed in the maintenance of the
Township's public properties and facilities.
A. It is the desire of the Mayor and Council of the Township of Irvington to
promote matters which benefit the health, welfare, comfort and safety
of the citizens of the community.
B. Scientific studies associate exposure to pesticides with asthma, cancer,
developmental and learning disabilities, nerve and immune system
damage, liver or kidney damage, reproductive impairment, birth
defects and disruption of the endocrine system.
C. Infants, children, pregnant women, the elderly and people with
compromised immune systems and chemical sensitivities are especially
vulnerable to pesticide effects and exposure.
D. Lawn pesticides are harmful to pets, wildlife, soil microbiology, plants,
and natural ecosystems and can run off into streams, lakes and drinking
water sources.
E. Integrated Pest Management is the coordinated use of pest and
environmental information and all available pest control methods
(sanitation, mechanical, biological and "least toxic" chemical) to
prevent unacceptable levels of pest damage by the most economical
means with the least possible hazard to people, property and the
environment.
F. Integrated Pest Management has been investigated and considered by
the Environmental Commission and it is recommended by the
Environmental Commission as a desirable and appropriate policy in
order to reduce or eliminate the use of pesticides.
G. The Township of Irvington does maintain public properties at which
pest management issues are an ongoing concern.
H. The Mayor and Council have determined that it is in the best interest of
the health, welfare, comfort and safety of the Township's citizens to
adopt Integrated Pest Management at the Township's pest management
policy.
§ 449-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 449-17
1:561
§ 449-17. Effect on private property; pesticide-free zones.
The Municipal Council of the Township of Irvington encourages all citizens
to make every effort to participate in this endeavor on their own property,
and the Township will designate certain public properties, such as
community parks, as "Pesticide-Free Zones."
§ 449-18. Posting of pesticide-free zones.
These areas will be posted with a sign indicating that chemical pesticides
have not been applied at the site.
§ 449-17 IRVINGTON CODE § 449-18
1:562
Chapter 455
POOLROOMS AND BILLIARD ROOMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing procedure — See Ch. 290, Art. I.
§ 455-1. Purpose.
This chapter is for the purpose of revenue as well as for the proper
regulation, control and operation of the business and premises described
herein.
§ 455-2. License required.
It shall be unlawful in the Town to conduct a billiard room, poolroom or
combination thereof or such other places where the business of playing
billiards or pool is conducted for gain, reward or profit without first having
obtained a license for that purpose in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 455-3. Application for license.
An application for a license required by and issuable under this chapter
shall be made to the Town Division of Licensing, in writing, signed by the
person intending to conduct such place of business. Such application shall
specify the location of the premises; the approximate size and the type and
nature of the building and the structure thereon; the nature of the business
to be conducted therein; the name, residence, age and occupation of the
applicant; the number of tables to be licensed; and such other information
and data as, by the rules and regulations of the Municipal Council or the
Division of Licensing, shall be considered pertinent. Applicants shall furnish
two-by-two-inch photographs of owners, corporate officers, directors and
stockholders. Applicants shall submit to being fingerprinted.
§ 455-4. Inspections and investigations; issuance of license.
A. All applications for licenses under this chapter shall be submitted to the
Director of Public Safety for his inspection and investigation and he
shall report thereon his approval or disapproval of the application. Such
applications shall also be submitted to the Fire Chief for his inspection
of the premises and investigation and he shall make notation thereon as
to his approval or disapproval. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No.
MC 3553; 1-12-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3562]
B. Where the Division of Licensing considers it appropriate, the
application shall also be submitted to the Health Officer, who shall
§ 449-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 455-4
1:563
§ 455-5. Fees. [Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622;
12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413]
The annual distributor's fee for a pool or billiard table shall be $589, plus a
fee of $136 for each additional table payable for licenses to be issued under
this chapter.
§ 455-6. Proration of fees.
Any license issued under this chapter after August 1 of any year shall
require payment of 1/2 of the full license fee for the year, and such license
shall expire on December 31 following its issuance.
§ 455-7. Payment of fee; refund upon denial of license.
The fees provided for by § 455-5 shall be paid to the Division of Licensing at
the time the application for license is submitted. In the event the license is
refused or not issued, then the license fee shall be refunded.
§ 455-8. Term of license.
The term of each license issued under this chapter shall run from January 1
and expire December 31 following the issuance thereof.
§ 455-9. License not transferable.
Each license issued under this chapter shall apply only to the person
specified therein, and such license shall not be transferable to any other
person or to any other place or location than that shown or set forth in such
license.
investigate and who shall indicate upon the application his approval or
disapproval.
C. The Director of Public Safety, Fire Chief and Health Officer shall
respectively satisfy themselves as to the moral and public safety
hazard, the sanitary requirements and conditions and the fire hazards
involved and shall make report thereon, together with their approval or
disapproval, within 10 days after the application has been submitted to
them. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553; 1-12-2016 by
Ord. No. MC 3562]
D. Upon return of the application to the Division of Licensing by the
Director of Public Safety, Fire Chief and Health Officer, the Division of
Licensing shall then refer the application for license to the Municipal
Council for consideration and determination. [Amended 1-12-2016 by
Ord. No. MC 3562]
E. Upon favorable action of the Council, the license herein provided for
shall be issued to the applicant.
§ 455-4 IRVINGTON CODE § 455-10
1:564
§ 455-10. License to be displayed.
The license provided for by this chapter shall be posted and displayed in a
conspicuous place in the billiard room, poolroom or such other place where
the business of playing billiards or pool is conducted under such license.
§ 455-11. Number of licenses limited.
The number of licenses issued or to be issued under this chapter for
the conduct of a billiard room, poolroom or combination thereof shall not
exceed one for every 15,000 residents of the Town according to the last
federal census.
§ 455-12. Licenses not to be issued to certain persons.
No license to operate or conduct a billiard room, poolroom or combination
thereof or such other place where the business of playing billiards or pool is
conducted shall be issued to any minor nor to any person convicted of crime
or violation of any state law or municipal ordinance involving gambling or
moral turpitude.
§ 455-13. Suspension or revocation of license.
Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the
Municipal Council upon a hearing to be held after notice to the licensee.
§ 455-14. Taverns. [Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622231]
§ 455-15. Permitting certain persons to play.
No person operating or having control of any billiard or pool table for profit
or who has the control of any room wherein is kept, used or operated for
profit any billiard or pool table of any kind whatsoever shall permit or allow
any minor under the age of 18 years to play thereon or to use any such
table or to be, remain in, frequent or loiter in any such room, nor shall any
person known to have been convicted of a crime or violation of a state law or
municipal ordinance involving gambling be permitted to use any such table
or to remain in or frequent any such room.
§ 455-16. Sign regarding minors to be posted.
It shall be the duty of any person who is the proprietor or keeper of a
billiard parlor or poolroom to post conspicuously in his place of business the
following sign: MINORS UNDER THE AGE OF 18 YEARS NOT ALLOWED
HERE.
A. Section 455-5 shall not apply to licensed taverns.
B. No person operating such a tavern shall permit any minor under the
age of 21 years to play on or use any pool or billiard table.
231. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 455-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 455-17
1:565
§ 455-17. Proximity to school, library or church.
No license shall be issued to conduct the business of billiard or poolrooms
within 1,500 feet of any school, library or church premises.
§ 455-18. View of interior from entrance. [Amended 10-14-2015 by
Ord. No. MC 3553]
Every licensed poolroom or billiard room or combination thereof shall be
established to admit a view of the interior thereof from the entrance to
the licensed premises; provided, however, that a curtain or other means of
screening may be used on windows or doors of the premises to a height
of five feet from the floor of such premises, provided that such screening
shall not obstruct or prevent the view or examination of the interior of
the premises by a law enforcement personnel in the Department of Public
Safety or any inspection by any other officer of the law.
§ 455-19. Hours of operation.
The owner or operator of every billiard room, poolroom or such other place
as may exist wherein billiards or pool is licensed under this chapter shall
not permit the use of the billiard and pool tables for any purpose between
the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekdays nor between 1:00 a.m.
and 2:00 p.m. on Sundays. The hours herein mentioned refer to Eastern
standard time or daylight saving time, whichever time shall then be in effect
and shall apply thereto.
§ 455-20. Complaints. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
A complaint may be filed by any interested citizen or by a member of the
Public Safety Department of the Town if such complainant shall have reason
to believe that a violation of this chapter exists in any premises licensed in
accordance with this chapter.
§ 455-21. Exception as to certain organizations.
This chapter shall not apply to any duly authorized church or to any bona
fide veterans, charitable, educational, religious, civic or fraternal
organizations; provided, however, that such organizations are organized on
a nonpecuniary profit basis and do not have a plenary retail consumption
license issued by any Alcoholic Beverage Control Board.
§ 455-17 IRVINGTON CODE § 455-21
1:566
Chapter 460
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Air pollution — See Ch. 149.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 307.
Housing standards — See Ch. 355.
Littering — See Ch. 380.
Pest control — See Ch. 449.
Solid waste and recycling — See Ch. 535.
§ 455-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 455-21
1:567

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 460-1. Findings; declaration of policy.
It is hereby found and declared that there exist in the Town structures used
for nonresidential as well as residential use which are or may become in the
future substandard with respect to structure, equipment or maintenance,
and, further, that such conditions, including but not limited to structural
deterioration, lack of maintenance and appearance of exterior of premises,
infestation, lack of essential heating, plumbing, storage or refrigeration
equipment, lack of maintenance or upkeep of essential utilities and
facilities, existence of fire hazards, insanitary conditions, constitute a
menace to the health, safety, morals, welfare and reasonable comfort of
the citizens and inhabitants of the Town. It is further found and declared
that by reason of lack of maintenance and progressive deterioration, certain
properties have the further effect of creating blighting conditions and
initiating slums, and that if the same are not curtailed and removed, the
aforesaid conditions will grow and spread and will necessitate in time
the expenditure of large amounts of public funds to correct and eliminate
the same, and that by reason of timely regulations and restrictions as
herein contained, the growth of slums and blight may be prevented and
the neighborhood property values thereby maintained, the desirability and
amenities of residential and nonresidential uses and neighborhoods
enhanced and the public health, safety and welfare protected and fostered.
§ 460-2. Purposes; construal of provisions.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, morals
and welfare by establishing minimum standards governing the
maintenance, appearance, condition and occupancy of nonresidential
premises; to establish minimum standards governing utilities and facilities
and other physical components and conditions essential to make the
aforesaid facilities fit for occupancy and use; to fix certain responsibilities
and duties upon owners and operators, and distinct and separate
responsibilities and duties upon occupants; to authorize and establish
procedures for the inspection of nonresidential premises; to fix penalties
for the violations of this chapter; to provide for the right of access across
adjoining premises; to permit repairs; and to provide for the repair,
demolition or vacation of premises unfit for occupancy or use. This chapter
is hereby declared to be remedial and essential for the public interest
and it is intended that this chapter be literally construed to effectuate the
purposes as stated herein.
§ 460-3. Applicability.
Every portion of a building or premises used for or intended to be used
for commercial business or industrial occupancy shall comply with the
provisions of this chapter irrespective of when such building shall have
been constructed, altered or repaired, and irrespective of any permits or
§ 460-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-3
1:569
licenses which shall have been issued for the use or occupancy of the
building or premises, for the construction or repair of the building or for
the installation or repair of equipment or facilities prior to the effective date
of this chapter. This chapter establishes minimum standards for the initial
and continued occupancy of all buildings and does not replace or modify
standards otherwise established for the construction, repair, alteration or
use of building equipment or facilities, except as provided in § 460-4.
§ 460-4. Conflict with other ordinances.
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a
provision of any zoning, building, electrical, plumbing, fire, safety or health
ordinances232 or any regulation adopted pursuant thereto, or any other
ordinances, code or regulation of the Town, the provision which establishes
the highest standard shall prevail.
§ 460-5. Issuance of permits to conform to chapter.
All departments, officials and employees of the Town who have the duty
or the authority to issue permits or licenses in regard to the construction,
installation, repair, use or occupancy, equipment or facilities shall conform
to the provisions of this chapter, and no such permit or license shall be
issued if such would be in conflict with this chapter, except as provided in
§ 460-4.
§ 460-6. Rights of Town concerning condemnation not impaired.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to abolish or impair existing
remedies of the Town or its officers or agencies relating to the removal
or demolition of any building which is deemed to be dangerous, unsafe or
unsanitary.
§ 460-7. Violations of other ordinances not affected.
This chapter shall not affect the violation of any other ordinance, code or
regulation of the Town existing prior to the effective date of this chapter,
and such violation shall be governed by and shall continue to be punishable
to the full extent of the law under the provisions of those ordinances, codes
or regulations in effect at the time the violation was committed.
§ 460-8. Definitions.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure, the use of which is incidental
to that of the main building and which is attached thereto or located on
the same premises.
232. Editor's Note: See Ch. 240, Construction Code, Uniform; Ch. 307, Fire Prevention; Ch. 365,
Land Use Procedures; and Ch. 650, Zoning.
§ 460-3 IRVINGTON CODE § 460-8
1:570
BASEMENT — The portion of the building which is partly underground
and which has more than five feet of its height, measured from clear
floor to ceiling, above the average finished grade of the ground
adjoining the building.
CELLAR — Lowermost portion of the building, partly or totally
underground, having half or more of it height, measured from the
clear floor to ceiling, below the average finished grade of the adjoining
ground.
CODE ENFORCEMENT AGENCY — The Department of Housing
Services.[Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622; 9-28-1982 by
Ord. No. MC 2668; 2-13-1985 by Ord. No. MC 2769; 7-14-2009 by
Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS — Open space within structure or open
space surrounding structure where title is held in same name as owner
of structure.
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of insects, rodents
and vermin by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or
making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by
poisoning, spraying, fumigating or trapping; or by any other approved
means of pest elimination.
GARBAGE — The animal, vegetable and mineral waste resulting from
the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
HOUSING INSPECTOR — All officials, officers or employees of the
Town entrusted with the enforcement of this chapter.
NONRESIDENTIAL — All commercial and industrial premises and
properties.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a building
or part thereof.
OWNER — Owner or owners of the freehold of the premises or lesser
estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents,
receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation
in control of a building.
PERSON — Includes any individual, firm, corporation, association or
partnership.
RUBBISH — Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage, and the term shall include the residue from the burning of
wood, coal, coke and other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons,
boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings,
tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust.
SEWAGE — Waste from a flush toilet, bath, sink, lavatory, dishwashing
or laundry machine, or the water-carried waste from any other fixture
or equipment or machine.
§ 460-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-8
1:571
STRUCTURE — Combination of any materials, whether fixed or
portable, forming a construction, including buildings. The word
"structure" shall be construed as though followed by the words "or part
or parts thereof."
SUPPLIED FACILITIES — Facilities paid for, furnished or provided by
or under the control of the owner or operator.
VENTILATION — Supply and removal of air to and from any space by
natural or mechanical means.
VENTILATION, MECHANICAL — Ventilation by power-driven devices.
VENTILATION, NATURAL — Ventilation by opening to outer air through
windows, skylights, doors, louvers or stacks with or without winddriven
devices.
B. Meaning of certain words. When the word "premises" is used in this
chapter, it shall be construed as though it were followed by the words
"or any part thereof."
§ 460-8 IRVINGTON CODE § 460-8
1:572
ARTICLE II
Duties and Responsibilities of Owners and Occupants
§ 460-9. Premises kept free of hazards and insanitary conditions.
[Amended 2-27-1973 by Ord. No. MC 2347]
§ 460-10. Ground surface hazards or insanitary conditions.
Holes, excavations, breaks, projections, obstructions, icy conditions,
uncleared snow and excretion of pets and other animals on paths, walks,
driveways, parking lots and parking areas and other parts of the premises
which are accessible to use by persons on the premises are considered
hazards. All such holes and excavations shall be filled and repaired, walks
and steps replaced or repaired and other conditions removed where
necessary to eliminate hazards or insanitary conditions with reasonable
dispatch upon their discovery.
§ 460-11. Stormwater.
Adequate runoff drains shall be provided and maintained to eliminate any
such recurrent or excessive accumulation or stormwater.
§ 460-12. Appearance of premises and structures generally.
A. The exterior of the premises and all structures thereon shall be kept
free of all nuisances and any hazards to the safety of occupants,
pedestrians and other persons utilizing the premises, and free of
insanitary conditions, and any of the foregoing shall be promptly
removed and abated by the owner or operator in order to keep the
premises free of hazards, which include but are not limited to the
following: Brush, weeds, broken glass, stumps, roots, obnoxious
growths, filth, garbage, trash, refuse and debris.
B. Loose and overhanging objects and accumulations of ice and snow
which, by reason of location above ground level, constitute a danger of
falling on persons in the vicinity thereof, shall be removed.
C. Vacant lots or lots containing untenanted buildings shall be kept free of
brush, weeds, broken glass, tree stumps, roots, obnoxious growths,
filth, garbage, trash, refuse, debris and abandoned vehicles. The owner
or operator of said lot shall erect and maintain around the perimeter of
such lot a chain link, picket or stockade fence of a height no less than 42
inches nor more than 54 inches or a barricade with steel beams of a
height of approximately 36 inches extending approximately 48 inches
below ground. All fences shall be kept in good repair. The fence or
barrier shall not be equipped with or contain barbed wire, spikes or any
similar device.
A. The exterior of every structure or accessory structure (including
fences) shall be maintained in good repair and all surfaces thereof shall
be kept painted or whitewashed where necessary for the purposes of
§ 460-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-12
1:573
§ 460-13. Landscaping.
Premises shall be kept landscaped, and lawns, hedges and bushes shall
be kept trimmed and free from becoming overgrown and unsightly where
exposed to public view and where the same constitute a blighting factor
depreciating adjoining property.
§ 460-14. Signs and billboards.
All permanent signs and billboards exposed to the public view permitted
by reason of other regulations or as a lawful nonconforming use shall be
maintained in good repair. Any signs which have excessively weathered or
faded or those upon which the paint has excessively peeled or cracked shall,
with their supporting members, be removed forthwith or put into a good
state of repair. All nonoperative or broken electrical signs shall be repaired
or shall, with their supporting members, be removed forthwith.
§ 460-15. Windows. [Amended 8-12-1980 by Ord. No. MC 2611]
preservation and appearance. The same shall be maintained free of
broken glass, loose shingles, crumbling stone or brick, excessive
peeling paint or other condition reflective of deterioration, including TV
antennas (height supporting structures) and replacement if deformed
by wind, etc., or of inadequate maintenance, to the end that the
property itself may be preserved, safety and fire hazards eliminated and
adjoining properties and the neighborhood protected from blighting
influences.
B. The exterior of the premises and the condition of accessory structures
shall be maintained so that the appearance of the premises and all
buildings thereon shall reflect a level of maintenance in keeping with
the standards of the neighborhood or such higher standards as may be
adopted as part of a plan of urban renewal by the Town, and such that
the appearance of the premises and structure shall not constitute a
blighting factor for adjoining property owners nor an element leading
to the progressive deterioration and downgrading of the neighborhood
with the accompanying diminution of property values.
A. All windows exposed to public view shall be kept clean and free of
marks or foreign substances except when necessary in the course of
changing displays. No storage of materials, stock or inventory shall be
permitted in window display areas ordinarily exposed to public view
unless such areas are first screened from the public view by drapes,
venetian blinds or other permanent rendering of windows opaque to the
public view. All screening of interiors shall be maintained in an
attractive manner and in a good state of repair.
B. Whenever the owner of any structure finds it necessary to replace
temporarily a display window and to cover the space formerly occupied
by the same with plywood or other opaque material, and if the time
required for replacement of such window shall exceed seven days, then
§ 460-12 IRVINGTON CODE § 460-15
1:574
§ 460-16. Storefronts; security gates.
it shall be the obligation of the owner to paint or have painted the
plywood or other opaque material with a durable paint of a color which
shall blend with or match the color of the walls surrounding such
window.
C. Whenever the owner of any structure eliminates permanently the use of
one or more display windows of the structure, the owner shall not cover
the space formerly occupied by the window with plywood or other
opaque material but instead shall fill said space by permanent
construction so that said space blends with the exterior walls adjacent
thereto.
D. For the purposes of Subsection C of this section, elimination of the use
of a display window for a period exceeding 30 days shall be deemed to
be permanent elimination.
E. The owner shall obtain a building permit from the Building Department
for any construction performed in accordance with Subsection C of this
section.
A. All storefronts shall be kept in good repair, painted where required and
shall not constitute a safety hazard or nuisance. In the event repairs to
a storefront become necessary, such repairs shall be made with the
same or similar materials used in the construction of the storefront in
such a manner as to permanently repair the damaged area or areas.
Any cornice visible above a storefront shall be kept painted where
required and in good repair.
B. Security gates. The provisions of this section shall be applicable to
nonresidential, commercial and industrial premises, properties and
structures. [Added 4-11-1989 by Ord. No. MC 2885]
(1) From and after the effective date of this subsection, the
construction or installation or replacement of any security gate or
cover extending over or across a front window or door of a
nonresidential, commercial or industrial premises, property or
structure shall be of a grate- or lattice-type, with a minimum of 25%
of the gate area being see-through composition. All gates and
accompanying hardware shall be of suitable materials and
maintained in a state of good repair.
(2) From and after the effective date of this subsection, it shall be
unlawful to construct or install a roll-up security gate over or
across the front door or windows of any nonresidential, commercial
or industrial premises, property or structure.
(3) From and after the effective date of this subsection, it shall be
unlawful to construct or install security gates as provided in
Subsection B(1) and (2) above unless a permit is obtained by the
property owner or lessee or contractor from the Municipal
§ 460-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-16
1:575
§ 460-17. Removal of temporary signs or advertisements.
§ 460-18. Awnings and marquees.
Any awning or marquee and its accompanying structural member which
extends over any street, sidewalk or other portion of the premises shall be
maintained in good repair and shall not constitute a nuisance or a safety
hazard. In the event such awnings or marquees are not properly maintained
in accordance with the foregoing, they shall, together with their supporting
members, be removed forthwith. In the event such awnings or marquees
are made of cloth, plastic or of similar materials, such cloth or plastic
where exposed to public view shall be maintained in good condition and
shall not show evidence of excessive weathering, discoloration, ripping,
tearing or other holes. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize any
encroachment on streets, sidewalks or other parts of the public domain.
Construction Code Official. [Added 5-23-1989 by Ord. No. MC
2886]
(a) The applicant for the permit shall submit proper specifications
of the size, make, model, location and details required by said
Municipal Official.
(b) The fee charged by the municipality for said security gate
permit shall be $50. [Amended 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. MC
3027; 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3134; 8-14-2001 by
Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by Ord. No. MC 3306;
12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413233]
(4) The failure to install an approved security gate or door as required
by this Subsection B shall constitute a violation punishable as set
forth in § 460-64, Violations and penalties; schedule of fines. The
failure to comply with the provisions of this Subsection B shall
constitute a daily violation.234
A. Except for "for rent" signs, any temporary sign or other paper
advertising material glued or otherwise attached to a window or
windows or otherwise exposed to public view shall be removed either at
the expiration of the event or sale for which it is used or within 60 days
after erection, whichever shall occur sooner.
B. Except during the course of repairs or alterations, no more than 33 1/
3% of the square footage of any single window or single window display
area shall be devoted to signs or other temporary advertising material
attached to such window or windows or otherwise exposed to public
view.
233. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
234. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 460-16 IRVINGTON CODE § 460-19
1:576
§ 460-19. Structural soundness and general maintenance of
structures.
Every structure shall be so maintained as to be weather- and watertight.
§ 460-20. Foundation walls.
Foundation walls shall be kept structurally sound, free from defects, cracks
and damage and capable of bearing imposed loads safely.
§ 460-21. Chimneys.
Chimneys and all flue and vent attachments, all to be a permanent part
of the building or home, shall be maintained structurally sound, free from
defects and so maintained as to capably perform at all times the functions
for which they were designed. Chimneys, flues, gas vents and other draftproducing
equipment shall provide sufficient draft to develop the rated
output of the connected equipment and shall be structurally safe, durable,
smoketight and capable of withstanding the action of the flue gases.
§ 460-22. Porches, balconies, fire escapes.
Exterior porches, landings, balconies, stairs and fire escapes shall be
provided with bannisters or railings properly designed and maintained to
minimize the hazard of falling, and the same shall be kept structurally
sound, in good repair and free from defects.
§ 460-23. Basements and cellars.
Basements, cellar and crawl spaces are to be free of moisture resulting from
seepage, and cross-ventilation shall be required to prevent accumulations
of moisture and dampness.
A. Exterior walls, roofs, windows, window frames, doors, door frames,
foundations and other parts of the structure shall be so maintained as to
keep water from entering the structure and to prevent excessive drafts.
Damaged materials must be repaired or replaced promptly; places
showing signs of rot, leakage, deterioration or corrosion are to be
restored and protected against weathering and seepage.
B. The exterior of every structure or accessory structure (including
fences, signs and storefronts) shall be maintained in good repair and all
surfaces thereof shall be kept painted or whitewashed where necessary
for purposes of preservation and appearance. All surfaces shall be
maintained free of broken glass, loose, shingles, crumbling stone or
brick, excessive peeling paint or other condition reflective of
deterioration or inadequate maintenance, to the end that the property
itself may be preserved, safety and fire hazards eliminated and
adjoining properties and the neighborhood protected from blighting
influence.
§ 460-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-24
1:577
§ 460-24. Sanitation and safety of buildings generally.
All parts of the building shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, free
from nuisance and free from health, safety and fire hazards.
§ 460-25. Freedom from infestation.
All parts of the premises shall be maintained so as to prevent infestation
and sources of infestation.
§ 460-26. Accumulation of garbage and rubbish prohibited.
[Amended 2-15-2017 by Ord. No. MC 3598]
Freedom from accumulation of and from obstruction by garbage, refuse or
rubbish shall be required on common stairways, areaways, fire escapes,
balconies, porches, hallways, basements, cellars, roofs and on the exterior
of the property, including front, side and rear yards.
§ 460-27. Floors generally.
Floors shall be considered to be structurally sound when capable of safely
bearing imposed loads and shall be maintained at all times in a condition so
as to be smooth, clean, free from cracks, breaks and other hazards.
§ 460-28. Bathroom and kitchen floors.
Washrooms and water closet compartment floors shall be surfaced with
water-resistant material and shall be kept dry, clean and in a sanitary
condition at all times. Food preparation areas in retail stores and eating
establishments shall have walls and floors of water-resistant and easily
cleaned materials.
§ 460-29. Basement and cellar floors.
Floors of basements and cellars shall be paved with stone or concrete not
less than four inches thick and shall be maintained at all times in a condition
as to be smooth, clean, free from cracks, breaks and other hazards and free
from water seepage.
§ 460-30. Supporting structural members.
Supporting structural members are to be kept structurally sound, free of
deterioration and capable of bearing imposed loads safely.
§ 460-31. Walls and ceilings.
Walls and ceilings shall be considered to be in good repair when clean,
free from cracks, breaks, loose plaster and similar conditions. Walls shall
be provided with paint, paper, sealing material or other protective covering
so that such walls and ceilings shall be kept clean, free from visible foreign
matter, sanitary and well maintained at all times.
§ 460-24 IRVINGTON CODE § 460-32
1:578
§ 460-32. Garbage removal.
The owner or operator shall have the duty and responsibility of removing
garbage.
§ 460-33. Accumulation of refuse; fire hazards. [Amended
10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
Storage bins, rooms and areas shall not be used for accumulated garbage
or refuse. Flammable or combustible liquids or other materials may not
be stored on the premises unless they are of a type approved for storage
by the regulations of the Public Safety Department and then only in such
quantities and in such fireproof storage containers as may be prescribed by
the regulations.
§ 460-34. Electricity in washrooms; fuses.
§ 460-35. Street numbers. [Added 10-10-1990 by Ord. No. MC 2910]
A. Every washroom and water closet compartment shall be provided with
permanently installed artificial lighting. Fixtures with a switch and wall
plate shall be so located and maintained that there is no danger of
short-circuiting from water from washroom facilities or from splashing
of water.
B. Maximum fuse sizes consistent with safety shall be posted
conspicuously on the inside cover of all fuse boxes and no fuse shall be
installed therein in excess of the stated maximum, except that owners
shall not be responsible for violations of fuse installations without their
knowledge where the correct maximum is stated and the fuse box is
located within any part of the premises which is in the exclusive
possession of occupants other than the owner.
A. All real estate properties, including residential, commercial and/or
industrial, heretofore or hereafter erected within the Township of
Irvington shall have affixed the street number of the real property upon
the front of said building or over the front entrance or on the side
thereof or at the gateway leading to the front entrance or on the side
thereof, so that said street number shall be visible to persons at the
street curb without obstructions, and said numbers shall be of a size not
less than three inches.
B. In all cases where the number is or shall hereafter be affixed to the real
property, it shall be the duty of the owner of the property to apply and
obtain from the Township's Tax Assessor a verification of the correct
street number of the property lot as indicated on the Official Tax Map of
the municipality. It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of the
property to comply with the provisions of this section within 90 days
after the adoption of this section or within 30 days after receiving a
notice by ordinary mail from the Building Division of the Township of
Irvington.
§ 460-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-35
1:579
C. Failure to comply with the provisions or requirements of this section
shall subject the owner to the penalties provided by the provisions of
the Irvington Township Code, or the municipality may affix street
numbers on said real estate and charge the costs for the same to the
owner as an additional cost on the next tax bill issued for said real
estate.
§ 460-35 IRVINGTON CODE § 460-35
1:580
ARTICLE III
Administrative Provisions
§ 460-36. Public officers designated. [Amended 6-10-1975 by Ord.
No. MC 2451; 9-28-1982 by Ord. No. MC 2668; 2-13-1985 by Ord.
No. MC 2769; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No.
MC 3511]
The Department of Housing Services, its Director, its authorized agents
and personnel or other municipal personnel recruited by this agency shall
be authorized to make surveys in any area of the Town to determine
the general conditions of structures used for commercial and industrial
purposes, the extent of deterioration, lack of facilities and maintenance,
unsafe and unsanitary conditions, land use and other relevant factors.
§ 460-37. Inspections authorized. [Amended 6-10-1975 by Ord. No.
MC 2451; 9-28-1982 by Ord. No. MC 2668; 2-13-1985 by Ord. No.
MC 2769; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC
3511]
The authorized personnel of the Department of Housing Services shall be
authorized to make or cause to be made inspections to determine the
condition of premises in order to safeguard the health, safety, morals and
welfare of the public. The head of the code enforcement agency or his
designated representatives shall be authorized to enter any premises at any
reasonable time during business hours, or at such other time as may be
necessary in an emergency, for the purpose of performing his duties under
this chapter.
§ 460-38. Right of access.
The owner, operator, agent or occupant of every building or premises shall
give personnel authorized in § 460-37 access to such premises for the
purpose of such inspections at any reasonable time during business hours
or at such other times as may be necessary in an emergency.
§ 460-39. Identification of inspectors.
Inspectors and authorized personnel of the code enforcement agency shall
be supplied with official identification and, upon request, shall exhibit such
identification when entering premises.
§ 460-40. Notice of violation; contents; service. [Amended
6-10-1975 by Ord. No. MC 2451; 9-28-1982 by Ord. No. MC 2668;
2-13-1985 by Ord. No. MC 2769; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407;
7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
Whenever the head of the code enforcement agency or his designated
representative determines that there has been a violation or that there
are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provision of this chapter or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto,
§ 460-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-40
1:581
he shall give notice of such violation or alleged violation to the person
or persons responsible for such violation. Such notice shall be in writing
and shall specify the alleged violation and shall provide a reasonable time
for compliance and shall be served upon the owner, agent, operator or
occupant, as the case may require. Such notice shall be deemed to be
properly served upon such owner, agent, operator or occupant if a copy is
served upon him personally, or if copy thereof is sent by registered mail,
return receipt requested, to the last known address of such person as listed
on the tax records in the office of the Tax Collector in the Town. In the
event these records reveal mailing of bills to a person other than the owner,
mailing to such person shall be deemed notice to owner if no address is
shown for the owner on such records, or if a copy is posted in a conspicuous
place in or about the building affected by the notice, and if a copy is mailed
by registered mail on the same day it is posted to the owner, agent, operator
or occupant, or by such other method authorized by the laws of the state.
Such notice shall inform the person to whom it is directed of his right
to apply for a hearing before the Director of the Department of Housing
Services as provided in § 460-51. Such notice may contain an outline of
remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of
this chapter and with rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
§ 460-41. Notice to become order unless hearing requested.
[Amended 6-10-1975 by Ord. No. MC 2451; 9-28-1982 by Ord. No.
MC 2668; 2-13-1985 by Ord. No. MC 2769; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No.
MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
Any notice of violation provided for in § 460-40 shall automatically become
a final order if written request for a hearing is not filed in the office of the
Department of Housing Services within 10 days after receipt of the notice.
A copy of the order shall be served as provided in § 460-40.
§ 460-42. Condition in violation of other ordinances.
Whenever it is determined that the condition of a building or premises is
in violation of any applicable code which is not provided for by this chapter
or which is provided for by a higher standard of such other law, code,
ordinance or regulation as provided in § 460-4, such condition or violation
shall be referred to the appropriate authority.
§ 460-43. Summary abatement in emergency. [Amended 6-10-1975
by Ord. No. MC 2451; 9-28-1982 by Ord. No. MC 2668; 2-13-1985 by
Ord. No. MC 2769; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by
Ord. No. MC 3511]
Whenever the Director of the Department of Housing Services at any stage
of the proceedings instituted under the provisions of this chapter finds that
a violation of this chapter exists which in his opinion requires immediate
action to abate a direct hazard or immediate danger to the health, safety,
morals or welfare of the occupants of a building or of the public, he may,
without prior notice or hearing, issue an order citing the violation and
§ 460-40 IRVINGTON CODE § 460-43
1:582
directing that such action be taken as is necessary to remove or abate the
hazard or danger. Such order may include an order to vacate as provided
in § 460-56. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, such an
order shall be effective immediately upon service and shall be complied with
immediately or as otherwise provided.
§ 460-44. Abatement by Township. [Amended 9-28-1982 by Ord. No.
MC 2668; 2-13-1985 by Ord. No. MC 2769; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No.
MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
Whenever any violation of this chapter which, in the opinion of the Director
of the Department of Housing Services, causes a direct hazard or immediate
danger to the health, safety, morals or welfare of the occupants of a building
or the public, has not been corrected in the time specified by the order
issued under § 460-42, the Director may take such direct action as is
necessary to abate the hazard or danger. Expenses incurred in the
execution of such orders shall be recovered as provided in § 460-61.
§ 460-45. Reinspection required. [Amended 6-10-1975 by Ord. No.
MC 2451; 9-28-1982 by Ord. No. MC 2668; 2-13-1985 by Ord. No.
MC 2769; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC
3511]
At the end of the period specified in the notice of violation or any extension
thereof it shall be the duty of the Director of the Department of Housing
Services to make or cause to be made a reinspection of the premises,
and if compliance has not been established, appropriate legal action shall
be instituted as specified in § 460-65, provided that additional notices of
violation are not required.
§ 460-46. Extension of time for compliance. [Amended 6-10-1975 by
Ord. No. MC 2451; 9-28-1982 by Ord. No. MC 2668; 2-13-1985 by
Ord. No. MC 2769; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by
Ord. No. MC 3511]
The Director of the Department of Housing Services may extend the
compliance time specified in any notice or order issued under the provisions
of this chapter where there is evidence of intent to comply within the
period specified, provided that reasonable conditions exist which prevent
immediate compliance.
§ 460-47. Demolition deemed compliance.
Any owner of a building receiving a notice of violation stating that such
building does not comply with the provisions of this chapter may demolish
such building and such action shall be deemed compliance.
§ 460-48. Filing of notices and orders with Town Clerk. [Amended
6-10-1975 by Ord. No. MC 2451; 9-28-1982 by Ord. No. MC 2668;
§ 460-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-48
1:583
2-13-1985 by Ord. No. MC 2769; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407;
7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
Whenever a notice or order has been issued for any infraction of this
chapter, the Director of the Department of Housing Services may file a copy
of such notice or order in the office of the Town Clerk. Such recording
shall constitute appropriate information of such notice or order to any
subsequent purchaser, transferee, grantee, mortgagee or lessee of the
property affected thereby.
§ 460-49. Sale of building where owner has received notice or order.
[Amended 6-10-1975 by Ord. No. MC 2451; 9-28-1982 by Ord. No.
MC 2668; 2-13-1985 by Ord. No. MC 2769; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No.
MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
No owner of any building or premises upon whom any notice or order
pursuant to this chapter has been served shall sell, transfer, grant,
mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such property to another until
compliance with the provisions of such notice or order has been secured,
or until such owner shall furnish to the purchaser, transferee, grantee,
mortgagee or lessee, prior to such sale, transfer, grant, mortgage or lease,
a true copy of such notice or order and, at the same time, give adequate
notification to the Director of the Department of Housing Services of his
intent to sell, transfer, grant, mortgage or lease and supply the name and
address of such person, persons or firm to whom the sale, transfer, grant,
mortgage or lease is proposed. A purchaser, transferee, grantee, mortgagee
or lessee who has been informed of the existence of any notice or order
issued pursuant to this chapter shall be bound thereby.
§ 460-50. Records of Department to be public. [Amended 6-10-1975
by Ord. No. MC 2451; 9-28-1982 by Ord. No. MC 2668; 2-13-1985 by
Ord. No. MC 2769; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by
Ord. No. MC 3511]
All records of the Department of Housing Services shall be public. Upon
request, the agency shall be required to make a search and issue a
certificate of any of its records, including violations, and shall have the
power to charge and collect reasonable fees for such searches or
certificates.
§ 460-48 IRVINGTON CODE § 460-50
1:584
ARTICLE IV
Appeals
§ 460-51. Request for hearing. [Amended 6-10-1975 by Ord. No. MC
2451; 9-28-1982 by Ord. No. MC 2668; 2-13-1985 by Ord. No. MC
2769; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC
3511]
Any person affected by any notice of violation issued in connection with the
enforcement of any provision of this chapter or of any rule or regulation
adopted pursuant thereto may request and shall be granted a hearing
before the Director of the Department of Housing Services, provided that
such person shall file in the office of the Director a written request for such
hearing, setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor, designating
the person and his address upon whom orders may be served and setting
forth the reasons why such notice of violation should be modified or
withdrawn. If this request is filed within 10 days after the service of notice
of violation, compliance with such notice shall not be required while the
hearing is pending.
§ 460-52. Time for hearing; decision. [Amended 6-10-1975 by Ord.
No. MC 2451]
A. Upon receipt of a request for a hearing as provided in § 460-51, the
Director of the Department of Housing Services shall set a time and
place for such hearing and shall give the applicant at least five days'
written notice thereof. Such hearing shall commence not later than 30
days after the date on which the request was filed; however, hearings
may be postponed beyond such thirty-day period for good and sufficient
reason. At such hearing, the applicant or his representative shall be
given an opportunity to show cause why such notice of violation should
be modified or withdrawn. [Amended 9-28-1982 by Ord. No. MC
2668; 2-13-1985 by Ord. No. MC 2769; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC
3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
B. After a hearing held in accordance with § 460-51 and on consideration
of the evidence presented, the Director shall sustain, modify or
withdraw the notice. If the notice of violation is sustained or modified,
such decision shall be deemed a final order and shall be served as
provided in § 460-40 on the person or persons whom the head of the
code enforcement agency shall find to be responsible for the violation.
Where there are practical difficulties or unreasonable hardships in the
literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, the Director shall
have the power to authorize a variance from the provisions of this
chapter; provided that the intent of the chapter shall be observed with
respect to the safeguarding of public health, safety, morals or welfare.
§ 460-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-53
1:585
§ 460-53. Records. [Amended 6-10-1975 by Ord. No. 2451;
9-28-1982 by Ord. No. MC 2668; 2-13-1985 by Ord. No. MC 2769;
7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
The Director of the Department of Housing Services shall keep a summary
of testimony and a copy of every relevant notice or order, the request
for a hearing, entries of appearance, findings of fact, if any, and the final
determination, and such record shall be maintained as a public record.
§ 460-53 IRVINGTON CODE § 460-53
1:586
ARTICLE V
Buildings Unfit for Human Occupancy
§ 460-54. Defects or violations constituting unfitness. [Amended
2-13-1973 by Ord. No. MC 2344; 9-28-1982 by Ord. No. MC 2668;
2-13-1985 by Ord. No. MC 2769; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407;
7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
Any structure, building or premises having any of the defects or violations
found or listed in Subsections A to E below shall constitute a violation of
this chapter and may be designated by the Director of the Department
of Housing Services as unfit for human occupancy, and the owners of
such structure, building or premises shall be subject to the provisions of
enforcement of this chapter and, in addition, such structure, building or
premises may be so placarded:
§ 460-55. Notice of violation. [Amended 6-10-1975 by Ord. No. MC
2451; 9-28-1982 by Ord. No. MC 2668; 2-13-1985 by Ord. No. MC
2769; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC
3511]
Whenever the Director of the Department of Housing Services determines
that a structure is unfit as provided in § 460-54, he shall include such
A. The structure lacks illumination, ventilation, sanitation, heat or other
facilities adequate to protect the health and safety of the occupants or
the public.
B. The structure is damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe or
vermin infested in such a manner as to create a serious hazard to the
health and safety of the occupants or the public.
C. The structure, because of the location, general conditions, state of the
premises or number of occupants, is so unsanitary, unsafe,
overcrowded or otherwise detrimental to health and safety that it
creates a serious hazard to the occupants or the public.
D. The structure, because of the failure of the owner or occupant to
comply with such notices or orders issued pursuant to this chapter, is
unfit.
E. It shall be the duty of every owner, owners, lessee or lessees of any
building or portion thereof rented or used by a business establishment
where one or more persons work, when the owner, owners, lessee or
lessees have agreed with the person, firm or corporation occupying the
building or portion thereof to supply heat, to provide heat from the first
day of October in each year to the first day of May of the succeeding
year, so that the temperature of that room or those rooms rented or
used by such business establishment and where person or persons work
shall always be kept at 68° F. during the usual working hours of the
business carried on therein.
§ 460-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-55
1:587
findings within the notice of violation provided for in § 460-40, and he shall
also include a statement of his intent to vacate and placard the premises
if compliance with the provisions of the notice of violation has not been
secured.
§ 460-56. Order to vacate. [Amended 6-10-1975 by Ord. No. MC
2451; 9-28-1982 by Ord. No. MC 2668; 2-13-1985 by Ord. No. MC
2769; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC
3511]
Whenever a notice of violation, as provided in § 460-55, has not been
complied with or where § 460-54 has not been invoked, the Director of the
Department of Housing Services may order the premises to be vacated. A
copy of such notice to vacate shall be served on the owner, agent, operator
and the occupant as provided in § 460-40.
§ 460-57. Written approval required for resumption of use of
building. [Amended 6-10-1975 by Ord. No. MC 2451; 9-28-1982 by
Ord. No. MC 2668; 2-13-1985 by Ord. No. MC 2769; 7-14-2009 by
Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
Any structure designated as unfit pursuant to § 460-54 and ordered vacated
as provided in § 460-56 shall be vacated within such reasonable time as the
Director of the Department of Housing Services may specify in the order.
No such structure shall again be used nor the placard removed until written
approval is secured from the Director.
§ 460-58. Defacement or removal of placard prohibited.
No person shall deface or remove the placard from any structure which has
been designated as unfit except as provided in § 460-57.
§ 460-59. Vacated building to be secured. [Amended 6-10-1975 by
Ord. No. MC 2451; 9-28-1982 by Ord. No. MC 2668; 2-13-1985 by
Ord. No. MC 2769; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by
Ord. No. MC 3511]
The owner, agent or operator of any structure which has been designated
as unfit and vacated shall make such structure safe and secure in whatever
manner the Director of the Department of Housing Services shall deem
necessary. Any vacant building open at the doors and windows, if
unguarded, shall be deemed dangerous to human life and a nuisance within
the meaning of this section.
§ 460-55 IRVINGTON CODE § 460-59
1:588
ARTICLE VI
Enforcement
§ 460-60. Violation a public nuisance; abatement by Town.
[Amended 6-10-1975 by Ord. No. MC 2451; 9-28-1982 by Ord. No.
MC 2668; 2-13-1985 by Ord. No. MC 2769; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No.
MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
Whenever a notice or order to remove a violation or secure, vacate or
demolish a building has not been complied with, and when such failure to
comply is deemed by the Director of the Department of Housing Services
to constitute a nuisance, he may proceed to cause the structure to be
demolished, repaired, altered, secured, vacated or take such other action
as is necessary to abate the nuisance. Whenever the Director determines
that such nuisance exists, he shall record sufficient proof to support such
determination and the owner, occupant, lessee or mortgagee shall be
notified of such finding pursuant to § 460-40. Abatement authorized by this
section shall not commence until at least 10 days after service of such
notice.
§ 460-61. Expense of abatement to constitute lien. [Amended
6-10-1975 by Ord. No. MC 2451; 9-28-1982 by Ord. No. MC 2668;
2-13-1985 by Ord. No. MC 2769; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407;
7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
The expenses incurred pursuant to §§ 460-44 and 460-60 shall be paid by
the owner or occupant of the premises or by the person who caused or
maintained such nuisance or other matter. The Department of Housing
Services shall file among its records an affidavit stating with fairness and
accuracy the items of expense and the date of execution of actions
authorized by §§ 460-44 and 460-60. The Department may institute a suit
to recover such expenses against any person liable for such expenses or
may cause such expenses to be charged against the property as a lien.
Except with respect to a lien imposed for expenses incurred in demolition,
nothing herein shall be construed as placing a lien upon the property which
supersedes the lien of any bona fide mortgage on such property executed
and recorded prior to the existence of a lien herein authorized.
§ 460-62. Power to adopt rules and regulations. [Amended
6-10-1975 by Ord. No. MC 2451; 9-28-1982 by Ord. No. MC 2668;
2-13-1985 by Ord. No. MC 2769; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407;
7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
The Department of Housing Services is authorized to make and adopt
such written rules and regulations as may be necessary for the proper
enforcement and interpretation of this chapter and to secure the intent
thereof. Such rules and regulations shall not be in conflict with the
provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance of the Town, nor shall
they have the effect of waiving any provisions of this chapter or any other
ordinance. Such rules and regulations shall have the same force and effect
§ 460-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-62
1:589
as the provisions of this chapter, and the penalty for violation thereof shall
be the same as the penalty for violation of the provisions of this chapter.
Such rules and regulations shall be submitted to the Municipal Council of
the Town by the Director of the Department. Failure of the local legislative
body to approve, reject or modify such rules and regulations within 30 days
after submission shall be deemed to constitute approval thereof. Such rules
and regulations as approved by the local legislative body shall be on file and
available as a matter of public record.
§ 460-63. Liability of Town officers.
No officer, agent or employee of the Town shall render himself personally
liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result
of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this
chapter. Any suit brought against any officer, agent or employee of the Town
as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties
under this chapter shall be defended by the Town Attorney until the final
determination of the proceedings therein.
§ 460-64. Violations and penalties; schedule of fines. [Amended
1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622; 1-26-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3563;
9-13-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3582]
A. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the penalties for
violations of this chapter are as follows:
Section
Short
Description
1st
Offense
2nd
Offense
3rd
Offense
4th
Offense
Maximum
Fine;
Court
Appearance
Required
§ 460-10 Ground
surface
hazards or
insanitary
conditions
$50 $250 $500 $750
§ 460-11 Stormwater $100 $250 $500 $1,000
§ 460-12 Appearance of
premises and
structures
generally
$100 $250 $500 $1,000
§ 460-13 Landscaping $50 $250 $500 $750
§ 460-14 Signs and
billboards
$100 $250 $500 $1,000
§ 460-15 Windows $100 $250 $500 $1,000
§ 460-62 IRVINGTON CODE § 460-64
1:590
Section
Short
Description
1st
Offense
2nd
Offense
3rd
Offense
4th
Offense
Maximum
Fine;
Court
Appearance
Required
§ 460-16 Storefronts;
security gates
$100 $250 $500 $1,000
§ 460-17 Removal of
temporary
signs or
advertisements
$100 $250 $500 $1,000
§ 460-18 Awnings and
marquees
$50 $250 $500 $750
§ 460-19 Structural
soundness and
general
maintenance
of structures
$100 $250 $500 $1,000
§ 460-20 Foundation
walls
$50 $250 $500 $750
§ 460-21 Chimneys $50 $250 $500 $1,000
§ 460-22 Porches,
balconies, fire
escapes
$50 $250 $500 $750
§ 460-23 Basements
and cellars
$50 $250 $500 $1,000
§ 460-25 Freedom from
infestation
$50 $250 $500 $750
§ 460-26 Accumulation
of garbage
and rubbish
$50 $250 $500 $750
§ 460-27 Floors
generally
$50 $250 $500 $1,000
§ 460-28 Bathroom and
kitchen floors
$50 $250 $500 $750
§ 460-29 Basement and
cellar floors
$50 $250 $500 $750
§ 460-30 Supporting
structural
members
$50 $250 $500 $750
§ 460-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-64
1:591
§ 460-65. Town Attorney to initiate action; remedies cumulative.
[Amended 6-10-1975 by Ord. No. MC 2451; 9-28-1982 by Ord. No.
MC 2668; 2-13-1985 by Ord. No. MC 2769; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No.
MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
The Town Attorney shall, upon complaint of the Director of the Department
of Housing Services or upon his own motion, institute appropriate action to
restrain, prevent, enjoin, abate, correct or remove such violation and to take
such other legal action as is necessary to carry out the terms and provisions
of this chapter. The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and
not exclusive and shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by
law, and all remedies may be pursued concurrently or consecutively and the
pursuit of any remedy shall not be construed as an election or the waiver of
right to pursue any and all of the others.
§ 460-66. Appeals to state court.
Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any final order of the
head of the code enforcement agency may seek to have such order reviewed
by any court of competent jurisdiction as provided by the laws of the state.
Section
Short
Description
1st
Offense
2nd
Offense
3rd
Offense
4th
Offense
Maximum
Fine;
Court
Appearance
Required
§ 460-31 Walls and
ceilings
$50 $250 $500 $750
§ 460-32 Garbage
removal
$50 $250 $500 $1,000
§ 460-33 Accumulation
of refuse; fire
hazards
$50 $250 $500 $750
§ 460-35AStreet
numbers
$50 $250 $500 $750
B. Any person who shall knowingly and willfully violate or assist in the
violation of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punishable as
provided in the general penalty provisions as set forth in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article III. The term "person" as used in this section
shall include the owner, occupant, mortgagee or vendee in possession,
assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee, agent or any other
person, firm or corporation directly or indirectly in control of a building
or part thereof.
§ 460-64 IRVINGTON CODE § 460-67
1:592
§ 460-67. Effect on existing ordinances.
All ordinances dealing with any part of the subject matter of this chapter
shall remain in full force and effect during the period between the final
adoption of this chapter and the date the same becomes effective, and after
the effective date of this chapter such other ordinances shall remain in full
force and effect except as provided in § 460-4.
§ 460-68. Assistance of other officials and employees. [Amended
6-10-1975 by Ord. No. MC 2451; 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622;
9-28-1982 by Ord. No. MC 2668; 2-13-1985 by Ord. No. MC 2769;
7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
In connection with the preparation of a notice or order as referred to in
this chapter or in connection with his decision upon a hearing as herein
provided, the Director of the Department of Housing Services is authorized
to obtain the assistance and cooperation of any other official or employee of
the Town whose duties may pertain to the subject matter of this chapter.
§ 460-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-68
1:593

ARTICLE VII
Vacant Properties
[Added 6-23-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3406; amended 6-25-2013 by Ord.
No. MC 3495; 6-23-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3541]
§ 460-69. Registration required; fee. [Amended 6-27-2017 by Ord.
No. 3611; 3-13-2018 by Ord. No. MC 3635; 6-26-2018 by Ord. No.
MC 3656]
§ 460-70. Securing of vacant property and vacant lots. [Amended
6-26-2018 by Ord. No. MC 3656]
A. Any person, company, corporation or beneficiary, whose property
becomes vacant or shows evidence of vacancy is herein to be
considered abandoned and shall within 10 days of receiving notice of
the declaration of vacancy register said property with the Director of
Housing Services or his or her designee.
B. The registration shall contain the name of any owner, including any
beneficiary, the direct street address of the owner (no P.O. boxes), a
direct contact name and number and in the case of a corporation or
LLC, provide a copy of the certificate of formation and a copy of valid
driver's license or identification for the owner or principal with physical
address, the name, address and number for the local property manager,
the person responsible for security, maintenance and marketing of the
property, if applicable.
C. An annual registration fee of $500 shall accompany the registration
form submitted. The fee will be required by August 31 of each year, and
must be received no later than September 10 of the year due. Any
property that has been validly registered for at least three years shall
pay a fee of $750. If the same property remains on the list for five years,
then the fee will be increased to $1,000 and, after 10 years, the fee will
be increased to $2,000. Any bank that registers a vacant property or
vacant lot shall designate a registered agent listed in the State of New
Jersey. In the event that a bank fails to comply with this section, a fine of
$2,500 per day shall be imposed.
A. It is the responsibility of the owner to secure the property registered
under this article. "Secure" means, but is not limited to, the closure and
locking of windows, doors (including garage) and any other opening. In
the case of windows, such shall be secured by means of reglazing or
boarding of same. The owner should also be responsible for notifying
the Township by written notice to the public officer of any change in
ownership. For vacant lots see Subsections C and D below.
B. If the property is owned by a corporation or out-of-area owner, a local
property management company shall be contracted to perform weekly
inspections to verify compliance with this article. "Out of the area" shall
mean any owner located at least 50 miles away from subject property.
§ 460-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-70
1:595
§ 460-71. Enforcement authority.
The property, if vacant, shall be posted with a name and twenty-fourhour
contact number of the local property management company or
a twenty-four-hour number for the owner. The posting shall be no
less than 18 inches by 24 inches with words in a prominent font and
legible. The words, "Property Managed By" and "To Report Problems or
Concerns Call. . . ." shall appear on the posted sign. The posting shall
be on the inside of an interior window facing the street or on at least
one boarded window facing the street or secured on the exterior of the
building facing the street where such can be read from the street. The
posting of such on a visible stake in front of the property is acceptable.
C. A "vacant lot" is defined as a parcel of land that has no structure, a
partially built structure (Construction was initiated on the property and
was discontinued prior to completion, leaving the building unsuitable
for occupancy, and no construction has taken place in accordance with
the permits issued.), a partial structure or a partially demolished
structure leaving the partial structure unsuitable for occupancy. The
Township's concerns regarding vacant lots are consistent with the
findings and declarations relative to abandoned properties set forth in
N.J.S.A. 55:19-79. Vacant lots are a concern because they tend to attract
or be subjected to illegal dumping and other nefarious activities.
D. All vacant lots and property which has been determined to be a
nuisance by the public officer in the Township as defined by Municipal
Code § 460-70C shall be completely fenced along the front yard (and
side yards if it is a corner property) of the property with a six-foot-high
solid wood fence (that cannot be seen through) with support posts
spaced a maximum of eight feet, zero inches, apart. The posts shall be
installed at a minimum of 24 inches into the ground and secured with
concrete. The fence shall have a six-foot-to-eight-foot-wide gate/door to
access the lot for maintenance. The fence must remain structurally
sound and in good repair at all times. Property owners or their designee
must apply for a permit from the Department of Housing, Division of
Buildings, prior to installing a fence.
E. All vacant lot owners will have until Friday, August 17, 2018, to be in
compliance with this revised Municipal Code. Extensions may be
granted based on extraordinary situations upon review of a written
request submitted by the property owner to the Department of
Housing.
A. Inspectors under the authority of the Director shall have the authority
to issue a summons for any violations found under this article. The
Township Public Safety Department is also authorized herein to issue
appropriate summonses. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC
3553]
B. Additional authority. In addition, the Director of Housing Services or his
or her designee shall have the authority to require the owner/
§ 460-70 IRVINGTON CODE § 460-71
1:596
§ 460-72. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-27-2017 by Ord. No.
MC 3611; 3-13-2018 by Ord. No. MC 3635]
In addition to the registration fee referenced herein235 ($500 per year), the
penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article III, Penalties, shall be imposed for
each violation of this article for which the party is found responsible.
§ 460-73. Maintenance.
Properties subject to this article shall be kept free of all weeds, dry bushes,
dead vegetation, junk, debris, building material and garbage. Furthermore,
there shall not be permitted any accumulation of flyers, notices, discarded
personal items of any sort that give the appearance that the property is
vacant or abandoned. The property owner shall be responsible for the
removal of any graffiti. Visible front side yards and back yards shall be kept
properly landscaped according to existing code standards. Failure to adhere
to any of the requirements listed above may result in the fines listed in
§ 460-72.
beneficiary to implement additional maintenance and/or security
measures, including requiring a specific type of material for closure
purposes, requiring additional lighting, the providing of security guard
protection if such building is located in an industrial area or isolated
area as determine by the Director, or any other reasonable measures
designed to assist in securing the property or rendering it from further
decline. [Amended 3-13-2018 by Ord. No. MC 3635]
235. Editor's Note: See § 460-69, Registration required; fee.
§ 460-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-73
1:597

ARTICLE VIII
Service of Warrants for Property Code Violations
[Added 7-12-2011 by Ord. No. MC 3448; amended 11-25-2014 by
Ord. No. MC 3518]
§ 460-74. Constables authorized to serve warrants.
Constable(s) duly appointed by the Township of Irvington may be permitted
to serve all warrants and other notices required to be served in all matters
concerning property code violations.
§ 460-75. Police assistance. [Amended 1-12-2016 by Ord. No. MC
3562]
The Director of Public Safety or designee may authorize assistance to the
Constable(s) upon the request for such by the Constable(s).
§ 460-76. Township employees.
No current Township employee will be permitted to serve warrants.
§ 460-77. Surcharge for warrant.
There shall be a surcharge added to each warrant or notice required to be
served and such surcharge shall be payable by the party upon whom service
is required.
§ 460-78. Fee for service of warrant.
The fee payable to the Constable for service of a warrant or other required
notice shall be $75 for each service.
§ 460-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-78
1:599
Chapter 462
RECORDS
§ 462-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth the Township of Irvington's fee
schedule for obtaining copies of government records.
§ 462-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GOVERNMENT RECORD(S) or RECORD(S) — Any information subject to
public inspection which is maintained by the Township of Irvington in
written, audio, video, electronic or other form and as defined by the Open
Public Records Act, N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.
SPECIAL SERVICE CHARGE — A charge, in addition to the actual cost
of duplicating the government record(s), which shall reflect the expense
associated with extensive use of Township information, technology or
resources, or the extensive clerical or supervisory assistance by Township of
Irvington personnel necessary to accommodate and as defined by the Open
Public Records Act, N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5c and 47:1A-5d.
§ 462-3. Fee schedule.
The fees for copies of government records shall be:
A. Photocopies of records shall be $0.05 per letter size page or smaller,
and $0.07 per legal size page or larger.236
B. Maps.
(1) Maps that are 32 inches by 32 inches (zoning, historic
preservation, elections, street, flood): $5 per sheet.
(2) Maps that are 24 inches by 36 inches (tax and other maps): $5 per
sheet.
(3) Maps that are 11 inches by 17 inches (tax and other maps): $1.50
per sheet; and maps that are 18 inches by 30 inches (tax and other
maps): $14. [Amended 12-23-2003 by Ord. No. 3247]
(4) Maps that are 8.5 inches by 11 inches or 8.5 inches by 14 inches
maps: Fees per page in accordance with Subsection A.
(5) Full set of Tax Maps (24 inches by 36 inches): $600.
(6) Full set of Tax Maps (11 inches by 17 inches): $120.
236. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 460-78 IRVINGTON CODE § 462-3
1:600
(7) Tax Map overlays: $20 per sheet.
(a) Individual print out of Tax Map overlay, including
topographical information: $7 per acre.
(8) Topographical maps (24 inches by 36 inches): $7 per acre.
(9) Digital copies of Tax Map sheets.
(a) Digital copy of Tax Map sheet (3.5 inch floppy disk) file in DWG
format: $50 per sheet.
(b) Digital copy of Tax Map sheet (CD) file in DWG format: $60 per
sheet.
(c) Digital copy of Tax Map sheet (CD or 3.5 inch floppy disk) in
TIFF format: $25 per sheet file.
(d) Digital copy of Tax Map sheet, including topographical
information: add $7 per acre.
(e) Additional charge for printout (24 inches by 36 inches): $5 per
sheet.
C. Engineering standards, details and design criteria:
(1) Hard copy: $50.
(2) Digital copy (CD): $50.
D. Historic Preservation Commission booklet: $5.
E. Parks and open space booklet: $3.
F. Township directory: $4.
G. Land Use Code book: $110, plus supplements.237
H. Land Use Code book supplements: Fees per page in accordance with
Subsection A.
I. General Ordinances Code supplements: Fees per page in accordance
with Subsection A.
J. Audiotape and CD-ROM: $10.238
K. Duplicate tax bill (carbon copy): $5.
L. Duplicate tax sales certificate: $100.
237. Editor's Note: Original § 98-52C(8) of the 1981 Revised Code, which contained a fee of
$150 for the Code book, which previously followed this subsection, was deleted at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
238. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 462-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 462-3
1:601
§ 462-4. Special service charges.
M. Public Safety Department records. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord.
No. MC 3553]
(1) Videotapes: $25.
(2) Audiotapes: $20.
(3) Certified copy of docket entry: $5.
(4) MDT transcripts: $25.
(5) Photographs (color prints).
(a) Eight-by-ten 35mm: $5 each.
(b) Five-by-seven 35mm: $3 each.
(c) Three-and-five-tenths-by-five standard 35mm roll of 12: $15.
(d) Three-and-five-tenths-by-five standard 35mm roll of 24: $25.
(6) Photographs (black and white prints).
(a) Eight-by-ten 35mm or four-by-five: $6.
(b) Four-by-five 35mm or four-by-five: $2.50.
N. Postage. Postage costs will be added to fees for copies of records
requested to be mailed and will be determined at the time of the
request.
A. A special service charge may be applied by the custodian of records or
his/her designee in the following circumstances:
(1) When the nature, format, manner of collation or volume of a
government record embodied in the form of printed matter to be
inspected, examined or copied is such that the record cannot be
reproduced by ordinary copying equipment in ordinary business
size or involves an extraordinary expenditure of time and effort to
accommodate the request; or
(2) When the request is for a government record in a medium not
routinely developed or maintained by the Township; or
(3) When a request for a government record requires a substantial
amount of manipulation or programming of information technology
by the Township and the cost of such manipulation or programming
is not otherwise included in the fee or fees listed in § 462-3A.
B. The special service charge rate for supervisory, programming and/or
clerical services shall be charged per hour and as follows:
§ 462-3 IRVINGTON CODE § 462-4
1:602
§ 462-5. Miscellaneous charges for nongovernmental records.
Chapter 464
REGISTRATION OF COMMERCIAL AND MULTIFAMILY
PROPERTIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing procedure — See Ch. 290, Art. I.
§ 464-1. Definitions.
In this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings
stated in this section unless the context otherwise requires:
(1) The hourly rate shall be the hourly wage of the employee
conducting the supervisory, programming and/or clerical services
as set by the Township by resolution and/or collective bargaining
agreement(s) by 26 (weeks) and then dividing that biweekly pay by
the number of hours worked in a biweekly period.
A. Public Safety Department. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC
3553]
(1) Good conduct letters: $5.
(2) Special events permits: $25.
(3) Alarm registration: $25.
(4) Firearms identification card: $5.
(5) Permit to purchase firearm: $2.
(6) State firearms fee: $25.
(7) Mental health search fee: $15.
(8) Temporary parking permit: $4.
(9) Fingerprinting.
(a) Township resident: $5.
(b) Nonresident: $10.
B. Returned check (NSF, stop payment, etc.): $20.239
239. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 462-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 464-1
1:603
CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION — A certificate of registration issued
by the police official under this chapter to the owner or operator of a
commercial property and or a residential property as defined below.
COMMERCIAL PROPERTY — Any business in the Township that is open
after 8:00 p.m. on any day of the week.
EMPLOYEE — Any person who performs any service on the premises of a
residential or commercial property on a full-time, part-time, temporary or
contract basis (including managers), whether or not the person is defined
an employee, independent contractor, agent, or otherwise. "Employee" does
not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair, maintenance or
cleaning of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
MANAGER — The person designated in the registration application filed
under this chapter as being responsible for the daily operation of a
residential or commercial property.240
NOTICE — Any written notice that the police official is required to give an
applicant or registrant under this chapter.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, organization, partnership,
association, or other legal entity.
POLICE OFFICIAL — The Director of the Public Safety Department for the
Township of Irvington or person he may designate to act as the official
primarily responsible for the administration of this chapter.
REGISTERED AGENT — The person identified in the registration
application filed under this chapter who is authorized to receive on behalf of
the residential or commercial property any legal process or notice required
or provided for in this chapter.241
REGISTRANT — A person issued a certificate of registration for a
residential or commercial property under this chapter and includes all
owners, lessees and operators of the residential or commercial property
identified in the registration application filed under this chapter.242
RESIDENTIAL UNITS — A building possessing five family units or more.
§ 464-2. Registration required; security camera system
requirements.
A. No person shall keep, maintain, or operate a commercial property or
residential property as defined in this chapter in the Township of
Irvington without first having registered with the police official.
B. The residential properties or commercial businesses subject to this
chapter must contain a retail security camera system as follows:
240. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
241. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
242. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 464-1 IRVINGTON CODE § 464-2
1:604
§ 464-3. Authority of police official; promulgation of rules and
regulations.
The police official shall implement and enforce this chapter and may
establish rules, regulations, or procedures as necessary to carry out the
purpose of this chapter.
§ 464-4. Time for compliance by new and existing residences and
commercial businesses; changes in registration information.
(1) A security camera system that operates 24 hours a day/seven days
a week;
(2) At least one of the security cameras within the residential or
commercial property must be completely dedicated to monitoring
the public entrance door;243
(3) There must be a camera or cameras that monitor the entire area of
the residential or commercial property that is accessible by the
public; and244
(4) The video footage obtained by the security camera system must be
maintained by the residential or commercial property for no less
than 30 days.245
A. All new residential or commercial businesses subject to this chapter
within the Township of Irvington must comply with the provisions of this
chapter not later than 30 calendar days following completion of
construction or commencement of business operations, whichever
occurs first.
B. All existing residential and commercial businesses subject to this
chapter must comply with the requirements of this chapter by February
1, 2016.
C. A registrant must obtain a new certificate of registration within 30
calendar days after any change in the information contained in the
application for a certificate of registration for a residential or
commercial property, including, but not limited to, any changes in
ownership of the residential or commercial property, and any changes
in the registered agent, manager, or emergency contact person for the
residential or commercial property.246
243. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
244. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
245. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
246. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 464-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 464-5
1:605
§ 464-5. Certificate of registration.247
To obtain a certificate of registration for a residential or commercial
business, a person must submit to the police official a notarized application
on a form provided by the police official. The applicant must be the person
who will own, operate, or manage the residential or commercial property.
§ 464-6. Nature of application.248
The application for registration shall be made to the Division of Licensing on
a blank form prepared and furnished by the police official. Such application
shall give the name and physical post office address of the applicant, the
location of the residential or commercial property, the name of the owner
of the property and such other information as the Division of Licensing may
require to locate such business and its owners and to show compliance with
the provisions of this chapter and any other applicable laws or regulations
of the Township of Irvington.
§ 464-7. Issuance, denial, and display of certificate of
registration.249
§ 464-8. Fee.
The administrative fee for registration shall be $100.
§ 464-9. Expiration and renewal of certificate of registration.
A. The police official shall issue to the applicant a certificate of
registration for a residential or commercial property if the police
official determines that the applicant has complied with all
requirements for issuance of the certificate of registration.
B. A certificate of registration must be displayed in a conspicuous manner
and location in the residential or commercial property that is visible to
the public inside the store. The certificate of registration must be
presented upon request to the police official or any other designated
agents having responsibility for enforcement of this Code for
examination.
A. A certificate of registration for a residential or commercial property
expires December 31 of each calendar year.250
B. A registrant may apply for renewal within 30 calendar days prior to the
expiration of the certificate of registration by making application to the
police official. However, a certificate of registration must be renewed
within 10 days following expiration.
247. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
248. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
249. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
250. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 464-5 IRVINGTON CODE § 464-10
1:606
§ 464-10. Property inspections.
An applicant or registrant shall permit, at reasonable times upon request,
representatives any designated agent of the Township of Irvington to
inspect the interior and exterior of the subject property or business for
the purpose of ensuring compliance with this chapter and other Township
ordinances and state and federal laws applicable to commercial properties.
§ 464-11. Refusal to permit inspections.251
The applicant or registrant commits an offense if, either personally or
through an agent or employee, the applicant or registrant refuses to permit
a lawful inspection of the subject property or business as required by this
chapter or is found to be operating a residential or commercial property in
the Township of Irvington without being registered with the police official.
§ 464-12. Hours of operation for all new and existing commercial
properties; lighting. [Amended 1-28-2019 by Ord. No. MC 3682]
§ 464-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, corporation, limited-liability company, partnership or
other business entity or commercial establishment of any type whatsoever
violating the provisions of this section or any other sections in this chapter
shall, upon conviction, pay the below imposed fines:
A. No commercial property to which the public is invited shall be opened
to the public or conduct any such business, operations or activities in
any manner before 5:00 a.m. on any day and after 12:00 midnight on
the same day on Mondays through Thursdays, or after 1:00 a.m. on
Fridays through Sundays and legal holidays, subject to other municipal
ordinances which otherwise limit hours of operation for commercial
properties.
B. Except with respect to security lighting, in nonresidential areas all
exterior and window electrical lighting or illumination, whether
temporary or permanent, for each such business or commercial
establishment shall be extinguished at the closing time thereof, as
established herein. In residential areas, electronically illuminated signs
shall be turned off and shall not function from 9:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.,
daily.
A. First offense: $100 to $500.
B. Second offense: $500 to $1,000.
C. Third offense: $1,000 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or
both such fine and imprisonment. [Amended 3-13-2018 by Ord. No.
MC 3635]
251. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 464-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 464-14
1:607
§ 464-14. Notice. [Amended 3-13-2018 by Ord. No. MC 3635]
All new and unregistered existing businesses operating as a residential or
commercial property in the Township of Irvington shall be given notice of
this chapter by way of business registration notices provided through all
appropriate modes of communication as determined by the police official.
Chapter 467
RENTAL PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing standards — See Ch. 355.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 439.
Rent control — See Ch. 472.
§ 464-14 IRVINGTON CODE § 464-14
1:608
ARTICLE I
Receipt of Rents
[Adopted 4-23-1996 by Ord. No. MC 3034 (Ch. 150A, Art. I, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 467-1. On-premises facility for receipt of rent in certain buildings.
Landlords and/or management of apartment buildings containing 100 or
more units shall provide an on-premises facility for receipt of rents in the
form of checks or money orders during business hours and from Monday
through Saturday of each week.
§ 467-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 467-1
1:609
Chapter 472
RENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Rental property — See Ch. 467.
§ 472-1. Establishment of rents.
From and after the effective date of this chapter, no landlord in the
Township of Irvington shall charge any rent in excess of that which he
was charging as of the effective date hereof, except for such increases
as are provided herein. Establishment of rents charged on dwelling units
to which this chapter is applicable shall hereafter be determined by this
chapter. At the expiration of a lease or at the termination of the lease of a
periodic tenant, no landlord may request, charge or receive an increase in
rent greater than that allowed by Subsection A of this section. A periodic
tenant whose lease term is less than one year shall not be caused to pay
any increase in any twelve-month period which exceeds that allowed by
Subsection A of this section. No tenant shall be caused to pay more than
one increase in any twelve-month period.
A. The increase in rents permitted under this section shall be as follows:
(1) Where the landlord supplies heat to the dwelling unit, the increase
in rent shall not exceed 4% of the prior year's rent.
(2) Where the landlord does not supply heat to the dwelling unit, the
increase in rent shall not exceed 3% of the prior year's rent.
(3) An individual age 65 or older who is a sole tenant or living with
other adults all aged 65 or older within the unit shall be limited to a
2% increase annually regardless of whether the landlord provides
heat to the unit.
(4) Where a vacancy of a dwelling unit presently exists or occurs after
the effective date of this chapter, the provisions of Subsection A(1)
and (2) and (3) hereinabove shall not apply, and the rent for said
vacant dwelling unit shall be decontrolled until said dwelling unit is
again rented or leased at a new agreed rental rate. After one year
of said new rental, the increase in rent permitted for said new
tenancy shall be as set forth in Subsection A(1) and (2) and (3)
above.
B. The increase permitted under Subsection A herein shall be computed
upon the base rent charged the tenant and not upon the base rent plus
any hardship or capital surcharge granted under § 472-4 of this chapter
and collected for any specified period of time.
§ 467-1 IRVINGTON CODE § 472-1
1:610
§ 472-2. Notification of rental increase.
Any landlord who shall increase rents as provided in § 472-1 hereof shall
give notice to his tenants by any reasonable means of said increase;
provided, however, that when said notice is not mailed to the tenant's
residence, delivery is not considered to have been accomplished unless a
C. A landlord shall not be entitled to request, charge or receive any tax
surcharge by reason of increase in municipal property taxes.
D. Tenants of any residential properties may present a written petition
signed by a majority of the tenants and consented to by the landlord of
the property agreeing to a specific rent surcharge for a specific purpose
or project, and providing for the landlord's permission to permit the
tenant's representative to review the expenditures involved for the
particular purpose or project surcharge. Each dwelling unit shall be
considered a single tenant for the purposes of this subsection. If the
aforementioned surcharge is approved by the Rent Leveling Officer, the
surcharges shall run for maximum of two years, if so provided. If there
are in existence joint agreements which have been in existence for
more than two years, they shall expire within 60 days after the effective
passage of this amendment.
E. Unbundling.
(1) A landlord shall not be allowed to unbundle service in order to
defeat the intent of this chapter.
(a) "Unbundling" shall include, but not be limited to,
subcontracting or providing for a separate charge for parking.
Unbundling shall also include changing the term(s) of any
previously received security deposit by increasing the amount
to be deposited with the landlord beyond the amount agreed to
in the original lease or in the event of valid rent increases
requiring a tenant to deposit more than the proportional
increase of deposit which would make the security deposit
consistent with the terms of the original lease.
(b) Any person or persons residing as a tenant on the effective
date of said unbundling shall be entitled to remain in their
then-existing status as long as they shall remain as a tenant.
(2) Fines may be levied on a daily basis for anyone found to be in
violation of this section. Each day the violation continues to exist
can be treated as a separate violation subject to a daily fine. Fines
shall be issued by the Rent Leveling Officer and/or designee.
F. Fees for late payment of rent and bounced checks. Prospectively, upon
renewal of a lease or upon entering a new lease, the landlord shall
include a provision in the lease agreement limiting fees for payment of
rent by the tenant more than seven days late to a maximum of $50 and
limiting fees for bounced checks to a maximum of $25.
§ 472-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 472-2
1:611
signed receipt is obtained from the tenant or his representative. If a tenant
is notified by mail other than certified or registered mail, the landlord or
his representative shall certify in writing that he mailed the notice to the
tenant. Said certification shall be retained for a period of three years.
§ 472-3. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
§ 472-4. Hardship or capital improvement relief.
A. Motels, hotels and similar dwellings.
B. Dwellings of two units or less.
C. Dwellings of three and four units, at least one of which is occupied by
one or more of the owners thereof.
D. Dwellings subject to rent control or stabilization under any state or
federal law.
E. With respect to the unbundling provisions set forth in § 472-1E only,
dwellings developed pursuant to a general development plan approved
by the Planning Board and subject to a redevelopment agreement with
the Township.
A. If, as the result of circumstances which he could not reasonably have
foreseen or anticipated or which are beyond his/her control, a landlord
is unable to earn a fair rate of return on his investment, he may appeal
to the Rent Leveling Officer (hereafter "RLO") for an increase in rent in
excess of that permitted under § 472-1 hereof, via an application to be
developed by the RLO. In connection with any appeal filed hereunder,
the landlord shall prove his expenses of operation, including but not
limited to payment of the purchase money mortgage or mortgages and
any subsequent mortgages, the proceeds of which were used for major
capital improvements as defined in Subsection B of this section, fuel,
utilities, taxes, sewer user charges, maintenance and repairs, a
management fee not to exceed 5% of gross rents, and related charges.
Management fees may be allowed as an expense, whether paid to the
landlord or a management company. For good cause shown, the RLO
may grant either an increase in the rent charged or permit the landlord
to receive a surcharge to be collected for a specified period of time only
in order to enable the landlord to earn said fair rate of return.
B. Major capital improvement surcharge.
(1) A major capital improvement consists of a substantial change in the
housing accommodations such as would materially increase the
rental value in a normal market and will provide tenants with a
benefit or service which they had not previously enjoyed.
Replacement of facilities, materials or equipment so as to maintain
§ 472-2 IRVINGTON CODE § 472-4
1:612
§ 472-5. Compliance.
No application made pursuant to § 472-4A of this chapter may be heard by
the Board unless attached thereto is an informational certificate or report
of inspection issued by the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs
the same level of services as previously provided or bargained for
shall not constitute a major capital improvement.
(2) Major capital improvement adjustment.
(a) A landlord may seek a rent surcharge for a major capital
improvement. Any landlord seeking a major capital
improvement surcharge shall apply to the Rent Leveling
Officer and pay the application fee of $75, via the aboveproposed
application, which the RLO shall, upon a showing of
satisfactory proof, determine if said improvement is a major
capital improvement and, if so, shall permit such surcharge. In
no event shall any surcharge permitted under this section
exceed the annual cost of the capital improvement per room
multiplied by the number of rooms occupied by the tenant, or
exceed 15% of the tenant's base rent, whichever is the lesser.
The surcharge may be granted for the entire premises or the
particular units benefited by the improvement.
(b) Any major capital improvement surcharge granted by the RLO
shall be paid in equal monthly installments over the period set
by the RLO.
C. No application filed pursuant to Subsection A or B of this section may
be heard by the RLO unless the landlord shall have attached to his
application proof under oath that he has given notice of same to all
affected tenants by posting a copy thereof in the front lobby or
entranceway to the premises and by mailing same at least two weeks
prior to the first scheduled hearing of the matter by the RLO. Said
notice, a copy of which shall be attached to said application, shall
clearly set forth the content and basis of the application. Notice of
application for relief pursuant to Subsection B of this section shall
include the total cost of the completed capital improvement, the
number of years of useful life of the improvement as claimed by the
landlord for purposes of depreciation for income tax purposes, the
actual cost of the improvement, the total number of square feet of the
dwelling or unit affected, the total square feet occupied by the tenant, if
applicable, and the capital improvement surcharge he is seeking from
each tenant.
D. No hardship or capital improvement increase or surcharge may be
granted unless the landlord shall have held title to the premises in
question for a period of at least one year prior to the date of his
application for said relief, unless, for good cause shown, the RLO
waives this requirement.
§ 472-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 472-5
1:613
or the Department of Housing Services pursuant to § 355-26 of this Code
not more than 18 months prior to the date of said application. No such
application may be approved by the Board unless the Board shall have first
determined that there are no substantial violations of the health, safety or
housing laws, codes or regulations of the Township of Irvington affecting
said premises. In the event that said informational certificate or report of
inspection discloses substantial violations of said laws, codes or regulations,
the Board may approve such application; conditioned, however, upon the
submission by the landlord within 180 days of said conditional approval
of an informational certificate or report of inspection indicating that all of
said violations have been corrected. Failure to submit said supplemental
certificate or report within 180 days shall render any conditional approval
void as of the date granted, and any hardship rent increase or surcharge
collected during said period of time shall be returned forthwith to the
tenant.
§ 472-6. Rent Leveling Officer.
In order to administer the provisions of this chapter, the prior authority
exercised under the auspices of the Rent Leveling Board within the
Township of Irvington shall be exercised by the Rent Leveling Officer.
§ 472-7. Acts to cause tenant to vacate prohibited.
No landlord of dwelling units to which this chapter is applicable shall do, or
cause to be done, any act or thing with the intent to cause a tenant to vacate
said dwelling unit in order that said dwelling unit shall become vacant
and no longer subject to this chapter as provided by § 151-3E252 hereof. In
any proceeding instituted by a tenant under this section, the reduction of
standards of service, maintenance, health and safety conditions, furniture,
furnishings or equipment in and for said dwelling unit shall create a
rebuttable presumption that the act or thing done or caused to be done by
the landlord was done with the intent to cause said tenant to vacate said
dwelling unit.
§ 472-8. Powers of Rent Leveling Officer; landlord property/unit
registration.
The Rent Leveling Officer shall have the following powers:
A. To promulgate such rules and regulations as he/she deems necessary to
implement the purposes of this act, which rules and regulations shall be
approved by the Township of Irvington Council and have the force of
law until revised, repealed or amended from time to time by the
resolution of the Township of Irvington Council, in the exercise of his/
her discretion.
252. Editor's Note: Former § 151-3E, pertaining to dwelling units available for occupancy on or
after July 1, 1981, was repealed 4-9-1985 by Ord. No. MC 2777.
§ 472-5 IRVINGTON CODE § 472-8
1:614
B. To supply information and assistance to landlords and tenants to enable
them to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
C. To hold hearings and adjudicate applications by landlords for additional
rent or surcharges.
D. To hold hearings and consider complaints by tenants that the premises
is not in substantial compliance with the health, safety and housing
laws, codes and regulations of the Township of Irvington. In the event
that the Board determines that substantial violations of said laws, codes
and regulations exist, it may order the return to the tenant of all or any
portion of the increase provided for in § 472-1A and B hereof; provided,
however, that before ordering any such return of rent, the Board shall
afford the landlord 90 days within which to abate such violations.
E. To hold hearings and consider complaints that a landlord has violated
§ 472-7 of this chapter. For good cause shown, the Board may order that
said dwelling unit shall remain or again become, as the case may be,
subject to the provisions of this chapter for such period of time as the
Board considers just, the provisions of § 151-3E notwithstanding.253
F. To employ an attorney to attend meetings and advise and represent the
RLO, and such other consultants, including a certified or public
accountant, as the RLO may deem necessary or advisable upon
approval of the Rent Leveling Board.
G. To issue fines for any violations of Township Code, to rescind a
certificate of habitability, certificate of occupancy and/or take any other
action permitted under applicable code enforcement/housing/building
construction state or local laws, rules and regulations. In such
instances where the RLO shall pursue fines against a landlord for
violations and/or noncompliance with a ruling of the RLO, the RLO shall
seek restitution damages for the Township for any cost(s) incurred
outside the normal operations of the RLO and/or any additional staff of
the Township of Irvington to address the violation(s) and/or
noncompliance.
H. To afford both landlords and tenants reasonable opportunity to be
heard before making any determination.
I. Landlord property/unit registration.
(1) Between January 1 and March 3 of each calendar year, all owners
and/or landlords of dwellings shall file with the Township of
Irvington Department of Housing and Building Construction a new
landlord registration statement for each dwelling unit owned. An
owner and/or landlord who purchases a dwelling on or after April 1
of any year shall also file a landlord registration statement within
seven days of purchase. Owner(s) and/or landlords(s) entitled to an
253. Editor's Note: Former § 151-3E, pertaining to dwelling units available for occupancy on or
after July 1, 1981, was repealed 4-9-1985 by Ord. No. MC 2777.
§ 472-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 472-8
1:615
increase in the base rent as a result of improving vacant housing
spaces shall immediately file an amended landlord registration
statement.
(2) Every owner and/or landlord shall, within 90 days following the
effective date of this subsection or the creation of the first tenancy
in any dwelling containing five or more housing spaces, whether or
not subject to the restriction of rent increases in this chapter, file a
landlord registration statement with the Department of Housing
and Building Construction containing the following information.
(a) The name and address of the record owner or owners of the
dwelling and the record owner or owners of the rental business
if not the same person.
(b) If the record owner is a corporation, the name and address of
the registered agent and corporate officers of the corporation.
(c) If the address of any record owner or owners is not located in
the County of Essex, the name and address of a person who
resides in the County of Essex or has an office in the County of
Essex and is authorized to accept notices from tenants and to
issue receipts for notices from tenants to accept services of
process on behalf of the record owner or owners.
(d) The name and address of the managing agent of the dwelling,
if any.
(e) The name and address, including the dwelling unit, apartment
or room number, of the superintendent, janitor, custodian or
any other individual employed by the record owner or
managing agent to provide regular maintenance service if any.
(f) The name, address and telephone number of any individual
representative of the record owner or managing agent who
may be called at any time in case of an emergency affecting the
dwelling or any housing space within the dwelling, including
such emergencies as the failure of any essential service or
system, and who has the authority to make emergency
decisions concerning the building and any repair to the
building or expenditure in connection with the building.
(g) A list of the base monthly rents of each housing space, by
apartment or room number, within the dwelling as of the date
of registration.
J. Nonregistration penalty. The RLO shall have the authority to issue
penalties consistent with those authorized in § 472-8G for
noncompliance with the registration provision outlined above.
§ 472-8 IRVINGTON CODE § 472-9
1:616
§ 472-9. Appeals.
Decisions of the RLO may be appealed to the Rent Leveling Board, which
shall consistent of the seven-member Township of Irvington Municipal
Council. Any appeal(s) thereafter shall be filed with the courts in
accordance with the rules pertaining to administrative appeals.
§ 472-10. Fees.
Upon the filing of an application for relief to the Rent Leveling Board, the
applicant shall pay the following fees:
§ 472-11. Violations and penalties.
A willful violation of any provision of this chapter, including but not limited
to the willful filing with the RLO of any material misstatement of fact, shall
be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article III. A violation affecting
more than one dwelling unit shall be considered a separate violation as to
each such dwelling unit. If a landlord has been in violation of the chapter,
then the tenants shall have a remedy to receive a refund for an overcharge
retroactive to two years from the date of the complaint.
§ 472-12. Construal.
This chapter, being necessary for the welfare of the inhabitants of the
Township of Irvington, shall be liberally construed to effectuate the
purposes thereof.
§ 472-13. Complaints.
Any complaint by a tenant respecting a violation of this chapter shall be in
writing and filed with the Rent Leveling Board within one year from the date
of the violation; provided, however, that complaints filed pursuant to § 472-7
shall be filed within 60 days of the date of the last act or thing alleged to
violate said section. Failure to file within the aforesaid periods shall bar the
acceptance of the complaint by the Board.
§ 472-14. Repealer.
Ordinance No. MC 2597 is hereby repealed.254
A. For hardship or capital improvement relief, the fee shall be $5 per
dwelling unit, but not less than $25 nor more than $200.
B. For all other applications or complaints, the fee shall be $10.
C. The fee for a copy of this chapter shall be $2.50.
D. The fee for a copy of the hardship application forms shall be $2.
254. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. MC 2597 comprised former Ch. 151, Rent Control, of the
1981 Revised Ordinances of the Township of Irvington.
§ 472-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 472-14
1:617
Chapter 478
SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing procedure — See Ch. 290, Art. I.
Toy or imitation firearms — See Ch. 304, Art.
I.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 443.
§ 472-14 IRVINGTON CODE § 472-14
1:618
ARTICLE I
Going-Out-of-Business Sales
[Adopted 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622 as Ch. 158, Art. I, of the
1981 Revised Code]
§ 478-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
FIRE-AND-OTHER-ALTERED-GOODS SALE — A sale held out in such a
manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the sale will offer
goods damaged or altered by fire, smoke, water or other means.
GOODS — Any goods, wares, merchandise or other property capable of
being the object of a sale regulated under this article.
PUBLISH, PUBLISHING, ADVERTISEMENT, ADVERTISING — Any means
of conveying to the public notice of sale or notice of intention to conduct a
sale, whether by word of mouth, letter, newspaper advertisement, magazine
advertisement, handbill, written or printed notice, printed display, billboard
display or poster, whether in or away from the business location, radio
announcement and any other means, oral or written.
REMOVAL-OF-BUSINESS SALE — A sale held out in such a manner as to
reasonably cause the public to believe that the person conducting the sale
will cease and discontinue business at the place of sale upon disposal of
the stock of goods on hand and will then move to and resume business at a
new location in the Town or will then continue business from other existing
locations in the Town.
SALE — Shall mean but shall not be limited to the sale, or an offer to sell,
to the public, of goods, wares and merchandise of all kinds and descriptions
on hand and in stock in connection with a declared purpose, as set forth
by advertising, on the part of the seller, that such sale is anticipatory
to the termination, closing, liquidation, revision, windup, discontinuance,
conclusion or abandonment of the business in connection with such sale.
It shall also include any "sale" advertised to be an "adjustment sale,"
"creditor's sale," "executor's sale," "administrator's sale," "insolvent sale,"
"insurance salvage sale," "mortgage sale," "assignee's sale," "adjuster's
sale," "receiver's sale," "loss-of-lease sale," "wholesaler's closeout sale,"
"creditor's committee sale," "forced-out-of-business sale," "removal sale"
and all sales advertised in such manner as to reasonably convey to the
public that upon the disposal of the stock of goods on hand, the business
will cease and be discontinued.
§ 478-2. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful to sell, offer or expose for sale at any sale regulated by
this article, or to list on the inventory required by § 478-7, any stock which
is not the stock of the store or other place the business of which is to be
closed out by such sale for which a license has been granted, or to replenish
§ 478-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 478-2
1:619
or add to such stock for the purpose of disposal at such sale, or to fail,
neglect or refuse to keep accurate and true records of the initial stock, the
stock sold and the stock on hand.
§ 478-3. Hearings and investigations authorized.
The Municipal Council shall hold such hearings and make such
investigations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions and intent of
this article.
§ 478-4. Persons exempt.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to or affect the following
persons:
§ 478-5. Construal of provisions.
The provisions of this article are intended to augment and be in addition to
the other provisions of this Code and other applicable licensing ordinances
of the Town. Where this article imposes a greater restriction upon persons,
premises, businesses or other practices than is imposed by any other
provision of this Code or other licensing ordinance of the Town, then this
article shall control.
§ 478-6. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to publish, announce or conduct any sale
of the type or kind defined by this article without first obtaining a license
therefor in compliance with the provisions of this article.
§ 478-7. Application for license.
A person desiring to conduct a sale regulated by this article shall make a
written application to the License Clerk, setting forth and containing the
following information:
A. Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent
jurisdiction.
B. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
C. Duly licensed auctioneers, selling at auction.
D. Any publisher of a newspaper, magazine or other publication who
publishes in good faith any advertisement without knowledge of its
false, deceptive or misleading character or without knowledge that the
provisions of this article have not been complied with.
A. The true names and addresses of the owners of the goods to be the
object of the sale.
§ 478-2 IRVINGTON CODE § 478-7
1:620
§ 478-8. Fees. [Amended 3-25-1980 by Ord. No. MC 2601; 1-13-1981
by Ord. No. MC 2622; 3-27-1984 by Ord. No. MC 2723; 8-11-1987 by
Ord. No. MC 2834; 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3027; 12-14-1999 by
Ord. No. MC 3134; 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by
Ord. No. MC 3306; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413]
Any applicant for a license under this article shall submit to the License
Clerk with his application a license fee of $116. Any applicant for a renewal
license hereunder shall submit to the License Clerk with his renewal
application a renewal fee of $224.
§ 478-9. Term; renewal.
The license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall authorize
the sale described in the application for a period of not more than 30
consecutive days following the issuance thereof. Such license may be
renewed in the discretion of the Municipal Council for an additional period
of time not exceeding 30 days upon application being made for such
renewal, which application shall be accompanied by a revised inventory
showing the items listed on the original inventory remaining unsold and not
listing any goods not included in the original application and inventory.
§ 478-10. Assignability; transferability.
The license provided for by this article shall not be assignable or
transferable.
B. The true name and address of the person from whom the owner
purchased the goods to be sold and the price therefor, and if not
purchased, the manner of such acquisition.
C. A description of the place where such sale is to be held.
D. The nature of the occupancy, whether by lease or sublease, and the
effective date of termination of such occupancy.
E. The dates of the period of time in which the sale is to be conducted.
F. A full and complete statement of the facts in regard to the sale,
including the reason for the urgent and expeditious disposal of goods
thereby and the manner in which the sale will be conducted.
G. The means to be employed in advertising such sale, together with the
proposed content of any advertisement.
H. A complete and detailed inventory of the goods to be sold at such sale
as disclosed by the applicant's records. Such inventory shall be
attached to and become part of the application.
§ 478-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 478-11
1:621
§ 478-11. Authority of license: type of sale, location.
The license provided for by this article shall authorize only the type of sale
described in the application at the location named therein.
§ 478-12. Sale goods restricted.
The license provided for by this article shall authorize only the sale of the
goods described in the inventory attached to the application.
§ 478-13. Payment of taxes prerequisite to issuance.
No license authorized under this article shall be issued unless personal
property taxes owed by the applicant are paid to the date of the application
for such license.
§ 478-14. Duties of licensees.
A licensee under this article shall:
§ 478-15. Surrender of other business licenses.
Upon being issued a license under this article for a going-out-of-business
sale, the licensee shall surrender to the License Clerk all other business
licenses he may hold at that time applicable to the location and goods
covered by the application for a license under this article.
A. Make no additions whatsoever during the period of the license sale to
the stock of goods set forth in the inventory attached to the application
for license.
B. Refrain from employing any untrue, deceptive or misleading
advertising.
C. Conduct the licensed sale in strict conformity with any advertising or
holding out incident thereto.
D. Keep available at the place of sale a duplicate copy of the inventory
submitted with the application and present such duplicate to inspecting
officials upon request.
E. Keep any other goods separate and apart from the goods listed in the
filed inventory as being objects of sale and make such distinction clear
to the public by placing tags on all inventoried goods in and about the
place of sale, apprising the public of the status of all such goods.
F. Display the license issued pursuant to this article in a prominent place
on the window of the premises where the sale is to be held so that it is
clearly visible from the exterior of such premises.
G. Keep suitable books and records at the place of sale and make the same
available for inspection by the Municipal Council or its authorized
representative.
§ 478-11 IRVINGTON CODE § 478-16
1:622
§ 478-16. New businesses not eligible for license.
Any person who has not been the owner of a business advertised or
described in the application for a license under this article for a period
of at least six months prior to the date of the proposed sale shall not be
granted a license under this article; provided that upon the death of a
person doing business in the Town, his heirs, devisees or legatees, executor
or administrator shall have the right to apply at any time for a license
hereunder.
§ 478-17. Time lapse between licenses for same location.
Any person who has held a sale as regulated under this article at the
location stated in the application within one year last past from the date of
such application shall not be granted a license under this article.
§ 478-18. Scope of license.
Where a person applying for a license under this article operates more
than one place of business, the license issued shall apply only to the one
store or branch specified in the application and no other store or branch
shall advertise or represent that it is cooperating with it or in any way
participating in the licensed sale, nor shall the store or branch conducting
the licensed sale advertise or represent that any other store or branch is
cooperating with it or participating in any way in the licensed sale.
§ 478-19. Grounds for revocation of license.
A license or renewal thereof issued pursuant to this article may be revoked
by the Municipal Council, after notice and hearing, for any of the following
reasons:
§ 478-20. Notice of hearing on revocation.
Notice of hearing for revocation of a license issued pursuant to this article
shall be given, in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the
A. Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application.
B. Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made as to the
inventory, stock sold or stock on hand.
C. Any violation of this article.
D. Conviction of the licensee of any felony or of a misdemeanor involving
moral turpitude.
E. Conducting the business licensed under this article in an unlawful
manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to
constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the
public.
§ 478-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 478-20
1:623
complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be
mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at his last known address at least
five days prior to the date set for the hearing.
§ 478-21. Suspension of license.
A license issued pursuant to this article may be suspended for not more than
five days by the Municipal Council upon probable cause being shown that
the license should be revoked.
§ 478-20 IRVINGTON CODE § 478-21
1:624
ARTICLE II
Garage Sales
[Adopted 11-9-1977 by Ord. No. MC 2513 (Ch. 158, Art. II, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 478-22. Definitions. [Amended 3-27-1984 by Ord. No. MC 2723]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FLEA MARKET SALE — Includes special sales of personal property and
goods advertised as such by the licensee at such times and places regulated
by the provisions of this Code and conducted and advertised by such
individuals, partnerships, voluntary associations and nonprofit corporations
to whom a permit and license has been granted for the specific locations
and dates set forth.
GARAGE SALE — Includes all sales entitled "garage sale," "lawn sale," "attic
sale" or "rummage sale" or any similar casual sale of tangible personal
property owned by the licensee, which personal property offered for sale
has not been purchased or acquired by the licensee for the purpose of
resale. "Garage sales" may be conducted by owners or lessees or occupants
at the premises licensed.
GOODS — Includes new or used merchandise owned by the licensee and
permitted for sale subject to the prohibitions set forth in this article and
those prohibited under the health, safety, and police laws of the state and
the provisions of the Township Code.
§ 478-23. License required; fee. [Amended 4-11-1978 by Ord. No.
MC 2528; 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622; 3-27-1984 by Ord. No.
MC 2723; 8-11-1987 by Ord. No. MC 2834; 12-12-1995 by Ord. No.
MC 3027; 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3134; 8-14-2001 by Ord. No.
MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by Ord. No. MC 3306; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No.
MC 3413]
§ 478-24. Term and display of license; duration of sale.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a garage sale in the Town
of Irvington without first filing with the License Clerk the information
hereinafter specified and obtaining from such Clerk a license so to do,
to be known as a "garage sales license."
B. The fee for a license to conduct a garage sale or a flea market sale shall
be $25, provided that institutions and organizations mentioned and
eligible under § 478-30E shall be exempt from paying said license fee.
[Amended 2-24-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3527255]
255. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 478-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 478-24
1:625
§ 478-25. Information required.
The information to be filed with the License Clerk pursuant to this article
shall be as follows:
§ 478-26. Maintenance of good order and conduct. [Amended
10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553; 1-12-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3562]
The person to whom such license is issued and the owner or tenant of
the premises on which such sale or activity is conducted shall be jointly
and severally responsible for the maintenance of good order and decorum
on the premises during all hours of such sale or activity. No such persons
shall permit any loud or boisterous conduct on said premises, nor permit
vehicles to impede the passage of traffic on any roads or streets in the area
of such premises. All such persons shall obey the reasonable orders of any
member of the Public Safety Department of the Town of Irvington in order
to maintain the public health, safety and welfare. All licensed premises
shall at all times be subject to such reasonable rules as may be made from
time to time by the Municipal Council of the Town of Irvington and shall
be subject to inspection at all times by the Building Inspector, Director
of Public Safety and Fire Chief or any of their agents or any other duly
authorized representative of the Town of Irvington.
§ 478-27. Hours of sale.
All garage sales shall be conducted between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. only.
A. Such license shall be issued to cover any location not more than twice
within a twelve-month period, and no such license shall be issued for
more than two consecutive calendar days.
B. Each license issued under this article must be prominently displayed on
the premises and visible from the street upon which the garage sale is
conducted throughout the entire period of the licensed sale.
A. Name of person, firm, group, corporation, association or organization
conducting said sale.
B. Name of owner or lessee of the property on which said sale is to be
conducted.
C. Location at which sale is to be conducted.
D. Number of days of sale.
E. Date, nature of any past sale.
F. Sworn statement or affirmation by the person signing that the
information therein given is full and true and known to him to be so.
§ 478-24 IRVINGTON CODE § 478-28
1:626
§ 478-28. Advertising signs.
No signs for advertising or directing customers are to be posted on any
place other than premises of applicant. The sign is not to exceed two feet
by two feet in size and cannot be placed on the premises earlier than one
week prior to the sale and must be removed within 24 hours after the sale
has terminated.
§ 478-29. Prohibited articles of sale.
It shall be unlawful for any person to offer for sale mattresses, bedsprings,
cots, lounges and sofas in any garage sale authorized under this article.
§ 478-30. Persons and sales excepted.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to or affect the following
persons or sales:
§ 478-31. Enforcement. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC
3553]
This article shall be enforced by the License Clerk and the Public Safety
Department. It shall be the duty of the License Clerk to investigate any
A. Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
B. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
C. Any person selling or advertising for sale an item or items of personal
property which are specifically named or described in the
advertisement and which separate items do not exceed five in number.
D. Any sale conducted by any merchant or mercantile or other business
establishment from or at a place of business wherein such sale would be
permitted by the zoning regulations of the Town of Irvington256 or under
the protection of the nonconforming use section thereof, or any other
sale conducted by a manufacturer, dealer or vendor and which sale
would be conducted from properly zoned premises and not otherwise
prohibited in the ordinances.
E. Any bona fide charitable, eleemosynary, educational, cultural or
governmental institution or organization; provided, however, that the
burden of establishing the exemption under this subsection shall be on
the organization or institution claiming such exemption; and provided
further that said institutions and organizations shall be limited to two
such garage sales in any twelve-month period and no such license shall
be issued for more than two consecutive days. [Amended 4-11-1978
by Ord. No. MC 2528]
256. Editor's Note: See Ch. 650, Zoning.
§ 478-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 478-31
1:627
violations of this article coming to his attention, whether by complaint or
arising from his own personal knowledge, and if a violation is found to exist,
he shall prosecute a complaint before the local Municipal Court pursuant
to the provisions of this article. It shall be the duty of the Public Safety
Department of the Town of Irvington to bring to the attention of the License
Clerk for further investigation any violations of this article of which the
Public Safety Department becomes aware during the course of its normal
duties.
§ 478-32. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord. No.
MC 2622; 9-8-1987 by Ord. No. MC 2835257]
A. Any person, association or corporation conducting any such sale or
similar activity without being properly licensed therefor or who shall
violate any of the other terms and regulations of this article shall be
subject to the following penalties:
(1) For the first violation: a fine of $50.
(2) For the second violation: a fine of $250.
(3) For the third violation: a fine of $500.
(4) For the fourth violation: a fine of $1,000. In addition, a mandatory
court appearance is required for the fourth violation.
B. Each day that such sale shall continue without being duly licensed shall
be considered a separate violation.
257. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 478-31 IRVINGTON CODE § 478-32
1:628
Chapter 483
SANITARY SEWER LATERALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 499. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 555.
§ 483-1. Responsibility for maintenance.
The property owner shall be responsible to maintain the sanitary sewer
lateral.
§ 483-2. Permit required. [Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC
3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
No person, firm or corporation shall repair, relay, construct or reconstruct
a sanitary sewer lateral in the area of any municipal roadway without
first obtaining a permit from the Department of Public Works. The repair,
relaying or construction of any laterals within the street right-of-way can
only be undertaken by a plumber licensed by the State of New Jersey.
§ 483-3. Fees and costs.
The applicant for such permit shall pay a street opening fee as provided
in § 555-15 of the Irvington Township Code, except that, on Essex County
roads, the applicant obtain work permits as required by the Essex County
Department of Public Works.
Chapter 491
SECONDHAND DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing procedure — See Ch. 290, Art. I.
Junk dealers — See Ch. 360.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 443.
Sales — See Ch. 478.
§ 478-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 483-3
1:629

ARTICLE I
Used Precious Metals, Gems and Jewelry
[Adopted 12-28-1982 by Ord. No. MC 2681 (Ch. 159, Art. I, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 491-1. Prohibited acts.
No person shall engage in the business of buying used or secondhand
precious metals, natural and synthetic gems and all forms of previously
owned jewelry, without first obtaining a license as provided herein.
§ 491-2. Licenses. [Amended 1-12-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3562]
§ 491-3. Investigations. [Amended 1-12-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3562]
The Director of Public Safety shall cause a background investigation to be
made of each applicant for a license. He may require the applicant to supply
such information necessary to obtain such investigation and shall require
the fingerprints of applicants. No person may obtain such a license if a
review of his background reveals a conviction for dealing in or possessing
A. Each person conducting such business shall apply to the Division of
Licensing for a license. Each business address maintained by a person
subject to § 491-1 shall be individually licensed. Where such person
maintains no permanent business address in the Township of Irvington
but purchases used or secondhand precious metals, gems or jewelry
within the Township of Irvington, on a regular basis, said person shall
also be subject to the license provision of this article. For the purpose of
this section, two or more purchases within any twelve-month period
shall constitute doing business on a regular basis.
B. Such license shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of
issue and shall be displayed in plain view at the licensed premises.
Where the person has no business premises within the Township of
Irvington, the license shall be carried on his person and shall be
displayed upon the request of the Director of Public Safety or his
designee. The license shall cover the individual licensee and, where
appropriate, the specific premises listed as the place of business in the
license application. Where a person does business in the Township of
Irvington but has no business premises in the Township, each employee
engaged within the Township of Irvington, in the aforesaid business,
shall be licensed.
C. All persons employed at the licensed premises are deemed to be
licensed, provided that they are listed on the license application. The
Director of Public Safety shall be notified of changes in personnel
within seven days of such change.
D. It shall be the duty of every licensee to provide the Director of Public
Safety with his residential address and to notify him of any change of
address within seven days.
§ 491-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 491-3
1:631
or participating in the sale, distribution of or the receiving of any stolen
property, or offenses relating thereto, or conviction of any indictable
offense.
§ 491-4. Maintenance of records.
§ 491-5. Identification of person from whom purchase is made.
§ 491-6. Receipts; records open to inspection.
A. Every licensee shall keep a bound book, in a form prescribed by the
Director of Public Safety, of consecutively numbered transactions, in
which shall be legibly written in English at the time of every purchase
from a person a complete and detailed description of every article so
purchased, the number or numbers and any trademark, monogram,
inscription or other marks of identification thereon, the size, color and
description of any natural or synthetic gem, the name and residence
address of the person from whom such purchase was made, the day and
hour of the purchase, the name and address of the person to whom such
article is sold, traded or the ownership thereof is otherwise transferred,
and such other information as the Director of Public Safety may
require. [Amended 1-12-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3562]
B. Such books shall be kept on the business premise of the licensee or at
the place designated on the duly approved license at all times during
normal business hours.
A. It shall be the duty of every licensee to verify the identity of every
person from whom he purchases an article, and to make and keep a
written record of the nature of the evidence submitted by such person
to prove his identity.
B. Only the following shall be deemed acceptable evidence of identity:
(1) Any official document, except a social security account number
card, issued by the United States government, any state, county,
municipality or subdivision thereof, any public agency or
department thereof, or any public or private employer, which
requires and bears the signature of the person to whom issued.
(2) Other identification documentation which, under the
circumstances of any particular purchase, would lead a reasonable
man to believe it to be accurate and reliable, when other
identification is not available.
C. It shall be the duty of every licensee to require that every person from
whom an article is purchased sign his name in the presence of the
licensee, and to compare the signature with the signature of the
identifying document, if any, and retain on his premises the person's
signature together with the number and description of the identifying
document, if any.
§ 491-3 IRVINGTON CODE § 491-6
1:632
§ 491-7. Disposing of articles.
No licensee shall melt, change the form of, sell or otherwise dispose of any
articles purchased or received within five days of such purchase or receipt,
and all such articles shall remain on the premises where the purchase was
made for at least five days.
§ 491-8. License fee. [Amended 8-11-1987 by Ord. No. MC 2834;
12-12-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3027; 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3134;
8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by Ord. No. MC 3306;
12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413]
The fee for a license for a person engaged in the business of buying used
precious metals, gems and jewelry shall be $342 initially and $197 annually
thereafter, provided that transactions listed in § 491-9 shall be exempt from
paying said license fee.
§ 491-9. Exempt transactions.
The sale or other disposition by a licensed dentist of gold or silver amalgams
used in dentistry is exempt from the provisions of this article.
A. Every licensee shall issue to the seller and keep for his own records a
serialized receipt which shall bear the following legend legibly printed
in ten-point type or larger: "Warning: This receipt and other records
relating to this transaction are subject to inspection by the Irvington
Public Safety Department." [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC
3553]
B. All receipts, records and other documents required by this article shall
be open to inspection by the Director of Public Safety or his designee.
[Amended 1-12-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3562]
§ 491-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 491-9
1:633
Chapter 499
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bureau of Sewer User Charge
Collections — See § 7-91.
Division of Streets and Sewers — See § 7-133.
Sanitary sewer laterals — See Ch. 483.
Subdivision and site plan review — See Ch.
560.
Zoning — See Ch. 650.
§ 491-9 IRVINGTON CODE § 491-9
1:634
ARTICLE I
User Charges
[Adopted 12-13-1977 by Ord. No. MC 2517 (Ch. 161, Art. I, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 499-1. Municipalities constituting Joint Meeting.
"Joint Meeting" shall mean the municipalities of the City of East Orange, the
Township of Hillside, the Town of Irvington, the Township of Maplewood,
the Township of Millburn, the City of Newark, the Borough of Roselle Park,
the Village of South Orange, the City of Summit, the Township of Union
and the Town of West Orange, organized in Joint Meeting pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:63-68 et seq., under the terms of a contract dated June 1, 1926,
as amended and supplemented, in the matter of a joint trunk and outlet
sewer and treatment plant for the sewage wastewater emanating from said
municipalities.
§ 499-2. Purpose of article.
The purpose of this article is to impose an annual user charge, as
hereinafter defined, on all domestic, commercial, industrial, institutional
and governmental users of the sewer system of the Town of Irvington, New
Jersey, which sewage, contributed thereto and flowing therein, is collected
and treated by said Joint Meeting.
§ 499-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
USER CHARGE — The charge levied upon all users of the treatment works
for the annual cost of operation and maintenance, including replacements,
of such trunk lines and such works, all as defined in the federal rules and
regulations.
§ 499-4. Charges imposed; basis for determination.
A. All residential, commercial, industrial, institutional and governmental
users shall be charged at a uniform rate per dwelling unit for domestic
waste contributed to said system. In the case of commercial, industrial
or multifamily residential units, the charge shall be based upon
equivalent dwelling units.
B. The user charges shall be based upon the table promulgated by the
Joint Meeting of Essex and Union Counties, a copy of which table is
attached hereto and made a part hereof.258 [Amended 8-14-1979 by
Ord. No. MC 2575]
258. Editor's Note: The table referred to is included in § 499-4B.
§ 499-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 499-4
1:635
Joint Meeting of Essex and Union Counties
Schedule of "Dwelling Units"
Type of Establishment
Measurement
Unit
Condition Constituting
One Equivalent
Dwelling Unit
Private dwelling Person* 3.5 people (fixed)
Apartment buildings Apartment 1 apartment
Transient dwelling units
Hotels Bedroom 4 bedrooms
Lodging houses and
tourist homes
Bedroom 5 bedrooms
Motels and tourist
cabins
Bedroom 5 bedrooms
Boardinghouses
(resident)
Bedroom 7 bedrooms
Camps
Trailer camps (private
bath)
Person* 4 people
Children's camps
(central bath, etc.)
Person* 7 people
Day camps, no meals Person* 20 people
Restaurants (including
washrooms)
Average type Seats 20 seats
Bar and cocktail
lounges
Seats 70 seats
Short-order or drive-in
service
Patron* 70 patrons
Clubhouses
Residential type Person* 4 people
Nonresidential
(serving meals)
Person* 10 people
Institutions
Hospitals Person or beds 2 people or beds
Other institutions Person or beds 3 people or beds
Schools
Elementary (no
shower or cafeteria)
Person* 35 people
With cafeteria Person* 25 people
§ 499-4 IRVINGTON CODE § 499-4
1:636
Joint Meeting of Essex and Union Counties
Schedule of "Dwelling Units"
Type of Establishment
Measurement
Unit
Condition Constituting
One Equivalent
Dwelling Unit
With cafeteria and
showers
Person* 20 people
With cafeteria,
showers and
laboratories
Person* 15 people
Boarding Person* 5 people
Automobile service
stations
No car washing Car served
(average
number)
70 cars served
Car washing Car washed
(average
number)
4 cars washed
Miscellaneous
Stores, shopping
centers and office
buildings
Square foot 2,800 square feet
Factories (8-hour
shift)
Person* 14 people
Self-service laundries Wash (average
number)
7 washes
Bowling alleys Alley 2 alleys
Swimming pools and
beaches
Person* 25 people
Picnic parks (with
flush toilets)
Person* 35 people
Fairgrounds (based
upon average
attendance)
Person* 70 people
Assembly halls Seat 70 seats
Airports (based on
passenger use)
Passenger* 115 passengers
Churches Seat 120 seats
Theater (indoor) Seat 70 seats
§ 499-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 499-4
1:637
Joint Meeting of Essex and Union Counties
Schedule of "Dwelling Units"
Type of Establishment
Measurement
Unit
Condition Constituting
One Equivalent
Dwelling Unit
Theater (drive-in with
food stand)
Car 70 cars
* Any measurement unit designated as "person" should be
interpreted on a design or average number basis.
C. "Domestic use or waste" is hereby defined to be domestic wastewater
from sanitary conveniences.
D. Industrial waste.
(1) User charges for industrial waste shall be charged industrial waste
contributors who discharge industrial waste into the system. User
charges for industrial waste shall be based upon the flow,
suspended solids and biochemical oxygen demand of the waste as
determined by the Joint Meeting. Sampling and measurement shall
be accomplished by each industrial discharger at its own expense
and the results thereof shall be monitored by the Joint Meeting
staff. Where deemed necessary by the Joint Meeting, permanent
measurement and sampling facilities shall be installed by the
industrial user at its own expense.
(2) The rate of charges shall be determined annually by resolution of
the Joint Meeting. For the first year of operation of the secondary
treatment facilities, the Joint Meeting shall make an estimate of the
rate of charges based upon the results of an industrial cost
recovery/heavy metals survey and shall embody the estimated first
year of operation charges in a resolution to be adopted.
(3) User charges for industrial waste shall be assessed only where
sampling and testing show that industrial waste from a particular
industrial waste contributor exceeds 2,000 gallons per day or
where the suspended solids contribution exceeds 50 pounds per
day or where the biochemical oxygen demand contribution exceeds
50 pounds per day.
E. The cost of sampling and testing by the Joint Meeting, as referred to in
Subsection D(1) and (3) herein, shall be assessed against each
industrial waste contributor on the basis of the actual cost thereof.
F. "Industrial waste" is hereby defined to be nondomestic wastewater flow
resulting from industrial processing and manufacturing and including
cooling water discharge.
§ 499-4 IRVINGTON CODE § 499-4
1:638
§ 499-5. Liability for payment; when due; interest; lien; collection;
disposition.
§ 499-6. Number and classification of users.
For the purpose of determining said user charges, the number and
classification of all users of said sewage system shall be made by the
Town of Irvington, New Jersey. Said determination shall be subject to audit,
review and redetermination by the Joint Meeting.
G. Where an industry has both domestic wastes and industrial wastes and
said wastes are comingled and so discharged into the sewer system, the
industrial waste charge as set forth in Subsection D(1) shall apply. Any
industry may, at its option and at its own cost and expense, separate its
industrial waste from its domestic waste and provide separate
connections to the municipal sewer system for each such type of waste.
If an industry exercises this option of separation of wastes as herein set
forth, the schedule of dwelling units as provided for in Subsection B
herein shall be applicable to its domestic waste flow, and the rates set
forth in Subsection D(1) shall be applicable to its industrial waste flow
and use.
H. User charges shall be determined annually by resolution of the Joint
Meeting and shall be based upon actual usage for the preceding year.
However, for the first year of operation of the joint trunk sewer system,
said user charges shall be based upon an estimate of the cost of
operation thereof and shall be set forth in a resolution to be adopted by
the Joint Meeting.
A. All charges established and provided for herein shall be assessed
against the owners of the property from which sewage or wastewater
emanates, respectively, and shall be collected annually by the Township
of Irvington, New Jersey, and shall be paid by the user on or before
March 1, except for such other date as may be established by
resolution. The bills shall be accompanied by an explanation of the
charges. [Amended 8-14-1979 by Ord. No. MC 2575; 12-26-1996
by Ord. No. MC 3054; 3-9-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3109]
B. Such charges shall draw the same interest from the time they become
due as taxes upon real estate in the municipality and shall be a lien
upon the premises until paid, and the municipality shall have the same
remedies for the collection thereof, with interest, costs and penalties as
it has by law for the collection of taxes upon real estate.
C. All sums collected under the terms of this article shall be applied by the
Town of Irvington, New Jersey, for reimbursement of such sums
advanced by it to the Joint Meeting as the result of estimates made and
assessments levied by said Joint Meeting for the cost of operation and
maintenance of the joint trunk sewer and treatment works, including
appurtenances, as set forth in § 499-8 hereof.
§ 499-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 499-7
1:639
§ 499-7. Initial payment.
The user charge referred to herein shall be due and payable from and after
the first day of January following the completion of the secondary treatment
facilities by the Joint Meeting.
§ 499-8. Adherence to statutory provisions.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this article and the Federal Water
Pollution Act of 1972259 requiring the imposition of user charges as defined
herein, as set forth in said Act, and as provided for in the rules and
regulations of the EPA, and without intending to interfere with or
contravene the provisions and requirements of the imposition of said user
charges as herein and therein defined, it is the express intention of the
Town of Irvington, New Jersey, to adhere to and comply with the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:63-116 providing for "annual expenses; estimated and
apportioned; additional expenses if necessary," in order that the Joint
Meeting may thereby by enabled to continue and perform its normal
functions.
259. Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1251.
§ 499-7 IRVINGTON CODE § 499-8
1:640
ARTICLE II
Cost Recovery Charges for Industrial Users
[Adopted 12-13-1977 by Ord. No. MC 2518 (Ch. 161, Art. II, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 499-9. Municipalities constituting Joint Meeting.
"Joint Meeting" shall mean the municipalities of the City of East Orange, the
Township of Hillside, the Town of Irvington, the Township of Maplewood,
the Township of Millburn, the City of Newark, the Borough of Roselle Park,
the Village of South Orange, the City of Summit, the Township of Union and
the Town of West Orange, organized in Joint Meeting pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:63-68 et seq., under the terms of a contract dated June 1, 1926, as
amended and supplemented, in the matter of a joint outlet and trunk sewer
and treatment plant for the sewage emanating from said municipalities.
§ 499-10. Purpose of article.
The purpose of this article is to impose an industrial cost recovery charge,
as hereinafter defined, on all industrial users of the Joint Meeting system,
and to provide for the collection of said charges.
§ 499-11. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY CHARGE — The recovery from industrial
users of the treatment works of the federal grant portion of the cost of
construction of the treatment works, allocable to the treatment of waste
contributed by such users, as defined in the federal statutes and
regulations. The portion allocable to each such user shall be payable in
equal annual installments in the sum of 1/30 of said portion for a period of
30 years, after which said payments shall cease and come to an end.
§ 499-12. Charge assessed; basis for determination; reports.
A. An annual minimum industrial cost recovery charge shall be assessed
against all industrial waste contributors discharging industrial wastes
into the system in the sum of $100, unless said industrial waste
contributor is subject to a greater charge under the terms of this
article.
B. The annual industrial cost recovery charge shall be a fixed cost per
million gallons of flow, a fixed cost per pound for suspended solids and/
or a fixed cost per pound of biochemical oxygen demand, as shown
following:
Flow $240 Cost/1,000 gallons
BOD $85 Cost/pound of BOD
§ 499-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 499-12
1:641
§ 499-13. Installation of monitoring facilities.
The Joint Meeting, at its option, may require an industry to install metering
and monitoring facilities at the expense of the industry involved for the
purpose of obtaining representative samples of an industry's wastewater
contribution to the Joint Meeting System.
§ 499-14. Access to premises for sampling.
§ 499-15. Exempt industries.
Industries whose sole flow consists of the discharge from sanitary
conveniences are exempt from industrial cost recovery charges upon
satisfactorily demonstrating to the Joint Meeting that they qualify as a
nonprocess "dry industry."
SS $75 Cost/pound of SS
C. Industries which on any day exceed a flow of 2,000 gallons or 20 pounds
per day of five-day biochemical oxygen demand or 20 pounds per day of
suspended solids shall, on a quarterly basis, report said flow, five-day
biochemical oxygen demand or suspended solids concentration to the
Joint Meeting for the purposes of determining the annual cost recovery
charge for said industry. Said reports shall be filed on January 1, April 1,
July 1 and October 1 of each year. The Joint Meeting shall establish
uniform regulations for sampling and analyses.
D. The Joint Meeting, at its option, may elect to sample and analyze the
contribution from any industry to verify the quarterly reports
submitted.
E. All tests shall be performed in accordance with the latest edition of
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater at the
time tests are made.
A. Entry and access to all industrial facilities for the purposes of
monitoring and sampling an industry's discharge shall be granted by
the industry to the authorized representatives of the Joint Meeting or its
duly authorized agents.
B. The Joint Meeting may monitor and sample an industry or industries
without prior warning for the purpose of determining the contributions
of flow, biochemical oxygen demand and suspended solids, so that it
may compute any industry's share of the industrial cost recovery
charge.
C. Entry to premises and monitoring referred to herein shall be as
provided in the Federal Water Pollution Act of 1972.
§ 499-12 IRVINGTON CODE § 499-16
1:642
§ 499-16. Charge for subsequent new users.
New industrial users which commence operations after the start of the
industrial cost recovery system shall also be subject to industrial cost
recovery charges, reduced by the ratio of the capacity used, multiplied by
the ratio of its period of use remaining, to the total cost recovery period of
30 years.
§ 499-17. Effect of discontinuance of use.
Discontinuance by an industry of its use of the treatment works shall relieve
said industry of further industrial cost recovery charges, unless use thereof
is thereafter resumed. The remaining industries shall not be required to
assume the portion of the industrial cost recovery charge unrecovered due
to said discontinuance.
§ 499-18. Appeal of charge.
Appeal from the industrial cost recovery charge involving the
reasonableness of the allocations and cost recovery assessments shall be
made in writing by an industry affected, by notice to the Executive Director
of the Joint Meeting, by sending said notice by certified mail, return receipt
requested. The Joint Meeting shall give said industry notice of a hearing on
said appeal at least 10 days before the date thereof. The Joint Meeting shall
determine said appeal within 90 days after the date of said hearing. Notice
of said determination shall be forwarded to said industry by certified mail,
return receipt requested.
§ 499-19. Adjustment of charge where sewer facilities expanded.
In the event the sewage collection system or the treatment works of the
Joint Meeting are expanded in the future, the respective industrial user's
share for such expansion shall be subject to a cost recovery charge for
the cost of said expansion, to be calculated both as herein provided and
as provided in the Water Pollution Act of 1972. The total industrial cost
recovery charge shall thereupon be adjusted for each industrial user.
§ 499-20. Quarterly payments; when due and payable.
All industrial cost recovery charges shall become due and payable on the
first day of February, May, August and November of each year on a quarterannual
basis, and shall be paid to the Town of Irvington, New Jersey. The
annual charge to each industrial user shall be determined by the Joint
Meeting. Said Town of Irvington, New Jersey, shall remit said sums collected
to the Joint Meeting within 30 days after they become due and payable.
§ 499-21. Initial payment.
The industrial cost recovery charges provided for herein shall become due
and payable from and after the first day of January following the completion
by the Joint Meeting of the secondary treatment plant.
§ 499-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 499-22
1:643
§ 499-22. What constitutes treatment works.
Anything herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding, it is the
intention of this article that any reference to "treatment works," "treatment
system" or "treatment plant" shall be construed to refer to a "public sewage
treatment plant" and shall mean any structure or structures by means of
which domestic or industrial wastes are subject to any artificial process
in order to remove or so alter constituents as to render the wastes less
offensive or dangerous to the public health, comfort or property of any of
the inhabitants of this state before the discharge of the plant effluent into
any waters of this state.
§ 499-23. Authority of Joint Meeting regarding applications and
inspections.
For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article and the rules
and regulations of the Joint Meeting relating thereto, the Joint Meeting
operating said public sewage treatment plant shall:
§ 499-24. Civil action for relief.
If any person, corporation or municipality violates any of the provisions of
this article or rules and regulations promulgated by the Joint Meeting, the
Joint Meeting may institute a civil action in the Superior Court for injunctive
relief to prohibit or prevent such violations and the Court may proceed in
the action in a summary manner.
§ 499-25. Violations and penalties.
In the event of the violation of any of the provisions of this article, said
violator shall be subject to the penalties set forth in N.J.S.A. 58:11-55.
A. Require that any person, corporation or municipality desiring to make
any sewage connection or to discharge or continue to discharge sewage
which includes or consists of industrial wastes into such public sewage
treatment plant make application therefor in writing on forms provided
by said Joint Meeting.
B. Adopt rules and regulations setting forth the information required to be
stated in the application therefor, in order to provide full information as
to the quantity, character and composition of any sewage which may be
discharged into the public sewage treatment plant, and establishing
requirements and procedures for prompt amendment of said
application in the event of significant changes in the quantity, character
or composition of such sewage.
C. Make or cause to be made inspection of the discharging facilities of any
person, corporation or municipality who may be discharging sewage or
permitting sewage to be discharged into sewerage systems under the
jurisdiction of the Joint Meeting.
§ 499-22 IRVINGTON CODE § 499-25
1:644
ARTICLE III
Sewer Use Regulations
[Adopted 12-26-1985 by Ord. No. MC 2801 (Ch. 163 of the 1981
Revised Code)]
§ 499-26. Rules and Regulations.
The Rules and Regulations of the Joint Meeting260 adopted on December 20,
1984 and as same are modified from time to time are hereby adopted as
if fully set forth herein as Rules and Regulations governing the municipal
sewer facilities as well as the Joint Meeting facilities.261
§ 499-27. Enforcement procedures.
A. Whenever the Joint Meeting finds that any person, as defined in said
Rules and Regulations, has violated or is violating this article or any
prohibition, limitation or requirement contained herein, the Joint
Meeting may serve upon such person a written notice stating the nature
of the violation and providing a reasonable time, not to exceed 30 days,
for the satisfactory correction thereof. If the violation is not corrected
by timely compliance, the Joint Meeting may order any person who
causes or allows an unauthorized discharge to show cause before the
Joint Meeting and Township of Irvington why service should not be
terminated. A notice shall be served on the offending party, specifying
the time and place of a hearing to be held by the Joint Meeting and
Township of Irvington regarding the violation, and directing the
offending party to show cause before the Joint Meeting and Township of
Irvington why an order should not be made directing the termination of
service. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by
registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least 10 days
before the hearing.
B. The Joint Meeting and Township of Irvington may itself conduct the
hearing and take the evidence, or may designate any of its members or
any officer or employee to:
(1) Issue in the name of the Joint Meeting and Township of Irvington
notices of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of
witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter
involved in any such hearings.
(2) Take the evidence.
260. Editor's Note: The preface to Ord. No. MC 2801 provides that said Joint Meeting is a
partnership of municipalities consisting of the City of East Orange, the Township of
Hillside, the Township of Irvington, the Township of Maplewood, the Township of Millburn,
the City of Newark, the Borough of Roselle Park, the Township of South Orange Village,
the City of Summit, the Township of Union and the Township of West Orange, operating
under an agreement between them dated June 1, 1926, under the authority of N.J.S.A.
40:63-68 et seq., which agreement was thereafter amended and supplemented, the last
supplemental contract having been entered into on October 19, 1967.
261. Editor's Note: Said Rules and Regulations are on file in the office of the Joint Meeting.
§ 499-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 499-27
1:645
§ 499-28. Suspension of service or permit.
(3) Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts, records and other evidence, together with
recommendations to the Joint Meeting and Township of Irvington
for action thereof.
C. At any public hearing, testimony taken before the Joint Meeting and
Township of Irvington, or any person designated by it, must be under
oath and recorded either by the hearing officer in a summary manner or
stenographically. In the latter case, the transcript, so recorded, will be
made available to any member of the public upon payment of the usual
charges therefor. After the Joint Meeting and Township of Irvington
have reviewed the evidence, they may issue an order to the party
responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time
period, the sewer service be discontinued unless adequate treatment
facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are properly
operated, and such further orders and directives as are necessary and
appropriate.
D. Any discharge in violation of the substantive provisions of this article or
an order of the Joint Meeting shall be considered grounds for legal
action. If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other
wastes into the treatment facilities contrary to the substantive
provisions of this article or any order of the Joint Meeting, the
Executive Director of the Joint Meeting shall commence an action for
injunctive relief and appropriate legal damages in the Superior Court of
the respective county.
A. The Joint Meeting and/or Township of Irvington may suspend the
wastewater treatment service and/or the nondomestic wastewater
discharge permit when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of
the Joint Meeting and/or the Township of Irvington, in order to stop an
actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an
imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of
persons and to the environment, causes interference to the publicly
owned treatment works or causes the Joint Meeting and/or Township of
Irvington to violate any condition of its New Jersey Pollution Discharge
Elimination System permit.
B. Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment
service and/or the nondomestic wastewater discharge permit shall
immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure
of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Joint
Meeting and/or Township of Irvington shall take such steps as are
deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the publicly owned
treatment works system or endangerment to any individuals. The Joint
Meeting and/or Township of Irvington shall reinstate the nondomestic
wastewater discharge permit and/or the wastewater treatment service,
upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge. A detailed
§ 499-27 IRVINGTON CODE § 499-28
1:646
§ 499-29. Violations and penalties; additional remedies.262
Any person who is found to have violated an order of the Joint Meeting/
Township of Irvington or who willfully or negligently fails to comply with
any provisions of this article and the orders, rules and regulations issued
hereunder shall be subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article
III, Penalties, of the Township Code, for each offense. Each day on which
a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct
offense. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the Joint Meeting
and Township of Irvington may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court
costs, court reporters' fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate
suit at law against the person(s) found to have violated this article or the
orders, rules and regulations issued hereunder. In addition, also, to the
penalties previously provided herein, the Joint Meeting and its tributary
municipalities may recover reasonable costs expended to rectify damages to
its treatment facilities and tributary sewers, as well as to rectify treatment
process problems caused as a result of violations of this article.
written statement submitted by the discharger describing the causes of
the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future
occurrence shall be submitted to the Joint Meeting and/or Township of
Irvington within 15 days of the date of occurrence.
262. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 499-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 499-29
1:647

ARTICLE IV
Discharge of Groundwater to Sanitary Sewer
[Adopted 1-24-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3011 (Ch. 161, Art. III, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 499-30. Use of public sewers.
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater (except as set forth below), roof runoff,
subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted
industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
B. Direct or indirect discharges of groundwater to the Joint Meeting
Wastewater Treatment Facilities shall only be permitted under the
following circumstances:
(1) The proposed discharger or applicant has filed an application for
and has been issued a nondomestic wastewater discharge permit
("permit") by the Joint Meeting.
(2) For long-term, continuous discharges, the Township of Irvington
(hereinafter referred to as "municipality"), at the election of the
municipality, the proposed discharger or applicant (hereinafter
"applicant") will be required to identify and eliminate two gallons of
infiltration/inflow to the Joint Meeting Wastewater Treatment
Facilities for each gallon of groundwater to be delivered into the
Joint Meeting Wastewater Treatment Facilities on a daily average
over the life of the remediation project discharge (two-to-one
offset).
(a) The location(s) of the remedial work to be performed by the
applicant shall be identified by the use of the Phase III Sewer
System Evaluation Report, prepared by Hazen and Sawyer,
dated August 1983, and as supplemented, which was
previously distributed by the Joint Meeting to each member
municipality in the Joint Meeting service area, or such other
report as may be available in the case of nonmember
municipalities.
(b) The remedial work to be performed by the applicant shall be
completed within a time period that shall not exceed 1/2 of the
time frame of the remediation project discharge estimated by
the proposed discharger or applicant and approved by the
municipality and the Joint Meeting. In the event that
extraordinary, unforeseen circumstances occur that will affect
the ability of the applicant to meet the time period previously
agreed upon by the parties for completion of the infiltration/
inflow remedial work, the applicant may seek an extension of
the time period through the filing of a written request not less
than 60 days before a previously defined and agreed-upon
milestone, fully describing the extraordinary, unforeseen
§ 499-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 499-30
1:649
circumstances and specifying the additional time necessary to
complete the remedial work as a result thereof. Such requests
for extensions will be considered by the Joint Meeting on a
case-by-case basis, and an extension of time shall not be
unreasonably withheld.
(c) An applicant may not discharge groundwater to the Joint
Meeting Wastewater Treatment Facilities until it has obtained
a permit and an agreement is reached between the Joint
Meeting and the municipality and/or the applicant upon the
terms of the remediation work to be performed to satisfy the
two-to-one-offset policy set forth in this regulation.
(d) At intervals to be mutually agreed upon by the applicant and
the Joint Meeting, the applicant shall be required to
demonstrate, in written progress reports, to the satisfaction of
the Joint Meeting, that the applicant is making definable
progress in performing the remedial work so as to be able to
complete the work within the time frame established in
accordance with Subsection B(2)(b) above.
(e) After the time that the location(s) of the remedial work is
identified by the municipality and agreed to by the Joint
Meeting, but prior to the initiation of the remedial work, the
applicant will be required to submit proof to the Joint Meeting
that a performance bond in the amount of 100% of the value of
the remedial work and naming the Joint Meeting as a coobligee
has been issued to ensure that such work is completely
performed.
(3) Short-term, batch discharges.
(a) For short-term, batch discharges, the applicant will be
required to identify and eliminate two gallons of infiltration/
inflow into the Joint Meeting Wastewater Treatment Facilities
for each gallon of groundwater to be delivered to the Joint
Meeting Treatment Works on a daily average over the life of
the remediation project discharge (two-to-one offset).
(b) The material to be discharged from the site of the remediation
project may be delivered in tanker vehicles to the Joint
Meeting Wastewater Treatment Facilities in Elizabeth, New
Jersey, for direct discharge at a rate of $0.03 per gallon (for
example, $150 per five-thousand-gallon trailer), to compensate
Joint Meeting for the costs to sample, monitor and process the
discharge. The use of this option will be at the reasonable
discretion of the Joint Meeting in order to avoid the arrival of a
number of trailers that will adversely impact the performance
of treatment operations by the Joint Meeting.
§ 499-30 IRVINGTON CODE § 499-30
1:650
(4) In the event that the two-to-one-offset option is selected with
respect to short-term, batch discharges, then the following
procedures shall apply:
(a) The location(s) of the remedial work to be performed by the
applicant shall be identified by the municipality and agreed to
by the Joint Meeting through the use of the Phase III Sewer
System Evaluation Report, prepared by Hazen and Sawyer,
dated August 1983, and as supplemented, which was
previously distributed by the Joint Meeting to each member
municipality in the Joint Meeting service area, or such other
report as may be available in the case of nonmember
municipalities.
(b) The remedial work to be performed by the applicant shall be
completed within a time period that shall not exceed 1/2 of the
time frame of the remediation project discharge estimated by
the proposed discharger or applicant and approved by the
municipality and the Joint Meeting. In the event that
extraordinary, unforeseen circumstances occur that will affect
the ability of the applicant to meet the time period previously
agreed upon by the parties for completion of the infiltration/
inflow remedial work, the applicant may seek an extension of
the time period through the filing of a written request not less
than 60 days before a previously defined and agreed-upon
milestone, fully describing the extraordinary, unforeseen
circumstances and specifying the additional time necessary to
complete the remedial work as a result thereof. Such requests
for extensions will be considered by the Joint Meeting on a
case-by-case basis, and an extension of time shall not be
unreasonably withheld.
(c) An applicant may not discharge groundwater to the Joint
Meeting Wastewater Treatment Facilities until it has obtained
a permit and an agreement is reached between the Joint
Meeting and the municipality and/or the applicant upon the
terms of the remediation work to be performed to satisfy the
two-to-one-offset policy set forth in this regulation should this
option be selected with respect to a short-term, batch
discharge.
(d) At intervals to be mutually agreed upon by the applicant and
the Joint Meeting, the applicant shall be required to
demonstrate, in written progress reports, to the satisfaction of
the Joint Meeting, that the applicant is making definable
progress in performing the remedial work so as to be able to
complete the work within the time frame established in
accordance with Subsection B(4)(b) above.
(e) After the time that the location(s) of the remedial work is
identified by the municipality and agreed to by the Joint
§ 499-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 499-30
1:651
Meeting, but prior to the initiation of the remedial work, the
applicant will be required to submit proof to the Joint Meeting
that a performance bond in the amount of 100% of the value
of the remedial work and naming the Joint Meeting as a coobligee
has been issued to ensure that such work is completely
performed.
(5) The groundwater to be discharged to the Joint Meeting Wastewater
Treatment Facilities pursuant to a permit will be, at all times,
subject to analyses by the Joint Meeting, at the sole cost of the
applicant, to ensure that the proposed discharge shall meet the
quality limits as set forth in these sewer use rules and regulations.
At any time during the period of the discharge of groundwater to
the Joint Meeting, a failure by the applicant to meet such quality
limits shall be the basis for a revocation of the permit and a
discontinuation of the discharge, and/or such enforcement
measures as are authorized by law to be taken by the Joint
Meeting.263
(6) The proposed discharger or applicant shall be obligated to institute
pretreatment measures prior to the direct or indirect discharge of
groundwater to the Joint Meeting in the event that the
groundwater fails to meet the parameters for acceptance of the
discharge set forth in the Sewer Use Rules and Regulations.264
(7) Credits for future discharges of groundwater through the removal
of infiltration/inflow pursuant to the above provisions may be
accumulated or "banked"; however, such credits may only be
transferred in accordance with ownership of the site identified as
the source of groundwater at the time of the performance of the
remediation work.
263. Editor's Note: See Art. III, Sewer Use Regulations, of this chapter.
264. Editor's Note: See Art. III, Sewer Use Regulations, of this chapter.
§ 499-30 IRVINGTON CODE § 499-30
1:652
Chapter 508
SHOPPING CARTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 439.
§ 508-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
CART — Any rolling or nonrolling basket or container used in so-called
supermarkets or self-service stores.
§ 508-2. Abandonment of carts prohibited.
§ 508-3. Identification on carts.
A. No person, his agent or employee shall leave, abandon or suffer or
permit to be left or abandoned upon any public street, sidewalk,
driveway or municipal parking area any cart, whether owned by him or
in his possession, custody or control.
B. Any cart found left abandoned shall be prima facie evidence that it was
left or abandoned by or with the permission of the owner.
A. Any cart provided or made available for use by any person, his agent or
employee shall have securely attached to it a plainly visible plastic or
metal identification tag 3 1/2 inches by five inches in size.
B. The identification tag shall have legibly printed on it the following
information:
(1) Number of the cart.
(2) Name and address of the owner.
(3) Location of the premises where it is actually available for use.
(4) "Persons removing carts shall be fined."
C. Duplicate tag numbers are prohibited.
D. All shopping carts shall have permanently affixed thereon an
identification tag with the name, address and telephone number of the
owner. Failure to have such an identification tag permanently affixed
will require payment of a charge of $12 per shopping cart to the
Township of Irvington. In the event that payment is not made, then no
retail food establishment or other license is to be issued. [Amended
12-12-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3027; 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. MC
§ 499-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 508-3
1:653
§ 508-4. Inspection of carts. [Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC
3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
At reasonable hours of a business day, the Director of Public Works is
authorized to enter any premises where carts are provided and available for
use in order to inspect such carts for proper identification and to ensure
compliance.
§ 508-5. Impoundment of abandoned carts; notice to owner.
§ 508-6. Disposition of unclaimed carts.
§ 508-7. Destruction of unsold carts.
3134; 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by Ord. No.
MC 3306; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413]
A. The Director of Public Works is authorized to remove or cause to be
removed and impounded any cart found abandoned or left in any
prohibited area described in § 508-2. He shall deliver the cart to any
Town-owned storage facility available for such purpose. [Amended
7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
B. Within 30 days after the removal of the cart, the Director of Public
Works shall notify, by ordinary mail, the owner of the cart at the address
indicated on the identification tag. [Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No.
MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
C. The notice shall inform the owner that he may redeem the impounded
cart for $12 within 30 days of the date of the notice for redemption.
[Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622; 12-12-1995 by Ord.
No. MC 3027; 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3134; 8-14-2001 by
Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by Ord. No. MC 3306; 12-29-2009
by Ord. No. MC 3413]
A. If such cart remains unclaimed or unredeemed beyond the date fixed
for redemption, identifiable carts shall be delivered to the owner at the
address indicated on the identification tags and an additional handling
charge of $65 will be made. [Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC
2622; 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3027; 12-14-1999 by Ord. No.
MC 3134; 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by Ord.
No. MC 3306; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413]
B. The Director of Public Works shall dispose of unidentifiable carts by
giving at least five days' public notice in a newspaper or newspapers
circulating in the Town. [Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407;
7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
C. Such public notice shall fix the place, date, time and terms of the public
sale to the highest bidder of the impounded carts. A specific term of
such public sale shall be that no cart shall be sold for less than $5.
§ 508-3 IRVINGTON CODE § 508-7
1:654
§ 508-8. Report of redemption of carts.
§ 508-9. Report of sale or other disposition of carts. [Amended
7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
§ 508-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person, association or corporation who shall violate the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $50 for each
violation nor more than $1,000, or imprisoned for a term not to exceed 90
days, or both, at the discretion of the court. Upon a second or subsequent
conviction, any person, association or corporation who shall violate the
provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than
A. If any impounded carts remain unsold at public sale, the Director of
Public Works may dismantle, destroy, sell or dispose of the unclaimed
carts in any manner. [Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407;
7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
B. Any public sale or other disposition of the carts shall be without liability
on the part of the Township to the owner of the carts or any other
person legally entitled to or having an interest therein.
A. Within 48 hours of the redemption of the property, the Director of
Public Services shall pay over to the Treasurer the amount received for
the redemption. [Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407;
7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
B. At the same time, such Director shall deliver to the Treasurer a detailed
statement concerning the redemption. The statement shall include:
(1) Identity of the property.
(2) Name and address of the redemptor.
(3) Amount received from the redemptor.
A. Within 48 hours after a public sale or disposition other than
redemption, the Director of Public Works shall pay over to the
Treasurer the proceeds of the sale or disposition.
B. At the same time, the Director of Public Works shall deliver to the
Treasurer a detailed statement concerning the public sale or
disposition. The statement shall include:
(1) Identity of the cart.
(2) Name and address of the purchaser.
(3) Amount paid by the purchaser.
(4) Cost and expenses of the public sale or disposition.
§ 508-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 508-10
1:655
$1,000 or imprisoned for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both, at the
discretion of the court.
Chapter 513
SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform Construction Code — See Ch. 240. Zoning — See Ch. 650.
§ 513-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards to safeguard
life, health, property and public welfare by regulating and controlling the
design, quality of materials, construction, illumination, location and
maintenance of all signs and sign structures, and to encourage signs which
are well designed and pleasing in appearance and to provide incentive and
latitude for variety, good design relationship and spacing and to enhance
the economic value of the community and each area thereof through the
regulation of signs and outdoor sidewalk merchandise displays and to
reduce possible traffic and safety hazards through good signing.
§ 513-2. Cigarette and alcohol advertisements; violations and
penalties. [Added 6-24-1997 by Ord. No. MC 3073]
§ 513-3. Location of signs and braces restricted.
No sign, brace or guy wire shall be attached to any fire escape or fire escape
support. Signs shall not be placed nearer than two feet from the ends of a
fire escape platform. No table, sign, brace or guy wire shall obstruct access
to a fire escape or other means of egress from a building, such as an exit
corridor, exit hallway or exit doorway. No sign shall cover up a window,
doorway or other opening providing light, ventilation or exit facilities which
are required by the regulations of the BOCA Building Code.266
A. No person may place any sign, poster, placard, billboard, graphic
display, freestanding sign and or device that advertises cigarettes or
alcohol within 500 feet of a school, park, church or community center
located in the Township of Irvington.
B. Any person who violates or refuses to comply with this section shall be
subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article III, Penalties, of the
Township Code.265
265. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
266. Editor's Note: The building code referred to was superseded by the adoption of the State
Uniform Construction Code Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 508-10 IRVINGTON CODE § 513-4
1:656
§ 513-4. Signs in residential zones. [Added 6-14-1966 by Ord. No.
MC 2132]
In all residential zones as delineated and set forth on the Town Zoning Map,
no sign, temporary or otherwise, in excess of eight square feet in area shall
be permitted. In the interpretation of the area of the sign, the size shall
be the display surface available for advertising, including decorative trim,
or, in the case of individual letters, the sum of the areas of the individual
rectangular box dimensions of the letters.
§ 513-5. Residential "for sale," "for rent" or "sold" signs. [Added
9-26-1967 by Ord. No. MC 2172; amended 3-12-1968 by Ord. No.
MC 2186; 12-23-1968 by Ord. No. MC 2207; 4-27-1971 by Ord. No.
MC 2283]
§ 513-6. Unsafe signs.
If any sign shall become unsafe, the Building Inspector shall notify the
owner or such other person as may be responsible for the maintenance of
the sign, to either remove the sign or make it safe. The owner shall comply
with such notice within 15 days after service of same.
A. On all residential premises wherein any dwelling is occupied by not
more than six families, the display of any sign stating the premises are
"for sale, rent, lease, let, transfer or available," or any other words
indicating that the use or possession of such premises or transfer of an
interest in such premises is available to another, is prohibited unless
the following standards are complied with:
(1) Signs shall not exceed 14 inches by 24 inches in area and shall
consist of black lettering on a white background, which shall state
only that the property is either for sale or for rent and may contain
only such legends as "inquire within," a telephone number or the
name of the owner of the property.
(2) The sign must be removed within seven days after the execution of
the agreement of sale, lease, let, rent, use or possession of such
premises or transfer of any interest in same.
B. The erection, maintenance or display of any sign marked "sold" on any
structure, plot or land or any real estate is permitted within the
boundaries of the Town under the following conditions:
(1) Signs shall not exceed 22 inches by 26 inches in area.
(2) Signs shall consist of black lettering on a white background.
(3) Signs may contain only the word "sold," the name and address of
the realtor and the telephone number of the realtor.
(4) The sign must be removed from the structure, plot or land within
14 days after the date of the sale, transfer of use or possession.
§ 513-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 513-7
1:657
§ 513-7. Maintenance of signs, generally.
All signs shall be maintained in good condition at all times. The Building
Inspector shall notify the owner of any sign which may become dirty or
dingy to clean, paint, repair or replace the same, as the occasion may
demand. The Building Inspector shall notify the owner failing to keep an
illuminated sign illuminated properly to maintain the illumination or, if the
portions of the sign affording illumination are in poor repair, to repair same.
The Building Inspector shall notify the owner of a poorly maintained or
unsightly sign to remove same. Any person feeling aggrieved by any such
order of the Building Inspector may appeal to the Municipal Council within
10 days after being so notified.
§ 513-8. Signs overhanging roadways.
No sign overhanging the roadway area shall be maintained unless specific
approval of the Municipal Council is first obtained, by resolution duly
passed. Where such approval is obtained, it shall be unlawful for any person
to maintain such sign without such supports as to meet the approval of the
Building Inspector as to public safety.
§ 513-9. Sandwich boards; merchandise tables.
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain a sandwich board,
merchandise table, merchandise or equipment on the public sidewalk or in
any entryway.
§ 513-10. Awning signs. [Amended 3-25-2019 by Ord. No. MC 3695]
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
AWNING SIGN — A light roof-like structure, supported entirely by the
exterior wall of a building that consists of a fixed or movable frame
covered with cloth, plastic or metal and extends over doors and/or
windows with the purpose of providing protection from sun and rain
and/or embellishment of the facade.
B. Applicability of the changes to this section.
(1) This section applies to all new businesses within the Township of
Irvington who register to do business or who otherwise open to do
business after the effective date of this section.
(2) This section applies to all existing businesses. An existing business
is any business registered to do business with the Township and
who is otherwise operating a business within the Township prior to
the effective date of this section. Existing businesses have one year
from the effective date of this section to comply with the
requirements thereof.
§ 513-7 IRVINGTON CODE § 513-10
1:658
C. Awning styles and specifications requirements. All awnings must
adhere to the following requirements:
(1) All awning signs shall be limited in their position to the fringe or
valance. The height of letters or figures of such signs shall not
exceed 10 inches. The subject matter shall cover only the name of
the owner of the awning and the place and kind of business.
Awnings shall have a clearance of eight feet from the sidewalk and
shall be kept in good repair.
(2) Permitted styles are shed, marquee and gable with or without sign
bands. Waterfall, box, translucent and internally lit awnings are not
permitted. Only street addresses using Arabic numbers are
permitted on valance or at bottom of awning.
(3) Material must be canvas, woven acrylic or similar material.
Materials that are not allowed are plastic, vinyl, Mylar and other
shiny materials. Egg crate undersides are also not permitted.
(4) Only letters and numbers are allowed on the valance and must be
five inches to 10 inches high and cover no more than 70% of the
valance.
(5) Only external lighting is permitted. Gooseneck lighting is
preferred. Internal and backlit lighting are not permitted.
(6) Awning should be placed within window bay of storefront. Awnings
that cover the entire face of building facade are not permitted.
(7) A specific color awning will be designated for each business
corridor as determined by the Township of Irvington. As such, the
color and layout of any awning must be reviewed and approved by
the Township Construction Code Official.
(8) Businesses who are franchisees and who must maintain the color of
the business franchise are exempt from this requirement, however,
said businesses must take all steps available to ensure that their
awnings and signs are similar in style and layout to the herein
requirements. Franchise businesses must also complete the
required application and provide signage and awning options to the
Construction Code Office for review and approval prior to selecting
a style and pattern.
(9) Any additional signage, posters, advertisement displayed on
storefront windows and outside walls must be presented to the
Construction Code Official for review and approval. Such signage,
posters and advertisement displayed must be removed by existing
businesses as per the requirements of this section if such signage
or advertisement are in violation of this section.
D. Permit requirements and process.
§ 513-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 513-10
1:659
(1) No awning shall be erected or maintained unless a permit therefor
shall first have been obtained from the Construction Code Official
or the Department of Housing and Building Construction.
(2) No awning of any kind shall be erected or maintained which shall
extend beyond the property line and over any street or sidewalk, or
public place, or any part thereof, unless a permit therefor shall first
have been obtained from the Department of Housing and Building
Construction and Construction Code Official after the payment of
the permit application fee.
(3) No permit for any such awning shall be issued by the Department
of Housing and Building Construction unless or until the proposed
awning has been reviewed and approved by the Zoning Official and
Construction Code Official.
(4) No permit for any such awning shall be issued by the Construction
Code Official unless such awning is in compliance with the
applicable provisions of the uniform construction codes.
(5) No permit for any awning shall be issued by the Department of
Housing and Building Construction or the Construction Code
Official unless the Construction Code Official determines, after
review by the Fire Official, that such awning or canopy will not
interfere with firefighting equipment, and specifically, if the
building or structure involved is of such height as to require the use
of ladders in the event of fire, that the location and size of the
awning will not interfere with the placement of such ladders, or
that the awning may be quickly and easily removed in such manner
as not to interfere with or delay the deployment of fire ladders.
(6) Property owners are responsible for the complying with the
requirements of this section. As such, property owners who rent
out their commercial to tenants to operate businesses are
responsible for ensuring that all tenants are notified and are in
compliance with this section.
(7) Prior to issuing a permit for any such awning the applicant therefor
shall submit to the Construction Code Official a signed
indemnification and hold harmless agreement, of a form approved
by the Township Attorney, in which the applicant agrees to
indemnify and hold harmless the Township of Irvington, its officers,
agents and employees from any and all claims of liability, including
any reasonable attorney fees, resulting from the issuance of the
permit or the erection of any such awning.
(8) Any permit granted hereunder may be revoked at any time by the
Township of Irvington whenever, in the opinion of the Council of the
Township of Irvington or the Construction Code Official, it would be
in the best interests of the citizens of Irvington to do so. Any permit
issued hereunder shall not grant to the holder thereof any
permanent easement to encroach upon the street, sidewalk or
§ 513-10 IRVINGTON CODE § 513-10
1:660
§ 513-11. Temporary signs.
other public place but rather shall only entitle the holder thereof to
a revocable license.
(9) Whenever the holder of the permit ceases to own or occupy the
premises for which the permit is issued, the permit shall expire.
Upon the expiration or revocation of the permit, any awning
encroaching upon the street, sidewalk or other public place shall
be removed. In the event the owner or occupant thereof fails to
remove such awning after notice thereof is provided, the Township
may remove such awning and charge the cost of such removal as a
municipal lien against the property in accordance with law.
(10) The Construction Code Official shall not issue any permit
hereunder unless all of the foregoing requirements have been
satisfied or unless the Municipal Council has, by resolution,
approved such permit.
E. Application for awning permit. No permit shall be issued until the
applicant therefor shall have first filed a written application on a form of
which shall be maintained by the Department of Housing and Building
Construction setting forth or containing the following:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Exact location where such awning is to be erected and maintained.
(3) Name of the owner or lessee of the premises where such awning is
to be erected and maintained.
(4) A statement as to whether the awning is to be a permanent or
temporary awning.
(5) If the application is for a temporary awning, the date when the
same will be erected and removed.
(6) A written specification describing the kind of materials to be used,
the general construction and the proposed method of anchoring the
awning.
(7) For awnings, a certificate of flame resistance from the fabric
manufacturer.
F. Violations and penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this
section shall, upon review and adjudication thereof, be punished by a
fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding
90 days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
A. Defined. Temporary signs as regulated by this chapter shall include any
sign, banner, pennant, valance or advertising display constructed of
cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard or other light
§ 513-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 513-11
1:661
§ 513-12. Removal of certain signs. [Added 6-14-1966 by Ord. No.
MC 2132]
Any sign now or hereafter existing which no longer advertises a bona fide
future event or purpose, a bona fide business conducted or a product sold
shall be taken down and removed by the owner, agent or person having the
beneficial use of the building or structure upon which such sign may be
found, within 10 days after written notification from the Building Inspector,
and, upon failure to comply with such notice within the time specified in
such notice, the Building Inspector is hereby authorized to cause removal
of such sign. Any person who violates this provision shall be subject to the
provisions of § 513-17.
§ 513-13. Show or display windows.
Show or display windows shall be maintained in a neat, uncluttered manner
and shall not be used for the storage of merchandise or as a counter, table
or rack for resale of merchandise.
§ 513-14. Small signs and bulletin boards.
Small announcement or professional signs not over one square foot in area
are permitted in any district; except that a church, school, community
center or other public or institutional building may have for its own use an
announcement sign or bulletin board not over 12 square feet in area, which,
materials, with or without frames, intended to be displayed for a short
period of time only.
B. Size limitations generally. No temporary sign shall exceed four feet in
one of its dimensions or 100 square feet in area; provided that any such
sign in excess of 60 square feet in area shall be made of rigid materials,
that is, of wallboard or other light materials with frames, subject to the
provisions of § 513-4. [Amended 6-14-1966 by Ord. No. MC 2132]
C. Signs weighing over 50 pounds. Every temporary sign weighing in
excess of 50 pounds shall be approved by the Building Inspector as
conforming to the safety requirements of the Building Code of the
Town.267
D. Location restricted. No temporary sign shall prevent free ingress to or
egress from any door, window or fire escape, nor shall any such sign be
attached to any fire escape.
E. Contents. The advertising contained on any temporary sign shall
pertain only to the business, industry or pursuit conducted within the
premises. This provision shall not apply to signs of a civic, political or
religious nature.
267. Editor's Note: The building code referred to was superseded by the adoption of the State
Uniform Construction Code Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 513-11 IRVINGTON CODE § 513-14
1:662
if not attached flat against a building, shall be at least 12 feet from all street
lines.
§ 513-15. Sign permit required; fee; failure to remove signs
following election; violations and penalties. [Added 3-24-2015 by
Ord. No. MC 3529]
§ 513-16. Conflicting provisions.
In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the
provisions of the BOCA Building Code previously adopted, the provisions of
this chapter shall prevail.268
§ 513-17. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord. No.
MC 2622]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction, be punishable as provided in the general penalty provisions set
forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article III.
Chapter 524
SMOKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sale of tobacco products — See Ch. 598.
A. Failure to obtain permits for signs will result in the removal of each
sign. There will be a fee imposed for the removal of each sign in the
amount of $100 per sign.
B. A permit fee of $2,500 shall be required to put up signs no sooner than
14 days prior to an election and shall be removed seven days after.
C. Any person, firm, corporation, limited liability company, partnership or
other business entity or commercial establishment of any type
whatsoever violating the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction, pay the below imposed fines:
(1) First offense: $100 to $499.
(2) Second offense: $500 to $999.
(3) Third offense: $1,000; imprisonment.
268. Editor's Note: The building code referred to was superseded by the adoption of the State
Uniform Construction Code Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 513-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 513-17
1:663

ARTICLE I
Smoking Near Public Places
[Adopted 5-24-2011 by Ord. No. MC 3438 (Ch. 168, Art. I, § 168-4.1,
of the 1981 Revised Code); amended in its entirety 6-26-2018 by
Ord. No. MC 3657]
§ 524-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CIGAR BAR — Any bar, or area within a bar, designated specifically for
the smoking of tobacco products, purchased on the premises or elsewhere;
except that a cigar bar that is in an area within a bar shall be an area
enclosed by solid walls or windows, a ceiling and a solid door and equipped
with a ventilation system which is separately exhausted from the
nonsmoking areas of the bar so that air from the smoking area is not
recirculated to the nonsmoking areas and smoke is not back-streamed into
the smoking areas. The cigar bar will not be within 500 feet of a preschool,
elementary, middle or high school in the Township of Irvington.
CIGAR LOUNGE — Any establishment, or area within an establishment,
designated specifically for the smoking of tobacco products, purchased on
the premises or elsewhere; except that a cigar lounge that is in an area
within a bar shall be an area enclosed by solid walls or windows, a ceiling
and a solid door and equipped with a ventilation system which is separately
exhausted from the nonsmoking areas of the bar so that air from the
smoking area is not recirculated to the nonsmoking areas and smoke is not
back-streamed into the smoking areas. The cigar lounge will not be within
500 feet of a preschool, elementary, middle or high school in the Township
of Irvington.
ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE — Any product containing or delivering
nicotine or any other substance intended for human consumption that can
be used by a person to simulate smoking through inhalation of vapor
or aerosol from the product. The term includes any device, whether
manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an e-cigarette, e-cigar, epipe,
e-hookah, e-cigarillo, vape pen, or under any other product name or
descriptor.
HOOKAH — A water pipe and associated products and devices which are
used to produce fumes, smoke, and/or vapor from the burning material
including, but not limited to, tobacco, shisha, or other plant matter.
HOOKAH BAR OR LOUNGE — Any establishment, or area within an
establishment, designated specifically for the smoking of tobacco products,
purchased on the premises or elsewhere.
INDOOR PUBLIC PLACE — A structurally enclosed place of business,
commerce or other service-related activity, whether publicly or privately
owned or operated on a for-profit or nonprofit basis, which is generally
accessible to the public, including, but not limited to: a commercial or other
office building; office or building owned, leased or rented by the state or
§ 524-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 524-1
1:665
by a county or municipal government; public and nonpublic elementary or
secondary school building; board of education building; theater or concert
hall; public library; museum or art gallery; bar; restaurant or other
establishment where the principal business is the sale of food for
consumption on the premises, including the bar area of the establishment;
garage or parking facility; any public conveyance operated on land or water,
or in the air, and passenger waiting rooms and platform areas in any
stations or terminals thereof; health care facility licensed pursuant to P.L.
1971, c. 136 (N.J.S.A. 26:2H-1 et seq.); patient waiting room of the office of
a health care provider licensed pursuant to Title 45 of the Revised Statutes;
child-care center licensed pursuant to P.L. 1983, c. 492 (N.J.S.A. 30:5B-1
et seq.); race track facility; facility used for the holding of sporting events;
ambulatory recreational facility; shopping mall or retail store; hotel, motel
or other lodging establishment; apartment building lobby or other public
area in an otherwise private building; or a passenger elevator in a building
other than a single-family dwelling.
SMOKING — The burning of, inhaling from, exhaling the smoke from, or
the possession of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or any other matter or
substance which contains tobacco or any other matter that can be smoked,
or the inhaling or exhaling of smoke or vapor from an electronic smoking
device, including e-cigarettes.
§ 524-2. Smoking near building entrances.
Prohibition: Smoking is prohibited within 100 feet of entranceways to
indoor public places pursuant to the New Jersey Smoke Free Air Act,
N.J.A.C. 8:6.
§ 524-1 IRVINGTON CODE § 524-2
1:666
Chapter 535
SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing standards — See Ch. 355.
Junk dealers — See Ch. 360.
Littering — See Ch. 380.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 460.
§ 524-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 524-2
1:667

ARTICLE I
Terms Defined
§ 535-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALUMINUM BEVERAGE CONTAINERS, ALUMINUM FOIL and
ALUMINUM FOOD CONTAINERS — Beverage containers constructed
entirely (top, bottom and sides) from aluminum material and also used,
but clean, wrapping material, pans and plates constructed of aluminum
(commingled residential pickup).
ANNUAL RECYCLING CALENDAR — Educational and enforcement
brochure produced by the certified recycling professional annually and
distributed by the Department of Public Works to all residential, commercial
and institutional sectors.269
AUTOMOBILE LEAD ACID BATTERIES — Used batteries from automobiles,
trucks and other vehicles.
AUTOMOTIVE SCRAP METAL — Scrap automotive vehicles and/or parts.
BATTERIES, HOUSEHOLD — Single-use dry cell batteries such as type
AAA, AA, C, D, nine-volt and button cell.
BATTERIES, RECHARGEABLE — Batteries used with rechargeable units.
BOOKS — Soft cover, paperback books, hardcover books, yellow pages and
phone books (included in mixed residential paper pickup).
BRUSH — Tree and shrub branches which have been removed from
residential properties and are free from roots, stumps and other
contaminants.
BULK MATERIAL — Scheduled pickup for second garbage day; material
consists of furniture (nonmetal), rugs (cut/tied), toys (in plastic bags).
CATALOG — Included in mixed residential paper pickup.
CERTIFIED RECYCLING PROFESSIONAL — Municipal certified recycling
professional having graduated from the Rutgers Certified Recycling Course
and having met the New Jersey State Requirements for the civil service
position.
CHIPBOARD — Gray cardboard, including cereal boxes, gift boxes, cracker
and cookie boxes, thin grocery boxes, shoe boxes, notepad backing, oatmeal
boxes, fruit snack boxes, etc. (included in mixed residential paper pickup).
COMMINGLED CONTAINERS — Clear, brown and green glass beverage
containers in addition to aluminum tin and metal containers and plastic
which bears code marking Nos. 1 and 2 (commingled residential pickup).
269. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 535-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-1
1:669
COMPUTERS AND ELECTRONICS — Telephones, fax machines, scanners,
televisions, modems, computers (monitors, hard drives) etc.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS — Recyclable materials,
including but not limited to concrete, asphalt, roof shingles, brick, block,
wood waste, tree stumps and tires.
CORRUGATED CONTAINERS/CORRUGATED CARDBOARD CONTAINERS
— Includes all disposable containers made and fabricated primarily of
corrugated cardboard most commonly used for boxes, shipping containers
and packing materials, having exterior cardboard piles separated by air
spaces created by one or more ridged and grooved cardboard piles, i.e.,
oatmeal container, grits container, cardboard boxes (flattened and tied),
delivery boxes (flattened and tied) (mixed residential paper pickup).
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials designated
within the Township of Irvington, Essex County District Solid Waste
Management Plan to be source separated for the purpose of recycling.
These materials include: commingled items, HDPE plastic containers, PET
containers, commingled containers (brown, clear and green beverage
containers), aluminum containers, automobile lead acid batteries, batteries,
household and rechargeable, residential mixed paper (books, catalogs,
magazines, cardboard, chipboard, shredded paper), leaves, brush,
electronics (computers, monitors, televisions, phones, printers, fax, copiers,
etc.), automotive scrap, motor oil, white goods (metal appliances,
refrigerators, freezers, toaster, ovens, washers dryers etc.).
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any waste substances required to be reported to
the Department of Environmental Protection on the special waste manifest
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:26-8.
HDPE PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Those plastic containers which are most
commonly used as milk containers and detergent containers (included in
mixed residential commingled pickup). Said containers shall be rinsed and
kept separate from the household solid waste.
LEAVES — Yearlong and during leaf season.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Any building or structure, or complex of
buildings in which three or more dwelling units are owner-occupied or
rented or leased, or offered for rental or lease, for residential purposes
(see N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13a) and shall include hotels, motels, or other guest
houses serving transient or seasonal guests as those terms are defined
under Subsection (j) of Section 3 of the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law,
P.L. 1967, c. 76 (N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq.).
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE (MSW) STREAM — All solid waste generated
at residential, commercial, and institutional establishments within the
boundaries of the municipality of Township of Irvington.
PET PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Those plastic containers which are most
commonly used as soda bottles (included in residential commingled pickup).
Said containers shall be rinsed and kept separate from the household solid
waste.
§ 535-1 IRVINGTON CODE § 535-1
1:670
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Those materials which would otherwise
become solid waste and which may be collected, separated, or processed
and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or
products.
RESIDENTIAL — All homes, condominiums, townhouses, apartments,
trailer parks, etc., including certain housing types considered institutional
(i.e., senior citizen homes) are to recycle the following materials.
RESIDENTIAL MIXED PAPER — Newspapers, junk mail, office paper,
envelopes, notebook paper, computer paper, shredded paper documents,
etc.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Recyclable materials
which are separated at the point of generation by the generator thereof
from solid waste for the purposes of recycling.
SOURCE SEPARATION — The process by which recyclable materials are
separated at the point of generation by the generator thereof from solid
waste for the purposes of recycling.
USED MOTOR OIL — Oil removed from automobiles and powered
equipment requiring oil.
WHITE GOODS — Any metal appliance, i.e., refrigerators, microwaves,
stoves, washer machines, dryers, toaster ovens, or toasters, etc. (picked up
on metal day by appointment).
§ 535-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-1
1:671

ARTICLE II
Collection of Solid Waste; Separation of Recyclable Materials
§ 535-2. Municipal service of collection.
§ 535-3. Residential dwelling compliance requirements.271
The owner of any property shall be responsible for compliance with this
chapter. For multifamily units, the management or owner is responsible
for setting up and maintaining the recycling system, including collection
of recyclable materials, in accordance with guidelines for regulations
established by the Director of Public Works and the certified recycling
professional. Violation and penalty notices will be directed to the owner or
management, in those instances where the violator is not easily identifiable.
A. The municipal service of collection and disposal of solid waste and
recycling hereunder shall be limited to curbside collection along public
streets and roads that have been dedicated to and accepted by the
Township of Irvington.
B. The municipal service of collection and disposal of solid waste
hereunder shall not extend entry upon private property to remove solid
waste and recycling from dumpsters or other containers.
C. Multi-unit dwellings must meet the prescribed requirements set forth
by the Township of Irvington for collection of solid waste and recycling.
Each multi-unit dwelling must be able to place a three-cubic yard
dumpster at the curb for collection without the obstruction of the
sidewalk for pedestrian usage after 6:00 p.m. the evening prior to
collection. All multi-unit dwellings must have a separate container/
dumpster designated for recycling material only. If the property owners
of said multi-unit dwellings are unable to meet the requirements for the
removal of solid waste and recycling according to the established
municipal curbside collection program, a private contracting service
must be established by the property owner for solid waste and recycling
services, at the owner's expense. At the end of the year, all recycling
tonnage reports must be submitted to the Director of Public Works or
certified recycling professional for state documentation purposes
according to the state and county regulations.270
D. All commercial and industrial sectors are not exempt from recycling as
it is mandated by the State of New Jersey, adopted by the County of
Essex and the Township of Irvington. All commercial and industrial
sectors must include recycling in their solid waste contracts and must
provide the certified recycling professional with annual recycling
tonnage reports for state documentation purposes according to the
state and county regulations.
270. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
271. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 535-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-3
1:673
The management shall issue notification and collection rules to new tenants
when they arrive and every six months during their occupancy.
§ 535-4. New developments.
§ 535-5. Separation and collection of recyclable material.
A. New developments of multifamily residential units or commercial,
institutional or industrial properties (pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13a
and 13:1E-99.16c).
(1) Any application to the Planning Board of the municipality of the
Township of Irvington for subdivision or site plan approval for the
construction of multifamily dwellings of three or more units, singlefamily
developments of 50 or more units, or any commercial,
institutional, or industrial development for the utilization of 1,000
square feet or more of land, must include a recycling plan. This
plan must contain, at a minimum, the following:
(a) A detailed analysis of the expected composition and amounts of
solid waste and recyclables generated at the proposed
development; and
(b) Locations documented on the application's site plan that
provide for convenient recycling opportunities for all owners,
tenants, and occupants. The recycling area shall be of
sufficient size, convenient location and other attributes
(signage, lighting, fencing, etc.) as may be determined by the
certified recycling professional.
(2) Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the Township
of Irvington, the owner of any new multifamily housing or
commercial, institutional, or industrial development must supply a
copy of a duly executed contract with a hauling company for the
purposes of collection and recycling of source-separated recyclable
materials in those instances where the Township of Irvington does
not otherwise provide this service.
(3) Provision shall be made for the indoor, or enclosed outdoor, storage
and pickup of solid waste, to be approved by the Director of Public
Works or Municipal Engineer or designated agent.272
A. An annual recycling calendar is provided to each resident and property
owner and should be followed as it is written.
B. On or after the date fixed and promulgated by the certified recycling
professional, it shall be mandatory for all persons, residential,
industrial and commercial sectors to separate the recyclable materials
as designated by the Township of Irvington for separate collection from
272. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 535-3 IRVINGTON CODE § 535-5
1:674
all other solid waste produced in or disposed of by such residents or
nonresidential premises.
C. On the dates and in the manner set forth in the regulations promulgated
hereunder, the recyclable materials shall be placed at the curbside for
collection by the Township of Irvington's recycling contractor.
D. The Township of Irvington will not collect solid waste from any
occupant or owner who includes newspapers, commingled material,
leaves, hazardous waste, construction and demolition debris, computer
or electronics, cardboard, yard waste, brush or tree parts or any of the
aforementioned designated recyclable materials.
E. The certified recycling professional, Director of Public Works and
Municipal Council, may, in accordance with its statutory authority,
negotiate and enter into franchises or agreements with qualified
persons to make collection of one or more of said recyclable materials
and for the sale or disposition of said recyclable materials for the
resultant benefit of the municipality.273
F. Designation of recyclable materials.
(1) Leaf season is from September 1 through December 31. Residents
may no longer place their leaves at the curbside. All leaves are to
be placed in a brown recyclable bag without debris or other yard
waste during the leaf season. Leaves are to be placed at the curb in
brown recyclable bags after 6:00 p.m. the evening prior to street
cleaning. Failure to comply with the regulations set forth will result
in fines and penalties.
(2) Spring yard cleanup. Branches, bushels and twigs must be tied and
bundled and placed at the curb for collection after an appointment
is made with the Department of Public Works (973) 399-6690.
Leaves, weeds, flowers, and some grass may be commingled in the
brown recycling bags and brought to 406 Coit Street during the
hours of 7:30 a.m. to 3:00 p.m., Monday through Friday for dropoff
unless other arrangements for said materials are made available by
the Township of Irvington, at which time, residents will be notified
of those arrangements.274
(3) Hazardous waste material. This material is not collected at the 406
Coit Street dropoff location due to its complexity in nature;
however, the County of Essex provides two hazardous waste days
for all residents within Essex County during the year. Dates are
advertised on the annual recycling calendar, the Township website.
Flyers are available in the Municipal Town Hall and the County of
Essex mails out to all residents as the date approaches.
273. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
274. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 535-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-5
1:675
(4) Tire collection. Tires are not collected at the curbside; however, a
minimum amount of four tires per household per year may be
brought to 406 Coit Street during the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 3:00
p.m., Monday through Friday, or to any used tire location for
disposal. Illegal dumping of said material will result in fines.
(5) Computer and electronic are no longer considered bulk. All
material must be brought to 406 Coit Street during the hours of
7:30 a.m. to 3:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
(6) Household batteries must be recycled. You may bring them to 406
Coit Street (or other designated located) during the hours of 7:30
a.m. to 3:00 p.m. Monday through Friday.
(7) Automotive batteries must be recycled. You may bring them to 406
Coit Street during the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m., Monday
through Friday, or they can be dropped off/exchanged at any Auto
Zone or auto repair shop or dropped off at the Essex County
hazardous waste dropoff site at the designated dates.
(8) Automotive scrap metal must be recycled. Municipal automotives/
equipment that are obsolete and/or have been either confiscated or
in forfeiture must be recycled. All funds are to be reimbursed to the
Municipal Recycling Fund. Recycling said material not only
generates funding, it also generates tonnage for the municipal
recycling tonnage grant. All residential and commercial/industry
automotives must be recycled. The Township does not recycle said
material. Residents must go to a metal scrap facility, declare the
Township as Irvington and receive their refund. By declaring the
Township in which you reside, you are increasing the tonnage for
Irvington. The Township does not incur any costs or receive any
refunds for the scrap; we do however benefit from the tonnage
reported.
(9) Motor oil must be recycled. You may drop off at 406 Coit Street in a
secure container, no more than eight quarts, or it may be brought
to any auto repair shop or at the Essex County hazardous waste
dropoff site on the designated dates.
(10) Commingled items must be recycled. All residential properties
must utilize the municipal curbside recycling program. All multiunit
dwellings must either comply with the prescribed regulations
according to the municipal curbside recycling program or provide a
private contractor for the removal of both solid waste and recycling
materials under the New Jersey State Recycling Source Separation
Act that has been adopted by the County of Essex and the Township
of Irvington at their own cost. All annual recycling tonnage reports
must be forwarded to the Director of Public Works, certified
recycling professional or designee for state documentation
purposes according to the state and County of Essex regulations.275
§ 535-5 IRVINGTON CODE § 535-5
1:676
(11) Mixed residential paper must be recycled. All residential properties
must utilize the municipal curbside recycling program. All multiunit
dwellings must either comply with the prescribed regulations
according to the municipal curbside recycling program or provide a
private contractor for the removal of both solid waste and recycling
materials under the New Jersey State Recycling Source Separation
Act that has been adopted by the County of Essex and the Township
of Irvington at their own cost. All annual recycling tonnage reports
must be forwarded to the Director of Public Works, certified
recycling professional or designee for state documentation
purposes according to the state and County of Essex regulations.276
(12) White goods must be recycled. All residential properties must
utilize the municipal curbside recycling program by appointment
only. Metal day is every Thursday; contact the Department of Public
Works during Monday through Wednesday morning for an
appointment at (973) 399-6690. All multi-unit dwellings must either
comply with the prescribed regulations according to the municipal
curbside recycling program or provide a private contractor for the
removal of both solid waste and recycling materials under the New
Jersey State Recycling Source Separation Act277 that has been
adopted by the County of Essex and the Township of Irvington.
White goods may be dropped off at the 406 Coit Street dropoff
center during the hours of 7:30 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. Monday through
Friday. All annual recycling tonnage reports must be forwarded to
the Director of Public Works, certified recycling professional or
designee for state documentation purposes according to the state
and County of Essex regulations.278
G. Prohibition of the collection of solid waste mixed with recyclable
materials.
(1) It shall be unlawful for solid waste contractors to collect solid waste
that is mixed with or contains visible signs of designated recyclable
materials. It is also unlawful for solid waste collectors to remove for
disposal those bags or containers of solid waste which visibly
display a warning notice or some other device indicating that the
load of solid waste contains designated recyclable materials.
(2) It shall be the responsibility of the resident or occupant to properly
segregate the uncollected waste for proper disposal or recycling.
Allowing such unseparated solid waste and recyclables to
accumulate will be considered a violation of this chapter and local
sanitary code.
275. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
276. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
277. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.11 et seq.
278. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 535-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-5
1:677
§ 535-6. Construction, renovation and demolition debris recovery
plan.
(3) Once placed in the location identified by this chapter, or any rules
or regulations promulgated pursuant to this chapter, no person,
other than those authorized by the Township of Irvington, shall
tamper with, collect, remove, or otherwise handle designated
recyclable materials.
H. Enforcement.
(1) All code enforcement officials within the Department of Public
Works, the Director of Public Works, and the certified recycling
professional are hereby individually and severally empowered to
enforce the provisions of this section. An inspection may consist of
sorting through containers and opening of solid waste bags to
detect, by sound or sight, the presence of any recyclable
material.279
(2) Violations and penalties.
(a) Any person, corporation, occupant, or entity that violates or
fails to comply with any provision of this section or any of the
rules and regulations promulgated hereunder shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not less than
$250, nor more than $1,000. Each day for which a violation of
this section occurs shall be considered a separate offense.
(b) Fines levied and collected pursuant to this section shall be
immediately deposited into the Municipal Recycling Trust
Fund. Monies in the Municipal Recycling Trust Fund shall be
used for the expenses of the Municipal Recycling Program,
including the salary for the Certified Recycling Professional
and all educational opportunities for higher education of said
Professional pertaining to recycling and environmental
education, implementation of recycling programs,
management of municipal drop off site, e-waste events,
enforcement of local recycling ordinances, and recycling
containers according to the state requirements.
A. A debris recovery plan shall be filed with the Director of Public Works,
certified recycling professional or designee prior to the commencement
of any activity for which municipal approval is required as further
identified above. The debris recovery plan shall identify the types and
estimated quantities of construction and demolition debris to be
generated from the project, how each material will be managed, and
the name of each facility or service provider that the entity will use to
manage each material. The plan shall further detail how the applicant
279. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 535-5 IRVINGTON CODE § 535-6
1:678
shall ensure that a minimum of 50% of the materials to be generated
will be separated and recycled.280
B. Review of debris recovery plan.
(1) Approval. A debris recovery plan shall be reviewed by the certified
recycling professional and approved if it provides for all of the
information required by this chapter. An approved debris recovery
plan shall be marked "Approved" and returned to the owner of the
entity which submitted the plan.
(2) Denial. A debris recovery plan shall not be approved if it does not
provide all of the information required by this chapter. If a debris
recovery plan is not approved, the owner of the entity which
submitted the plan shall be notified in writing that the plan has
been rejected, including the reasons for the rejection. In order to
obtain the building or demolition permit sought, the owner of the
entity which will carry out the construction, renovation, or
demolition project shall make the required changes and resubmit
the debris recovery plan to the Director of Public Works, certified
recycling professional or designee.281
C. Diversion requirement adjustment.
(1) Application. If the owner of an entity carrying out a covered project
experiences circumstances that makes it infeasible to comply with
the diversion requirement cited in this chapter, the owner of the
entity may apply for an adjustment. The owner shall indicate in
writing why it is infeasible to divert 50% of the materials being
generated from the covered project and specify what percentage of
diversion could be achieved. Increased costs to the owner of the
entity carrying out the covered project will not be an acceptable
justification for an adjustment.
(2) Review. The Director of Public Works, certified recycling
professional or designee shall review the information supplied by
the owner. If warranted the Director of Public Works, certified
recycling professional or designee shall attempt to contact the
owner to discuss possible ways of meeting the diversion
requirement.282
(3) Granting of an adjustment. If the Director of Public Works, certified
recycling professional or designee determines that is infeasible for
the entity carrying out a covered project to divert 50% of the
generated construction and demolition debris from the covered
project, the percent of diversion required shall be adjusted.283
280. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
281. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
282. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
283. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 535-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-6
1:679
(4) Denial of adjustment. If the Director of Public Works, certified
recycling professional or designee determines that it is feasible for
the owner of an entity carrying out a covered project to meet the
diversion requirement cited in this chapter, the owner shall be
notified in writing of the denial of the diversion requirement
adjustment.284
D. Debris recovery plan report requirements; documentation. Upon
completion of the covered project, but before the final inspection, the
owner of the entity carrying out a covered project shall submit in
person or by certified mail to the certified recycling professional, the
documentation required to demonstrate that the applicant has met the
diversion requirement. The required documentation shall include the
following:
(1) A completed debris recovery report, signed by the owner of the
entity carrying out a covered project, indicating the quantity of
each material generated during the covered project diverted or
disposed;
(2) Receipts from all facilities or service providers utilized to divert
and dispose of materials generated during the covered project; and
(3) Any additional information that the owner of the entity carrying out
the covered project believes is relevant to determining compliance
with the diversion requirement.
E. Compliance with diversion requirement.285
(1) The Director of Public Works, certified recycling professional or
designee shall review the information submitted pursuant to this
chapter and determine whether the owner of the entity carrying
out the covered project has complied or failed to comply with the
diversion requirement. The determination regarding compliance
will be provided to the owner of the entity carrying out the covered
project in writing.
(2) Appeal. An owner of the entity carrying out the covered project
may appeal a determination of failure to comply under this chapter
to the municipality within 30 days of the decision or determination.
The appeal shall be in writing and shall state the facts and basis for
the appeal. A decision by the Department of Public Works shall be
final.
F. Enforcement. The Code Enforcement Official, the Public Safety
Department, the Department of Health, the certified recycling
professional and the Department of Public Works are hereby
individually and severally empowered to enforce the provisions of this
section. The respective enforcing official may, in his or her discretion,
284. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
285. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 535-6 IRVINGTON CODE § 535-6
1:680
§ 535-7. Board of Education.
§ 535-8. Commercial and industrial sectors.
post warning stickers for a first offense. An inspection may consist of
dumping and opening of solid waste bags of containers to detect, by
sound or sight, the presence of any recyclable material. [Amended
10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553286]
G. Violations and penalties. Any person, corporation, occupant, or entity
that violates or fails to comply with any provision of this section or any
of the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not less than $250, nor
more than $1,000.
A. The Township of Irvington has adopted the Irvington Board of
Education in the municipal curbside recycling program. All material
belongs to the Township of Irvington and must be placed out for
collection according to the Township recycling requirements. Failure to
comply will result in fines from both the Municipal Enforcement Team
and the County of Essex Health Authority (CEHA).
B. All schools within the district must have a recycling program set in
place for the proper source separation of solid waste and recycling
materials. All recycling programs must have an educational component
set in place in accordance with the Township of Irvington's Three E
Equation: Education + Enforcement=Effectiveness, and the four R s of
recycling: Reduce waste, Reuse products, Recycle products and
Rethinking choices-choosing to develop a sustainable lifestyle.
C. Leaf and other recycling materials must be recycled, and it is the
responsibility of the Irvington Board of Education to properly discard
said materials. All annual recycling tonnage reports must be forwarded
to the Director of Public Works, certified recycling professional or
designee for state documentation purposes according to the state and
County of Essex regulations.287
D. The Irvington Board of Education must participate in the Township of
Irvington's Keep Irvington Beautiful programming to further educate
and implement an aesthetically clean environment for the children
which they serve in this community.
A. All businesses operating within the Township of Irvington must recycle
and are subject to fines from the municipal enforcement team and the
County of Essex Health Authority (CEHA).
B. All businesses operating within the Township of Irvington must provide
private solid waste removal and recycling removal.
286. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
287. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 535-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-8
1:681
§ 535-9. Contracts for removal and transport.
The Township of Irvington is hereby authorized to award a contract for the
removal and transporting of recycling material for a term not exceeding five
years or any part thereof upon competitive bidding to the lowest responsible
bidder who complies with the regulations respecting the bidding and who
furnishes a contractor's surety bond conditioned for the faithful
performance of the obligations of the contract. Said bond shall be for each
year for which the contract is awarded in a sum equal to the quotient
obtained by dividing the amount of the contract by the number of years of
the contract, plus 25% of said quotient. Any contract awarded pursuant to
this section shall in nowise be constructed to afford any exclusive privileges
to said contractor with reference to private waste contracts in said
municipality.
C. It is a known fact that small businesses, i.e., nail salons, hair braiding
salons, unisex shops, and barbershops, generate an abundant amount
of commingled HDPE and PET material. They are adopted under the
Township of Irvington's recycling program to generate recycling
tonnage. However, all commingled material must be brought to the 406
Coit Street dropoff site during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. only
after contacting the certified recycling professional for approval (973)
399-6697. The Township will not collect at the curbside, and failure to
recycle will result in fines.
D. All businesses operating within the Township of Irvington must support
the Keep Irvington Beautiful Pledge and programming to ensure an
aesthetically appealing community for the residents and visitors which
they serve.
E. All materials for both solid waste and recycling for commercial
businesses shall not be placed at the curb earlier than 6:00 a.m. the
morning of the collection. There shall be no solid waste and/or
recyclable materials from a commercial business placed on curbside
overnight. Solid waste and recyclable materials shall be placed at
curbside between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. [Added
6-26-2012 by Ord. No. MC 3467]
A. The collection and/or disposal and transporting of solid waste and
recycling shall comply with all rules and regulations of the local Health
Department, disposal site and laws of the State of New Jersey,
particularly with the rules of the Bureau of Solid Waste Management of
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection relating to
registration, collection, haulage and dumping and the rules and
regulations of the Board of Public Utilities.
B. The municipal service of collection and disposal of solid waste and
recycling hereunder shall not extend to entry upon private property to
remove solid waste and/or recycling from dumpsters or other
containers.
§ 535-8 IRVINGTON CODE § 535-9
1:682
§ 535-10. Collection program established.288
C. There shall be no reimbursement from municipal funds to those
property owners who do not receive the municipal service of collection
and disposal of solid waste and/or recycling.
A. There is hereby established a program for the separate collection of
newspapers, glass containers, aluminum cans, bimetal cans, PET
plastic containers, HDPE plastic containers, corrugated cardboard,
mixed paper, computers and electronics, leaves, brush, white goods,
used motor oil and batteries from the residences of the Township of
Irvington for recycling purposes. Such collections shall be made weekly
according to a schedule of residences and dates to be publicly
advertised by the Township of Irvington. Such collection shall be made
under the direction of the Director of Public Works and the supervision
of the certified recycling professional.
B. Responsibility of occupants, property owner and residents. The owner
of any property shall be responsible for compliance with this chapter.
For multifamily units, the management or owner is responsible for
setting up and maintaining the recycling system, including collection of
recyclable materials, in accordance with guidelines or regulations
established by the Department of Public Works. Violations and penalty
notices will be directed to the owner or management in those instances
where the violator is not easily identifiable. The management shall issue
notification and collection rules to new tenants when they arrive and
every six months during their occupancy.
(1) The property owner of each property in the Township of Irvington
in the County of Essex shall provide suitable receptacles as herein
prescribed, in which the occupant shall place and keep solid waste
separate from the recycling materials in not more than two
containers per dwelling unit.
(2) The property owner/occupant of property shall place in each
receptacle for solid waste and recycling no more material than it
can properly hold without spilling.
(3) All receptacles for solid waste and recycling shall be so prepared,
covered, handled and set by the occupant or other person that the
contents shall be secure and shall not spill or leak on the sidewalk
or elsewhere.
(4) All material for both solid waste and recycling shall not be placed at
the curb earlier than 6:00 p.m. the evening prior to collection and
shall not be put out the morning of the collection, with
consideration that collection times vary and are not mandated to
start, after 9:00 a.m. (may start as early as 6:00 a.m.).
288. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 535-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-10
1:683
§ 535-11. Receptacle specifications; placement for collection.
§ 535-12. Establishment of regulations.289
Said Director of the Department of Public Works and the certified recycling
professional are hereby authorized and directed to establish and
promulgate regulations as to the manner, days and times of such collections
and the bundling, handling, location and time of placement of all materials
for collection.
§ 535-13. Materials to be property of Township.
From the time of placement at the curb by any resident of any designated
recyclable material placed at the curb for collection by the Township of
Irvington's authorized agent, pursuant to a program established hereby and
the rules and regulations issued hereunder, such materials shall become
the property of the Township of Irvington, and it shall be considered a
violation of this chapter for any person other than the authorized personnel
of the contractor to collect, pick up or cause to be collected or picked up
such materials. Each such collection in violation hereof from one or more
(5) Solid waste and recycling shall not be stored at the front or side of
residential, business, commercial or institutional property. Storage
of solid waste and recycling shall be placed in the rear yard of
property with a lid and in the proper receptacle.
A. All containers shall be of the roll-out style with an attached lid. The
container shall be properly sized and qualify as to durability, ease of
handling, and weather resistance. Each container is expected to be
approximately 64 gallons.
B. Any solid single piece of solid waste (bulk material/furniture) may be
placed at the curb on the scheduled second garbage day, provided the
piece does not weigh more than 50 pounds and is not more than four
feet in length and can be handled by one man.
C. The occupant/property owner shall keep all receptacles for both solid
waste and recycling clean and in a proper condition for safe handling.
Containers with holes and tears may not be used.
D. All receptacles or dumpsters shall be maintained in accordance with
the Health Code of the Township of Irvington.
E. In buildings in which two or more families reside, each family shall
suitably mark its own receptacles so as to render the receptacles
identifiable.
F. In multi-unit dwellings the solid waste and recycling must be placed at
the curbside in three cubic yard dumpsters not blocking the sidewalk.
289. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 535-10 IRVINGTON CODE § 535-13
1:684
residences during said period shall be considered a separate and distinct
offense.
§ 535-14. Other methods of disposal.
Any resident may donate or sell used newspapers, glass containers,
aluminum cans, bimetal cans, PET plastic containers, HDPE plastic
containers, corrugated cardboard boxes, mixed papers or used motor oil to
any person, firm, partnership or corporation, whether operating for profit
or not. Said person, partnership, firm or corporation may not, under any
circumstances, pick up said materials from the curbside of the Township of
Irvington.
§ 535-15. Construction and renovation debris.
Any resident/property owner who renovates, decorates and/or demolishes
his/her property must obtain a contractor who will properly dispose of any
recyclable material, including but not limited to concrete, asphalt, roof
shingles, brick, block, wood waste (doors, fences, etc.) tree stumps, etc. The
contractor/hauler must report his/her tonnage reports to the New Jersey
State of Environmental Protection, County of Essex, and the municipal
certified recycling professional in the Township of Irvington at the
beginning of the year, prior to April 15.
§ 535-16. Reports of private organizations.
Any private organization collecting recyclable materials, as set forth in
this chapter, shall provide the Township of Irvington quarterly reports
as to the volume of materials (tonnage) collected by such organization.
Those reports will be utilized by the Township of Irvington for grant funds
and other credits which may be authorized by the State of New Jersey,
Department of Environmental Protection, pursuant to the provisions of the
New Jersey Recycling Act, N.J.S.A. 13:1E-92 et seq. or any other statutes or
administrative rules and regulations.
§ 535-17. Violations and penalties; schedule of fines. [Amended
1-26-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3563290]
A. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the penalties for
violations of this chapter are as follows:
290. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 535-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-17
1:685
Section
Short
Description
1st
Offense
2nd
Offense
3rd
Offense
4th
Offense
Maximum
Fine; Court
Appearance
Required
§ 535-10B(1)Keep solid
waste separate
from recycling
materials in
not more than
2 containers
per dwelling
unit
$50 $250 $500 $750
§ 535-10B(3)Property
owner/
operator/
tenant provide
and/or utilize
approved
leakproof
containers for
storage of solid
waste
materials
$50 $250 $500 $750
Corrugated or
cardboard
boxes/cartons/
containers
shall be
flattened and
securely
bundled/tied/
and placed at
curb for
collection on
recycling
collection days
$100 $250 $500 $750
§ 535-17 IRVINGTON CODE § 535-17
1:686
Section
Short
Description
1st
Offense
2nd
Offense
3rd
Offense
4th
Offense
Maximum
Fine; Court
Appearance
Required
Allowing
commingled
materials (i.e.,
glass beverage
containers,
milk/detergent
containers,
etc.) to spill/
leak on
sidewalk or
elsewhere
$50 $250 $500 $750
§ 535-10B(2)Property owner
or occupant of
property shall
place in each
receptacle for
solid waste/
recycling no
more material
than it can
properly hold
without spilling
$50 $250 $500 $750
§ 535-10B(3)Failure to
secure
receptacle
allowing
garbage (solid
waste) to spill/
leak on
sidewalk or
elsewhere
$50 $250 $500 $750
§ 535-10B(4)Placing trash
out early
(before 6:00
p.m.)
$50 $250 $500 $750
§ 535-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-17
1:687
Section
Short
Description
1st
Offense
2nd
Offense
3rd
Offense
4th
Offense
Maximum
Fine; Court
Appearance
Required
§ 535-10B(5)Storage of
solid waste/
recycling shall
be placed in
rear yard of
property with a
lid and in
proper
receptacles
$50 $250 $500 $750
§ 535-11B No more than
2 pieces of
bulk can be
placed at the
curb per
property for
pick up
(scheduled 2nd
garbage day)
(must not
weigh more
than 50 pounds
and not be
more than 4
feet in length
and can be
handled by 1
man)
$50 $250 $500 $750
B. Any person violating any other provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter 1,
Article III, Penalties, of the Township Code.
§ 535-17 IRVINGTON CODE § 535-17
1:688
Chapter 544
SPECIAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 650.
§ 535-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 535-17
1:689

ARTICLE I
Springfield Avenue Center Special Improvement District
[Adopted 11-25-1997 by Ord. No. MC 3084 (Ch. 170, Art. I, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 544-1. Establishment of District.
The Springfield Avenue Center Special Improvement District ("District") is
hereby established.
§ 544-2. District properties.
The district shall consist of commercial properties located on Springfield
Avenue between Stuyvesant Avenue and Grove Street, Nye Avenue between
Stuyvesant Avenue and Union Avenue, Ball Street between Nye Avenue
and Clinton Avenue, Washington Avenue between Clinton Avenue and
Springfield Avenue, Clinton Avenue between Smith Street and Ball Street,
New Street between Nye Avenue and Clinton Avenue, and Union Avenue
between Nye Avenue and Springfield Avenue. A list of said commercial
properties, identified by lot and block number, is attached herein as
Schedule A.291
§ 544-3. Annual assessments.
§ 544-4. Annual report and budget.
The Mayor, with assistance and concurrence of the District Management
Corporation, shall submit all reports and plans required by N.J.S.A. 40:56-80
and N.J.S.A. 40:56-89, together with a detailed annual budget as required
by N.J.S.A. 40:56-84, to the governing body for approval.
§ 544-5. District Management Corporation.
A. All costs of development, construction and acquisition relating to the
provision of improvements shall be financed by and assessed to
properties especially benefitted thereby.
B. All costs of improvements and maintenance, other than the costs of
improvements and maintenance ordinarily incurred by the Township
out of general funds, shall be determined and approved pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:56-80 or N.J.S.A. 40:56-85 as determined by the District
Management Corporation.
C. The above costs shall be collected as a special assessment rate against
commercial properties who benefit in the district.
A. Creation. There is hereby created the Springfield Avenue Center
District Management Corporation (the "Corporation").
291. Editor's Note: Schedule A is available at the Township offices.
§ 544-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 544-5
1:691
B. Membership. The Corporation shall be comprised of all commercial
property owners, business owners or representatives and others
according to the bylaws of the District Management Corporation. The
Board of Directors of the Corporation shall be composed of the
following members: one voting Council representative to be appointed
by the Council, one voting municipal agency head, or designee,
appointed by the Mayor, one voting Urban Enterprise Zone (UEZ)
representative, one Chamber of Commerce representative, one voting
Irvington Clergy Association President, one voting New Jersey Transit
representative, and one voting resident living within the boundaries of
the Springfield Avenue Center Special Improvement District (SID) and
a minimum of 15 Springfield Avenue Center Special Improvement
District business and/or property owners to be elected according to the
bylaws of the District Management Corporation. The quorum at any
meeting of the Board of Directors of the Corporation shall be three of
the 15 business and/or property owners of the Board. Three business/
property owner members must be in attendance for meetings requiring
a vote on any agenda item.
C. Obligations. In addition to the obligations set forth in the Act,292 the
Corporation shall file an annual audit of its books, accounts and
financial transactions, which shall be filed with the governing body and
the Division of Local Government Services, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:56-88.
D. Powers. In addition to the powers otherwise conferred upon it by the
Act, the Corporation shall have the power to:
(1) Adopt bylaws for the regulations of its affairs and the conduct of its
business and to prescribe rules, regulations, and policies for the
performance of its functions and duties.
(2) Employ such persons as may be required, and fix and pay their
compensation from funds available to the Corporation.
(3) Apply for, accept, administer and comply with the requirements
respecting an appropriation of funds or a gift, grant or donation of
property or money.
(4) Make and execute agreements which may be necessary or
convenient to the exercise of the powers and functions of the
Corporation, including contracts with any person, firm,
corporation, governmental agency or other entity.
(5) Administer and manage its own funds and accounts and pay its own
obligations.
(6) Borrow money from private lenders or governmental entities for
periods not to exceed 180 days.
292. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:56-65 et seq.
§ 544-5 IRVINGTON CODE § 544-5
1:692
§ 544-6. Debt obligations.
This article obligates the Springfield Avenue Center Special Improvement
District to satisfy all debts, loans and financial liabilities incurred by the
Corporation. The Springfield Avenue Center District Management
Corporation may not borrow an amount that exceeds the approved budget
for that fiscal year. The charter of the Springfield Avenue Center Special
Improvement District shall include a clause including the aforementioned.
(7) Fund the improvement of the exterior appearance of commercial
properties within the district.
(8) Fund the rehabilitation of commercial properties in the district.
(9) Accept, purchase, rehabilitate, sell, lease or manage property in
the district.
(10) Enforce the conditions of any loan, grant, sale or lease made by the
Corporation; provided, however, that if the businesses in the
district petition to dissolve the district, the Township shall have the
right to amend the current year budget and schedule fees and/or
taxes in order to liquidate outstanding claims against the
Springfield Avenue Center Special Improvement District
Corporation.
(11) Provide security, sanitation, and other services to the district
supplemental to those normally provided by the Township.
(12) Undertake improvements designed to increase the safety or
attractiveness of the district to businesses which may wish to
locate there or to visitors to the district, including but not limited to
litter cleanup and control, landscaping, parking areas and facilities,
recreational and rest areas and facilities, and those improvements
generally permitted for pedestrian malls under N.J.S.A. 40:56-66,
pursuant to pertinent regulations of the governing body.
(13) Publicize the district and all of the businesses included within the
district boundaries.
(14) Recruit new businesses to fill vacancies and to balance the
business mix of the district.
(15) Organize and coordinate special events in the district pursuant to
pertinent regulations of the Township.
(16) Provide temporary decorative lighting within the district boundary.
(17) Provide special parking arrangements for the district.
§ 544-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 544-6
1:693

ARTICLE II
Camptown Business Improvement District
[Adopted 11-9-2000 by Ord. No. 3159 (Ch. 170, Art. II, of the 1981
Revised Code)]
§ 544-7. Findings.
§ 544-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated:
DISTRICT MANAGEMENT CORPORATION — An entity created by
municipal ordinance or incorporated pursuant to N.J.S.A. 15A:1-1 et seq.
and designated by municipal ordinance to receive funds collected by a
special assessment within a special improvement district as authorized by
this article.
A. The Irvington Municipal Council finds as follows:
(1) That an area within the Township of Irvington, as shall be described
hereafter by lot and block numbers as well as by street addresses,
would benefit from being designated as a special improvement
district;
(2) That a District Management Corporation would assist this
Township in promoting economic growth and employment within
the business district by providing administrative and other services
to benefit the businesses, employees, residents and consumers in
the special improvement district;
(3) That a special assessment shall be imposed and collected by the
Township of Irvington with the regular property tax payment in lieu
of taxes and that such special assessment shall be transferred to
the District Management Corporation to exercise the powers given
it by this article and to effectuate the purposes of N.J.S.A. 40:56 et
seq.;
(4) That it is in the best interest of the Township of Irvington and the
public to create such special improvement district and to designate
such District Management Corporation, except that no District
Management Corporation shall be designated to receive any funds
or to exercise any powers, unless the Board of Directors of that
Corporation shall include at least one member of the Municipal
Council of the Township of Irvington.
B. The public policy of the State of New Jersey permits the governing body
to protect the public welfare and health and the interest of the public in
the safe and effective movement of persons and to preserve and
enhance the function and appearance of the business districts of the
Township of Irvington by adoption of a special improvement ordinance.
§ 544-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 544-8
1:695
SPECIAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT — An area within the Township of
Irvington designated by this article as an area in which a special assessment
on all property within the district shall be imposed for the purpose of
promoting the economic and general welfare of the district and the
municipality. This District shall be called "Camptown Business Improvement
District of Irvington, New Jersey."
§ 544-9. Description of District.
There is hereby designated as Special Improvement District (hereafter
called SID), which is more particularly described as follows:293
§ 544-10. Exemption from payment of special assessment.
Any property listed hereinabove, and which is incorporated with the SID, is
exempt from the payment of any special assessment if it is exclusively used
for residential purposes.
§ 544-11. Special assessments.
§ 544-12. District Management Corporation.
Camptown Business Development Park of Irvington, New Jersey, is hereby
designated the District Management Corporation which shall assist the
Township of Irvington in promoting economic growth and improvement
within the SID. Said District Management Corporation is incorporated
pursuant to the provisions of Title 15A of the New Jersey Statutes and
A. The Special Improvement District, as hereinabove described, shall be
an area in which all of the property included therein, except as
hereinafter stated, shall have imposed a special assessment for the
purposes of promoting the economic and general welfare of the district
and the Township of Irvington. Any property located within the SID
which is tax exempt shall not be subject to the special assessment. In
the event any tax-exempt entity makes a payment in lieu of taxes to the
Township of Irvington, then, in that event, said entity shall be subject to
the imposition of the special assessment.
B. The improvements and supplemental services in the SID will involve
annual costs peculiar only to the SID and will be distinguished from
improvements and services normally provided by the Township. While
the improvements and supplemental services shall be maintained and
operated pursuant to the provisions of this article and to N.J.S.A.
40:56-65 et seq. and the costs thereof assessed or taxed to the benefited
properties pursuant to this article, such improvements and
supplemental services shall not be substituted by the Township for
improvements and services now supplied to the proposed SID nor be
grounds for curtailment of future improvements and services planned.
293. Editor's Note: The specific description of the Camptown Business Improvement District,
by owner name, block, lot and location, is available at the Township offices.
§ 544-8 IRVINGTON CODE § 544-12
1:696
is hereby designated as eligible to receive the funds collected as special
assessment within the SID. In addition, the District Management
Corporation shall:
A. Have a Board of Trustees consisting of 11 members chosen as follows:
(1) One member appointed by the Mayor;
(2) One member of the Urban Enterprise Zone, appointed by the
Township Council;
(3) One member of the Board of Education appointed by the Board of
Education;
(4) The UEZ Coordinator;
(5) Such additional persons, including owners of real estate located
within the Special Improvement District and officials of
corporations or entities operating retail or service establishments
therein, as may be selected under the bylaws of the District
Management Corporation.
B. Exercise the following powers:
(1) Adopt bylaws for the regulation of its affairs and the conduct of its
business and to prescribe rules, regulations and policies in
connection with the performance of its functions and duties.
(2) Employ such persons as may be required, and fix and pay their
compensation from funds available to the Corporation.
(3) Apply for, accept, administer and comply with the requirements
respecting an appropriation of funds or a gift, grant or donation of
property or money.
(4) Make and execute agreements which may be necessary or
convenient to the exercise of the powers and functions of the
Corporation, including contracts with any person, firm,
corporation, governmental agency or other entity.
(5) Administer and manage its own funds and accounts and its own
obligations.
(6) Borrow money from private lenders for periods not to exceed 180
days and from governmental entities for that or longer periods.
(7) Accept, purchase, rehabilitate, sell, lease or manage property in
the SID.
(8) Provide security, sanitation and other services to the SID
supplemental to those provided normally by the Township.
(9) Undertake improvements designed to increase the safety or
attractiveness of the SID to businesses which may wish to locate
§ 544-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 544-12
1:697
§ 544-13. Budget.
there or to visitors to the SID, including, but not limited to, litter
cleanup and control, landscaping, parking areas and facilities,
recreational and rest areas and facilities, and those improvements
generally permitted for pedestrian malls under Section 2 of P.L.
1972, c. 134 (N.J.S.A. 40:56-66), pursuant to pertinent regulations
of the governing body.
(10) Publicize the district and the business included within the district
boundaries.
(11) Organize special events in the district.
(12) Provide special parking arrangements in conjunction with the
Irvington Department of Public Safety for the district. [Amended
10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
(13) Provide temporary decorative lighting in the district.
A. The District Management Corporation shall submit a detailed annual
budget for approval by resolution of the Municipal Council of the
Township of Irvington. The budget shall be submitted with a report
which explains how the budget contributes to goals and objectives for
the Special Improvement District.
B. The budget shall be introduced, approved, amended and adopted by
resolution passed by not less than a majority of the full membership of
the Municipal Council of the Township of Irvington.
C. The procedure shall be as follows:
(1) Introduction and approval;
(2) Public advertising;
(3) Public hearing;
(4) Amendments and public hearing, if required;
(5) Adoption.
D. The budget shall be introduced in writing at a meeting of the Municipal
Council of the Township of Irvington. Approval thereof shall constitute a
first reading, which may be by title. Upon approval of the budget by the
governing body, it shall fix the time and place for the holding of a public
hearing upon the budget.
E. The budget shall be advertised after approval. The advertisement shall
contain a copy of the budget and shall set forth the date, the time and
place of the hearing. It shall be published at least 10 days prior to the
date fixed therefor in a newspaper circulating in the Township of
Irvington.
§ 544-12 IRVINGTON CODE § 544-13
1:698
F. No budget shall be adopted until a public hearing has been held
thereon and all persons having an interest therein shall have been given
an opportunity to present objections. The hearing shall be held not less
than 28 days after approval of the budget.
G. The public hearing shall be held at the time and place specified in the
advertisement thereof, but may be adjourned from time to time until the
hearing is closed. The budget, as advertised, shall be read at the public
hearing in full, or it may be read by its title, if:
(1) At least one week prior to the date of the hearing, a complete copy
of the approved budget, as advertised:
(a) Shall be posted in a public place where public notices are
customarily posted in the Municipal Building of the Township
of Irvington; and
(b) Is made available to each person requesting the same, during
that week and during the public hearing; and
(2) The Municipal Council shall, by resolution passed by not less than a
majority of the full membership, determine that the budget shall be
read by its title and declare that the conditions set forth in
Subsection G(1) have been met. After closing the hearing, the
Municipal Council may adopt the budget, by title without
amendments, or may approve amendments as provided in
Subsection H of this section before adoption.
H. Amendment.
(1) The Municipal Council may amend the budget during or after the
public hearing. No amendment by the Municipal Council shall be
effective until taxpayers and all persons having an interest therein
shall have been granted a public hearing thereon, if the
amendment shall:
(a) Add a new item in an amount in excess of 1% of the total
amount as stated in the approved budget;
(b) Increase or decrease any item by more than 10%; or
(c) Increase the amount to be raised pursuant to Section 16 of P.L.
1972, c. 134 (N.J.S.A. 40:56-80) by more than 5%, unless the
same is made pursuant to an emergency temporary
appropriation only.
(2) Notice of hearing on an amendment shall be advertised at least
three days before the date set therefor. The amendment shall be
published in full in the same manner as an original publication and
shall be read in full at the hearing and before adoption.
I. Final adoption shall be by resolution, adopted by a majority of the full
membership of the Municipal Council, and may be by title.
§ 544-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 544-14
1:699
§ 544-14. Audit.
§ 544-15. Annual report.
The District Management Corporation shall within 30 days of the close of
each fiscal year, make an annual report of its activities for the preceding
fiscal year to the Municipal Council of the Township of Irvington.
§ 544-16. Costs and assessments.295
The annual costs of operating, maintaining and improving the Special
Improvement District shall be reported to the governing body, assessed,
collected and appropriated as provided in N.J.S.A. 40:56-80.
§ 544-17. Public notice.
At least 10 days prior to the date fixed for a public hearing on this article, a
copy hereof and notice of the date, time and place of said hearing shall be
mailed by first class mail to the owners and tenants of the lots or parcels
of land included in the Special Improvement District, as listed on the tax
record of the Township.
A. Concurrently with the introduction of this article and the submission of
a plan for the SID, the District Management Corporation shall cause an
annual audit of its books, accounts and financial transactions to be
made and filed with the Municipal Council of the Township of Irvington,
and for that purpose the Corporation shall employ a certified public
accountant of New Jersey.
B. The annual audit shall be completed and filed with the governing body
within four months after the close of the fiscal year of the
Corporation.294
294. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
295. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 544-14 IRVINGTON CODE § 544-17
1:700
Chapter 550
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 313.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 365.
Subdivision and site plan review — See Ch.
650.
Zoning — See Ch. 560.
§ 544-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 544-17
1:701

ARTICLE I
Standards and Management
[Adopted 2-14-2007 by Ord. No. MC 3335 (Ch. 172, Art. I, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 550-1. Scope and purpose.
A. Policy statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low-impact techniques shall be
explored before relying on structural BMPs. Structural BMPs should be
integrated with nonstructural stormwater management strategies and
proper maintenance plans. Nonstructural strategies include both
environmentally sensitive site design and source controls that prevent
pollutants from being placed on the site or from being exposed to
stormwater. Source control plans should be developed based upon
physical site conditions and the origin, nature, and the anticipated
quantity or amount of potential pollutants. Multiple stormwater
management BMPs may be necessary to achieve the established
performance standards for water quality, quantity, and groundwater
recharge.
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for "major
development," as defined in § 550-2.
C. Applicability.
(1) This article shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions for
the following major developments that require preliminary or final
site plan or subdivision review:
(a) Nonresidential major developments; and
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21.
(2) This article shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the Township of Irvington.
D. Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant
to this article are to be considered an integral part of development
approvals under the subdivision and site plan review process and do not
relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or
approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule,
act, or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this article shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare, this article
is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other
ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law, except
§ 550-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-1
1:703
§ 550-2. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this article its most reasonable application. The definitions
below are the same as or based on the corresponding definitions in the
Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES OR NODES — Those areas within boundaries
accepted by the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8E-5B.
CAFRA PLANNING MAP — The geographic depiction of the boundaries for
Coastal Planning Areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA Cores and CAFRA Nodes
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.3.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving
the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and access to
public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County Board
of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management plans
and implementing ordinances. The county review agency may either be:
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGNATED CENTER — A State Development and Redevelopment Plan
Center as designated by the State Planning Commission, such as urban,
regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation
and development of project design and preparation of drawings and
specifications.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any mining
excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any building or
other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any person, for which
permission is required under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
that, where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different
from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other
provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher standards
shall control.
A. A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A.
58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinances.
B.
§ 550-1 IRVINGTON CODE § 550-2
1:704
et seq. In the case of development of agricultural lands, "development"
means: any activity that requires a state permit; any activity reviewed
by the County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State Agricultural
Development Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any activity not
exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving water body
or to a particular point along a receiving water body.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood designated by the
Urban Coordinating Council in consultation and conjunction with the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
ENGINEER — The Township Engineer or his designee or authorized
representative.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — An area or feature which is
of significant environmental value, including, but not limited to: stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland forest;
steep slopes; and wellhead protection and groundwater recharge areas.
Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the
Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that provides for ultimately
disturbing one or more acres of land. Disturbance for the purpose of this
rule is the placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement
of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of vegetation or any site
plan for development that is classified as a major site plan within Chapter
560 of the Code of the Township of Irvington.
MAJOR SITE PLAN — A site plan involving the disturbance of 5,000 square
feet or more as part of development or redevelopment activity.
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, borough, town, township, or village.
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a compact
form.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
§ 550-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-2
1:705
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, the Township of Irvington, or political subdivision of this state
subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
substance [except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954,
as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.)], thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, agricultural, and
construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or
indirectly to the land, groundwaters or surface waters of the state, or
to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous and
nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into
the ground and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or
gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has
occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the State Plan Policy Map
and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended to be the
focus for much of the state's future redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies, and
the Official Map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities,
or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or embankment
and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater
management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or
infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool (a retention basin), or
be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most constructed stormwater
wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater discharges into
stormwater conveyances.
§ 550-2 IRVINGTON CODE § 550-2
1:706
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or in
storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area, which may be
influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is primarily
caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— A neighborhood given priority access to state resources through the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — A zone designated by the New Jersey
Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise
Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions of
areas:
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams,
wetlands, and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
§ 550-3. General standards.
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes;
A.
B. Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
C. Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
D.
A. Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality standards in
§ 550-4. To the maximum extent practicable, these standards shall be
met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater management strategies
into the design. If these strategies alone are not sufficient to meet these
standards, structural stormwater management measures necessary to
meet these standards shall be incorporated into the design.
B. The standards in this article apply only to new major development and
are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on water
quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and maintain
groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to new major
§ 550-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-3
1:707
§ 550-4. Requirements for major development.
development to the extent that alternative design and performance
standards are applicable under a regional stormwater management
plan or water quality management plan adopted in accordance with
Department rules.
A. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development in accordance with § 550-10.
B. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as
documented in the Department's Landscape Project or Natural
Heritage Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through
15.150, particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or Clemmys
muhlenbergii (bog turtle).
C. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater
runoff quality requirements of Subsections F and G:
(1) The construction of an underground utility line, provided that the
disturbed areas are re-vegetated upon completion;
(2) The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(3) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is made of permeable material.
D. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of Subsections F and G may be obtained for the
enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad, or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided
that the following conditions are met:
(1) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(2) The applicant demonstrates, through an alternatives analysis, that
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of Subsections F and G to the
maximum extent practicable;
(3) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
of Subsections F and G, existing structures currently in use, such
as homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
§ 550-3 IRVINGTON CODE § 550-4
1:708
(4) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under Subsection D(3) above within
the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that would
provide additional opportunities to mitigate the requirements of
Subsections F and G that were not achievable on site.
E. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in Subsections F
and G shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies set forth in this subsection into the design.
The applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures
incorporated into the design of the project. If the applicant
contends that it is not feasible for engineering, environmental, or
safety reasons to incorporate any nonstructural stormwater
management measures identified in Subsection E(2) below into the
design of a particular project, the applicant shall identify the
strategy considered and provide a basis for the contention.
(2) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
(d) Minimize the decrease in the time of concentration from
preconstruction to postconstruction. "Time of concentration" is
defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed;
(e) Minimize land disturbance, including clearing and grading;
(f) Minimize soil compaction;
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
§ 550-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-4
1:709
[1] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy Subsection E(3) below;
[2] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
[3] Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
[4] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
(3) Site design features identified under Subsection E(2)(i)[2] above
shall comply with the following standard to control passage of solid
and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of
this subsection, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment,
debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids.
For exemptions to this standard see Subsection E(3)(c) below.
(a) Grates.
[1] Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a
storm drain or surface water body under that grate:
[a] The New Jersey Department of Transportation
(NJDOT) bicycle-safe grate, which is described in
Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle Compatible
Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
[b] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven square
inches, or is no greater than 0.5 inch across the
smallest dimension.
[2] Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer
bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields,
open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
§ 550-4 IRVINGTON CODE § 550-4
1:710
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than seven square inches, or be no greater
than two inches across the smallest dimension.
(c) This standard does not apply:
[1] Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
[2] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in Subsection G(1) are conveyed through any
device (e.g., end-of-pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed,
at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
[a] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
[3] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars, to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in Subsection G(1); or
[4] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
(4) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in Subsections F and
G shall be dedicated to a government agency, subjected to a
conservation restriction filed with the appropriate County Clerk's
office, or subject to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures
that measure or an equivalent stormwater management measure
approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
(5) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 550-7, or found on the Department's Web
site at www.njstormwater.org or is available in the Office of the
Township Engineer.
F. Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity standards.
§ 550-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-4
1:711
(1) This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. and
implementing rules.
(b) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
[1] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at § 550-5, either:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain 100% of the average annual
preconstruction groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from preconstruction to postconstruction for the twoyear
storm is infiltrated.
[2] This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within the urban redevelopment area, or to
projects subject to Subsection F(1)(b)[3] below.
[3] The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and
commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or
applied, areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than "reportable
quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
with a Department-approved remedial action work
plan or landfill closure plan and areas with high risks
for spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[b] Industrial stormwater exposed to source material.
"Source material" means any material(s) or
machinery, located at an industrial facility, that is
§ 550-4 IRVINGTON CODE § 550-4
1:712
directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which
could be a source of pollutants in any industrial
stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw
materials; intermediate products; final products;
waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery
and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents
that are related to process, manufacturing, or other
industrial activities that are exposed to stormwater.
[4] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surficial ponding, flooding of basements, or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
downgradient of the groundwater recharge area.
(c) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at § 550-5, complete one of the
following:
[1] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that for stormwater leaving the site, postconstruction
runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten-, and one-hundredyear
storm events do not exceed, at any point in time, the
preconstruction runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events;
[2] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there is no increase, as compared to the
preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten-, and onehundred-
year storm events and that the increased volume
or change in timing of stormwater runoff will not increase
flood damage at or downstream of the site. This analysis
shall include the analysis of impacts of existing land uses
and projected land uses assuming full development under
existing zoning and land use ordinances in the drainage
area;
[3] Design stormwater management measures so that the
postconstruction peak runoff rates for the two-, ten- and
one-hundred-year storm events are 50%, 75% and 85%,
respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff rates. The
percentages apply only to the postconstruction
stormwater runoff that is attributable to the portion of the
§ 550-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-4
1:713
site on which the proposed development or project is to
be constructed. The percentages shall not be applied to
postconstruction stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard
areas if the increased volume of stormwater runoff will not
increase flood damages below the point of discharge; or
[4] In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with Subsection F(1)(c)[1], [2] and
[3] above shall only be applied if the increased volume of
stormwater runoff could increase flood damages below the
point of discharge.
(2) Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of "major development" at § 550-2 shall be submitted to
the appropriate Soil Conservation District for review and approval
in accordance with the requirements of this section and any
applicable Soil Conservation District guidelines for stormwater
runoff quantity and erosion control. For the purposes of this
section, "agricultural development" means land uses normally
associated with the production of food, fiber and livestock for sale.
Such uses do not include the development of land for the
processing or sale of food and the manufacturing of agriculturally
related products.
G. Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(1) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
postconstruction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in stormwater
runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from the developed site,
expressed as an annual average. Stormwater management
measures shall only be required for water quality control if an
additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is being proposed on a
development site. The requirement to reduce TSS does not apply to
any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated under a numeric
effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New Jersey Pollution
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in
a discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit from this
requirement. The water quality design storm is 1.25 inches of
rainfall in two hours. Water quality calculations shall take into
account the distribution of rain from the water quality design
storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation of the volume of
runoff may take into account the implementation of nonstructural
and structural stormwater management measures.
§ 550-4 IRVINGTON CODE § 550-4
1:714
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
(2) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 550-7, or found on the Department's Web
site at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual and other sources
of technical guidance are listed in § 550-7. TSS reduction shall be
calculated based on the removal rates for the BMPs in Table 2
below. Alternative removal rates and methods of calculating
removal rates may be used if the design engineer provides
documentation demonstrating the capability of these alternative
rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of any approved
alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate shall be
provided to the Department at the following address: Division of
Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, P.O. Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0418.
(3) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
eighty-percent TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize
the following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B - (AXB)/100
Where:
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of both
BMPs
§ 550-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-4
1:715
A = TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP
B = TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second BMP
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention systems 90%
Constructed stormwater
wetland
90%
Extended detention basin 40% to 60%
Infiltration structure 80%
Manufactured treatment
device
See § 550-6C
Sand filter 80%
Vegetative filter strip 60% to 80%
Wet pond 50% to 90%
(4) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the eighty-percent
TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the
runoff from the subareas converge on site, in which case the
removal rate can be demonstrated through a calculation using a
weighted average.
(5) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the postconstruction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in Subsections F and G.
(6) Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may
be obtained from the address identified in § 550-7.
(7) In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
(8) Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage area.
These areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
§ 550-4 IRVINGTON CODE § 550-4
1:716
and exceptional fisheries significance of those established Category
One waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[1] A three-hundred-foot special water resource protection
area shall be provided on each side of the waterway,
measured perpendicular to the waterway from the top of
the bank outwards or from the center line of the waterway
where the bank is not defined, consisting of existing
vegetation or vegetation allowed to follow natural
succession.
[2] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under Subsection G(8)(a)[1]
above shall only be allowed where previous development
or disturbance has occurred (for example, active
agricultural use, parking area or maintained lawn area).
The encroachment shall only be allowed where applicant
demonstrates that the functional value and overall
condition of the special water resource protection area will
be maintained to the maximum extent practicable. In no
case shall the remaining special water resource protection
area be reduced to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the top of bank of the waterway or center
line of the waterway where the bank is undefined. All
encroachments proposed under this subsection shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the Standard for Off-Site Stability in the Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established under
the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et
seq.
(c) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
Standard for Off-Site Stability in the Standards for Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established under the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.,
then the stabilization measures in accordance with the
requirements of the above standards may be placed within the
special water resource protection area, provided that:
[1] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One waterway;
§ 550-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-4
1:717
§ 550-5. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge.
[2] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a ninety-five-percent TSS
postconstruction removal rate;
[3] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
[4] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
[5] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation
District staff to identify necessary stabilization measures;
and
[6] All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan, or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to Subsection G(8) has been approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection, then the provisions
of the plan shall be the applicable special water resource
protection area requirements for that waterway. A stream
corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to Subsection
G(8) shall maintain or enhance the current functional value
and overall condition of the special water resource protection
area as defined in Subsection G(8)(a)[1] above. In no case shall
a stream corridor protection plan allow the reduction of the
special water resource protection area to less than 150 feet as
measured perpendicular to the waterway subject to this
subsection.
(e) Subsection G(8) does not apply to the construction of one
individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
A. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
(1) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
§ 550-4 IRVINGTON CODE § 550-5
1:718
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Section 4 — Hydrology and
Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds; or
(b) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
(2) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the preconstruction condition
of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology at Subsection A(1)(a) and the Rational and
Modified Rational Methods at Subsection A(1)(b). A runoff
coefficient or a groundwater recharge land cover for an existing
condition may be used on all or a portion of the site if the design
engineer verifies that the hydrologic condition has existed on the
site or portion of the site for at least five years without interruption
prior to the time of application. If more than one land cover has
existed on the site during the five years immediately prior to the
time of application, the land cover with the lowest runoff potential
shall be used for the computations. In addition, there is the
presumption that the site is in good hydrologic condition (if the
land use type is pasture, lawn, or park), with good cover (if the land
use type is woods), or with good hydrologic condition and
conservation treatment (if the land use type is cultivation).
(3) In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, or
culverts, that may reduce preconstruction stormwater runoff rates
and volumes.
(4) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds and other methods may be employed.
(5) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
§ 550-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-5
1:719
§ 550-6. Standards for structural stormwater management
measures.
B. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following:
(1) The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32 A Method for
Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual; at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological
Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427, Trenton, New Jersey
08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
A. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
(1) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas, wetlands; flood-prone
areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
(2) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure as appropriate, and shall have parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of the
water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water
quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall
be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the
orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing
between bars of one inch and a maximum spacing between bars of
six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with
the requirements of § 550-8B.
(3) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosionresistant.
Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
7.4, and 7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
(4) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in diameter.
(5) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
§ 550-8.
§ 550-5 IRVINGTON CODE § 550-6
1:720
§ 550-7. Sources for technical guidance.
B. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized, provided the
design engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its
design will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater
recharge and water quality design and performance standards
established by § 550-4 of this article.
C. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of § 550-4 of this article, provided the pollutant removal rates are
verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and
certified by the Department.
A. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at Subsection A(1) and (2) below, which
are available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton,
New Jersey 08625; telephone (609) 777-1038.
(1) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures such as: bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
(2) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
B. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
(1) The Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey
promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or
any of the Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
The location, address, and telephone number of each Soil
Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625;
(609) 292-5540;
(2) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, (732) 932-9306; and
(3) The Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The
location, address, and telephone number of each Soil Conservation
District may be obtained from the State Soil Conservation
§ 550-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-7
1:721
§ 550-8. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625; (609)
292-5540.
A. This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This section applies to any new stormwater management basin.
B. Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape provisions.
(1) A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than
six-inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net
area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion-resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(2) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion-resistant, and shall be designed
to withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(3) For purposes of this Subsection B(3), "escape provisions" means
the permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other
features that provide easily accessible means of egress from
stormwater management basins. Stormwater management basins
shall include escape provisions as follows:
§ 550-7 IRVINGTON CODE § 550-8
1:722
§ 550-9. Requirements for site development stormwater plan.
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in
Subsection C a freestanding outlet structure may be exempted
from this requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four feet to six feet
in width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2 feet
below the permanent water surface, and the second step shall
be located one foot to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent water
surface. See Subsection D for an illustration of safety ledges in
a stormwater management basin.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be
steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
C. Variance or exemption from safety standards. A variance or exemption
from the safety standards for stormwater management basins may be
granted only upon a written finding by the appropriate reviewing
agency (municipality, county or Department) that the variance or
exemption will not constitute a threat to public safety.
D. Illustration of safety ledges in a new stormwater management basin.
A. Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(1) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this article, the applicant shall submit all of the required
components of the checklist for the site development stormwater
plan at Subsection C below as part of the submission of the
applicant's application for subdivision or site plan approval.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this article.
§ 550-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-9
1:723
(3) The applicant shall submit 16 copies of the materials listed in the
checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance with
Subsection C of this section.
B. Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the municipal board or official from which
municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official shall
consult the engineer retained by the Planning and/or Zoning Board (as
appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist requirements have been
satisfied and to determine if the project meets the standards set forth in
this article.
C. Checklist requirements.
(1) The following information shall be required:
(a) Topographic base map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary.
It is recommended that the topographic base map of the site be
submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the
limits of the proposed development, at a scale of one inch
equals 200 feet or greater, showing two-foot contour intervals.
The map, as appropriate, may indicate the following: existing
surface water drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible
soils, perennial or intermittent streams that drain into or
upstream of the Category One waters, wetlands and
floodplains along with their appropriate buffer strips,
marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or vegetative
surfaces, existing man-made structures, roads, bearing and
distances of property lines, and significant natural and manmade
features not otherwise shown.
(b) Environmental site analysis: A written and graphic description
of the natural and man-made features of the site and its
environs. This description should include a discussion of soil
conditions, slopes, wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the
site. Particular attention should be given to unique, unusual, or
environmentally sensitive features and to those that provide
particular opportunities or constraints for development.
(c) Project description and site plan(s): a map (or maps) at the
scale of the topographical base map indicating the location of
existing and proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities,
structural facilities for stormwater management and sediment
control, and other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also
clearly show areas where alterations occur in the natural
terrain and cover, including lawns and other landscaping, and
seasonal high groundwater elevations. A written description of
the site plan and justification of proposed changes in natural
conditions may also be provided.
§ 550-9 IRVINGTON CODE § 550-9
1:724
(d) Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall
provide a demonstration of how the goals and standards of
§§ 550-3 through 550-6 are being met. The focus of this plan
shall be to describe how the site is being developed to meet the
objective of controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater
quality and stormwater quantity problems at the source by
land management and source controls whenever possible.
(e) Stormwater management facilities map. The following
information, illustrated on a map of the same scale as the
topographic base map, shall be included:
[1] Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon,
and details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
[2] Details of all stormwater management facility designs,
during and after construction, including discharge
provisions, discharge capacity for each outlet at different
levels of detention and emergency spillway provisions with
maximum discharge capacity of each spillway.
(f) Calculations.
[1] Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design
calculations for the predevelopment and postdevelopment
conditions for the design storms specified in § 550-4 of this
article.
[2] When the proposed stormwater management control
measures (e.g., infiltration basins) depend on the
hydrologic properties of soils, then a soils report shall be
submitted. The soils report shall be based on on-site
boring logs or soil pit profiles. The number and location of
required soil borings or soil pits shall be determined based
on what is needed to determine the suitability and
distribution of soils present at the location of the control
measure.
(g) Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of § 550-10.
(2) Waiver from submission requirements. The municipal official or
board reviewing an application under this article may, in
consultation with the municipal engineer, waive submission of any
of the requirements in Subsection C(1)(a) through (f) of this section
when it can be demonstrated that the information requested is
impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship on the applicant
§ 550-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-9
1:725
§ 550-10. Maintenance and repair.
to obtain and its absence will not materially affect the review
process.
A. Applicability. Projects subject to review as in § 550-1C of this article
shall comply with the requirements of Subsections B and C.
B. General maintenance.
(1) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
(2) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal; and the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including
replacement). Maintenance guidelines for stormwater
management measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public
agency or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for
maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such
person's agreement to assume this responsibility, or of the
developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management
facility to such person under an applicable ordinance or regulation.
(3) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project, unless such owner or tenant owns or
leases the entire residential development or project.
(4) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan
and any future revisions based on Subsection B(7) below shall be
recorded upon the deed of record for each property on which the
maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be
undertaken.
(5) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and
ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
(6) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall maintain a detailed log of all
preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
§ 550-9 IRVINGTON CODE § 550-10
1:726
§ 550-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains, or
uses any building, structure or land in violation of this article shall be
subject to the following penalties:
the development, including a record of all inspections and copies of
all maintenance-related work orders.
(7) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and the
deed as needed.
(8) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall retain and make available, upon
request by any public entity with administrative, health,
environmental, or safety authority over the site, the maintenance
plan and the documentation required by Subsection B(6) and (7)
above.
(9) The requirements of Subsection B(3) and (4) do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
(10) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and
repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the municipal
engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its discretion, may
extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for
good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform
such maintenance and repair, the municipality or county may
immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the
responsible person.
C. Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
A. Any person who violates this article shall, upon conviction thereof in
municipal court, be punishable by imposition of the penalties set forth
in Chapter 1, Article III, of the Township of Irvington Code.
B. Each instance of engaging in a separate regulated activity, in violation
of this article, shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 550-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-11
1:727
C. Nothing in this section shall preclude the Township from instituting a
civil action for injunctive or other relief to enforce the provisions of this
article.
§ 550-11 IRVINGTON CODE § 550-11
1:728
ARTICLE II
Refuse Containers and Dumpsters
[Adopted 3-9-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3420 (Ch. 172, Art. II, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 550-12. Purpose.
This article requires dumpsters and other refuse containers that are
outdoors or exposed to stormwater to be covered at all times and prohibits
the spilling, dumping, leaking, or otherwise discharge of liquids, semiliquids
or solids from the containers to the municipal separate storm sewer
system(s) operated by the Township of Irvington and/or the waters of the
state so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe
penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 550-13. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of Irvington or other
public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Any waste container that a person controls,
whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash cans,
garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or artificial, within
the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
§ 550-14. Covering of containers; prevention of leaks and
discharges.
§ 550-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-14
1:729
§ 550-15. Exceptions.
Exceptions are as follows:
§ 550-16. Enforcement.296
This article shall be enforced by the Department of Public Works of the
Township of Irvington.
§ 550-17. Violations and penalties.297
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article III, Penalties,
of the Township Code.
A. Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing.
B. Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semiliquids or solids to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Township of Irvington.
A. Permitted temporary demolition containers.
B. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
C. Individual homeowner recycling containers.
D. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit.
E. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods placed curbside for pickup).
296. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
297. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 550-14 IRVINGTON CODE § 550-17
1:730
ARTICLE III
Private Storm Drain Inlet Retrofitting
[Adopted 3-9-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3421 (Ch. 172, Art. III, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 550-18. Purpose.
This article requires the retrofitting of existing storm drain inlets which are
in direct contact with repaving, repairing, reconstruction, or resurfacing
or alterations of facilities on private property, to prevent the discharge of
solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles, cans, food wrappers and other
litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the
Township of Irvington so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and
to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 550-19. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of Irvington or other
public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or artificial, within
the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
§ 550-20. Prohibited conduct.
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one
single-family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing
or altering any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain
inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
§ 550-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-20
1:731
§ 550-21. Design standards.
Storm drain inlets identified in § 550-20 above shall comply with the
following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this section, "solid and floatable
materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or
settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see Subsection C below.
A. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid
and floatable materials; or
B. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in § 550-21 below prior
to the completion of the project.
A. Grates.
(1) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever
they use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water
body under that grate:
(a) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle
safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT
Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and
Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
(b) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate
has an area of no more than seven square inches, or is no
greater than 0.5 inches across the smallest dimension.
(2) Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate
inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates,
and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground
surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and stormwater basin floors.
B. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than seven
square inches, or be no greater than two inches across the smallest
dimension.
C. This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the municipal engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
(2) Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
§ 550-20 IRVINGTON CODE § 550-21
1:732
§ 550-22. Enforcement.298
The Department of Public Works of the Township of Irvington shall enforce
this article.
§ 550-23. Violations and penalties.299
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article III, Penalties, of
the Township Code, for each storm drain inlet that is not retrofitted to meet
the design standard.
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
(a) A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches wide
(this option does not apply for outfall netting facilities); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register-listed historic property.
298. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
299. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 550-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-23
1:733
Chapter 555
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and site plan review — See Ch.
560.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 620.
§ 550-23 IRVINGTON CODE § 550-23
1:734
ARTICLE I
Streets Closed for Repair
[Adopted 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622 as Ch. 171, Art. I, of the
1981 Revised Code]
§ 555-1. Walking or driving upon streets closed for repairs.
[Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No.
MC 3511]
No person shall walk upon or drive over or upon any street with any
automobile, bicycle, horse, wagon or other vehicle while such street is
designated as closed by appropriate signs indicating that such street is
closed, while such street is having laid thereon any new pavement or while
such street is being repaired, or thereafter, until such street is declared
open for traffic by the Director of Public Works.
§ 555-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 555-1
1:735

ARTICLE II
Use and Occupancy
[Adopted 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622 as Ch. 171, Art. II, of the
1981 Revised Code]
§ 555-2. Purpose of article.
The purpose and intent of this article is to provide certain standards and
requirements for the safe and adequate use of the public streets, sidewalks
and public places in the Town and to regulate all encroachments and
construction on such public streets, sidewalks and public places within the
Town.
§ 555-3. Scope. [Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407;
7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
All surface or subsurface structures in the streets, sidewalks or public
places of the Town shall conform to the requirements of this article, and no
person shall erect any such structure or cause any excavation to be made
or cause any encroachment or obstruction to be made or maintained in any
street, sidewalk or public place in the Town except in conformity with the
provisions of this article, and no such work shall be commenced within the
Town until application has been made to the Department of Public Works
and a permit obtained.
§ 555-4. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
AREAWAY — Any permanent uncovered opening in a sidewalk.
DRIVEWAY — Any part of a sidewalk area paved with a material sufficiently
strong to withstand a wheel load of 5,000 pounds.
DROP AWNING OR CANOPY — Any awning or canopy of canvas cloth or
similar material on a suitable metal frame attached to a building.
FIXED AWNING, MARQUEE OR CANOPY — Any awning, marquee or
canopy permanently attached to a building so that it projects permanently
over any portion of the sidewalk of any public street.
MANHOLE or COALHOLE — Any permanent opening through the street
surface, except cellar or hoistway entrances, permitting access to a cellar
or underground vault in either sidewalk or roadway area.
SIDEWALK BRIDGE — Any temporary structure designed to provide
pedestrian passageway over any part of a sidewalk made otherwise
impassable or unsafe by reason of building or excavating operations.
SIDEWALK CELLAR ENTRANCE — Any permanent opening through the
surface of a street for descending to a cellar or basement, together with an
approved metal sidewalk door as a cover.
§ 555-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 555-4
1:737
SIDEWALK FENCE — Any temporary fence occupying a portion of any
public street or place for the purpose of protecting the public using such
street from the building or demolition of structures or excavation operations
in back of such fence.
SIDEWALK HOISTWAY — Any shaft or opening through the surface of
a sidewalk used for mechanical conveyance of goods, together with an
approved metal door as a cover.
SIDEWALK SHED — Any temporary overhead structure covering a portion
of the sidewalk to protect the public using such sidewalk from building or
demolition operations.
STREET — Wherever used in this article, shall be construed to include
highways, roads, avenues, courts, public lanes, alleys, public places,
sidewalks and footpaths.
STREET LINE — The line of any street or public place defined by law.
VAULT — Any opening below the surface of the street, except sidewalk
cellar entrances or hoistways.
§ 555-5. Protective barricades and lights.
Every person erecting or maintaining a permanent or temporary structure
in any street or public place, or excavating in any street or sidewalk area,
or laying, relaying, constructing or reconstructing any sidewalk or curbing
in any street or public place, or maintaining any obstruction in a street or
public place, shall protect such opening, structure or obstruction by placing
substantial barricades about same at all times, and shall, between the hours
of sunset and sunrise, maintain proper red lanterns or flares on each end of
such barricades. All barricades shall be not less than two inches in thickness
and eight inches in width, substantially supported not less than 24 inches
above the ground. Such barricades shall be painted black and white with
diagonal lines six inches in width.
§ 555-6. Expiration of permits; duration.
§ 555-7. Revocation of permits.
A. Except where otherwise provided by this article, any permit issued
pursuant to the provisions of this article but under which no work is
commenced within six months shall be deemed to have expired at the
end of that time.
B. Except where otherwise provided by this article, no permit shall be
deemed to permit the use of the streets or public places of the Town for
a period exceeding 60 days.
A. It shall be the duty of the Town Engineer to revoke and cancel any
permit authorized by this article which was issued improvidently or
applied to a use not in conformity with the provisions of this article.
§ 555-4 IRVINGTON CODE § 555-7
1:738
§ 555-8. Encroachment by buildings.
No person shall erect or place any building or any appurtenance or fixture
connected therewith, in whole or in part, upon any street, highway, public
lane, alley or public place.
§ 555-9. Encroachment by platforms, stoops or steps.
No person shall construct any platform, stoop or steps in any street,
highway, public lane, alley or public place which shall extend more than 1/
15 part of the width of the street nor more than five feet. Such platform,
stoop or steps shall have open backs or sides except for a suitable railing.
The width shall be no greater than necessary for the purpose of a
convenient passageway into the dwelling house, store or other building. In
no case shall any stoop or steps exceed five feet in height.
§ 555-10. Encroachment by bay windows.
No person shall construct or enlarge any bay window of any dwelling house
or store, which bay window shall extend into any street, highway, public
lane, alley or public place or over the established street (building) line.
§ 555-11. Showcases, merchandise displays on streets; sidewalk
sales. [Amended 4-21-1992 by Ord. No. MC 2945; 8-12-2003 by Ord.
No. MC 3230]
B. The Director of Public Works or the Town Engineer may revoke a permit
or approval issued under the provisions of this article in case there has
been any fraud or deception practiced in obtaining the same.
[Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No.
MC 3511]
A. Showcases, merchandise displays on streets. It shall be unlawful for
any person to place and maintain or cause, suffer or permit to be placed
or maintained any showcase, stand or other device for the display of
merchandise or any box, barrel, can, package or other device on or over
any street, sidewalk or other public place or to display or cause, permit
or suffer to be displayed upon or over any street, sidewalk or other
public place any merchandise for sale or advertisement, provided that
this section shall not prevent the reasonable use of the sidewalk by the
occupant of any building or part thereof for loading or unloading
merchandise, nor prevent receptacles for garbage, ashes or refuse from
being placed upon the sidewalk area close to the curb when so placed in
accordance with the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the
Township; and provided further that this section shall not prevent the
placement of booths or showcases for the display of merchandise, foods
and other material along the route of any parade or at the site of any
cultural event duly licensed by the Township in accordance with
applicable provisions of this Code and state law.
§ 555-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 555-11
1:739
§ 555-12. Permit required to encumber streets with building
materials, dumpsters, moving/storage/shipping containers, etc.
[Amended 2-12-1980 by Ord. No. MC 2599; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No.
MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511; 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. MC
3698]
B. It shall be lawful for the Irvington Chamber of Commerce and the
Springfield Avenue Center Business Improvement District to sponsor
sidewalk sales upon approval by the Municipal Council by resolution.
[Amended 7-8-2019 by Ord. No. MC 3700]
(1) Said sales are to take place on Thursday, Friday and Saturday
between 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. and Sunday between 12:00 noon
and 6:00 p.m.
(2) The participating business operator is responsible for cleaning the
area or areas in question utilized for the sale including the sidewalk
and the area 18 inches out from the curb, before, during and after
the sidewalk sale each and every day of the sale.
C. Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of a violation of this
§ 555-11 shall be subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article
III, Penalties, of the Township Code. [Amended 3-13-2018 by Ord.
No. MC 3635]
A. No person shall encumber or obstruct any street or public place in the
Township by placing thereon any type of building materials, dumpsters,
moving/storage/shipping containers, etc., or any other article or
material whatsoever without first obtaining a permit from the
Department of Public Works.
B. Once the permit is obtained it must be affixed (by the applicant) to the
front end of the material, dumpster or container so that the permit
faces out toward the street so that it can be seen while driving past.
C. The material, dumpster or container can only be placed on a street
where parking is allowed.
D. If the material, dumpster or container is placed in/on a street without
the obtaining/affixing a permit or if it is placed on a street where
parking is not allowed, the owner of the item is subject to be issued a
summons and the item is subject to being towed/impounded by the
Township. The item can only be released to the owner once a release is
obtained from the Police Department and all impoundment fees are
paid.
E. The cost of the permit to encumber the street shall be:
(1) $100 for seven days (in addition to any associated fees).
(2) $200 for 14 days (in addition to any associated fees).
(3) $300 for 21 days (in addition to any associated fees).
§ 555-11 IRVINGTON CODE § 555-12
1:740
§ 555-13. Fee; maximum width occupiable; term and renewal of
permit. [Amended 1-31-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622; 12-14-1999 by
Ord. No. MC 3134; 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by
Ord. No. MC 3306; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 12-29-2009 by
Ord. No. MC 3413; 7-13-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3424; 7-1-2014 by
Ord. No. MC 3511; 3-13-2018 by Ord. No. MC 3635]
The applicant for the permit required by § 555-12 shall pay such fee to cover
the cost of inspection with the Department of Public Works such sums for
use of the first 50 feet of frontage or fraction thereof and each additional 50
feet of frontage or fraction thereof. For a permit for encumbering any street
or public place by placing thereon any building materials, dumpsters or any
other article or material whatsoever, the applicant shall pay a flat fee of $50
per dumpster. There shall be a limit of seven days on said permit. A renewal
for an additional seven days shall be issued upon payment of an additional
$75. A renewal for an additional 14 days shall be issued upon payment of
$200. Extensions may be granted beyond 28 days at the discretion of the
Director of Public Works for good cause shown and upon payment of $200
per fourteen-day period. This fee shall not apply to civic groups or other
such groups who, for periods not exceeding 14 days, utilize a dumpster.
In any instance, a deposit shall not be required. The width of the street
to be occupied is not to exceed six feet. Such permits shall not be issued
for a period exceeding 30 days but may be renewed on the presentation of
evidence satisfactory to the Director of Public Works that further time is
necessary.300
§ 555-14. Permit required to open or excavate. [Amended 7-14-2009
by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
No person shall dig into, disturb or excavate any street or sidewalk in the
Town or break up or displace any pavement or sidewalk on any street or
(4) No materials, dumpsters or containers can be placed in/on the
street for more than 21 days.
F. The fine when issued a summons for violation of § 555-12 shall be:
(1) $300 for the first offense (in addition to any court cost).
(2) $600 for the second offense (in addition to any court cost).
(3) $1,000 for the third offense (in addition to any court cost).
G. The fee for an item being towed/impounded shall be:
(1) $500 for the initial towing/impoundment.
(2) $50 per day storage fee starting after the first 24 hours.
300. Editor's Note: Original § 171-14, Removal of encumbrance; disposition of deposit, as
amended, which previously followed this section, was deleted 3-13-2018 by Ord. No. MC
3635.
§ 555-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 555-14
1:741
public place without first obtaining a permit from the Department of Public
Works for each excavation or opening.
§ 555-15. Special permit to tunnel under streets.
No person shall tunnel under any street pavement or sidewalk without an
additional special permit from the Town Engineer.
§ 555-16. Fee; deposits; replacement of pavement; disposition of
deposit.
§ 555-17. Excavating and backfill methods.
All excavations shall be made in open trenches. The sides of the excavation
shall, when necessary, be supported by suitable planking and shoring, which
shall be drawn as the work progresses, unless the Town Engineer shall
order the same left in place. All work of excavating and backfilling shall
A. The applicant for a permit referred to in §§ 555-14 and 555-15, for a
permit for excavating in a street or sidewalk or tunneling under a
street, shall pay a fee of $26 for each such permit. In addition, the
applicant shall deposit with the Department of Public Works such sum
as the Town Engineer shall deem necessary to cover the cost of
replacing such pavement or sidewalk. [Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord.
No. MC 2622; 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3134; 8-14-2001 by
Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by Ord. No. MC 3306; 7-14-2009
by Ord. No. MC 3407; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413; 7-1-2014
by Ord. No. MC 3511]
B. The Department of Public Works shall, in all cases, replace such
defective pavement and retain such deposit as security for the payment
of the costs of such replacement by the applicant. After such costs have
been determined, the same shall be deducted from the security and the
balance of such deposit shall be returned to the person receiving such
permit. Should the cost of such replacement exceed the amount of such
deposit, such deposit shall be credited upon the amount of the cost of
replacement and the person receiving such permit shall pay to the
Department of Public Works the balance of such cost. [Amended
7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511;
3-13-2018 by Ord. No. MC 3635]
C. For excavating in sidewalk areas, the applicant shall deposit such sum
as the Township Engineer shall determine is necessary. Such deposit
shall be returned to the applicant when such excavation has been
backfilled and the sidewalk relaid or reconstructed in compliance with
the standard specifications for sidewalks of the Town.301 [Amended
1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622; 3-13-2018 by Ord. No. MC 3635]
301. Editor's Note: Original § 171-17D, which stated that no deposit is required for a dumpster
permit, added 7-13-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3424, which previously followed this subsection,
was deleted 3-13-2018 by Ord. No. MC 3635.
§ 555-14 IRVINGTON CODE § 555-17
1:742
be prosecuted with all possible vigor. In backfilling, all trenches shall be
thoroughly rammed in layers not more than six inches deep. The Town
Engineer may, if necessary, require the trench to be flushed with water.
Where street pavements have been disturbed, the backfill shall be brought
to within four inches of the finished surface of the pavement and covered
with a layer of temporary pavement composed of a mixture of crushed
stone and bituminous binding material level with the adjoining pavement
surface. All excess earth or other material shall be promptly removed from
the street.
§ 555-18. Authority of Town Engineer to make backfill.
Should the work of backfilling and relaying or reconstructing sidewalks
not be completed within the time granted in the permit issued pursuant to
§§ 555-14 to 555-16, or should the same not be done in accordance with
this article, the Town Engineer shall be authorized to complete such work
in a satisfactory manner and the deposit required by § 555-16 shall stand as
security for the payment by the applicant of the cost of such work.
§ 555-19. Permit required to drive over sidewalks for excavating
cellars. [Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord.
No. MC 3511]
No person shall drive across a sidewalk for the purpose of excavating
cellars or other purposes without first having obtained a permit from the
Department of Public Works to do so.
§ 555-20. Fee; deposit; term of permit; failure to repair damage.
[Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622; 12-14-1999 by Ord. No.
MC 3134; 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by Ord. No.
MC 33067-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No.
MC 3413; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511302]
The applicant for the permit required by § 555-19 shall pay a fee of $26
for each location not exceeding 15 feet in width and shall deposit with the
Department of Public Works the sum of $500 as security for the costs of
repair of any damage to such sidewalk by reason of such use. The term of
such permit shall not exceed 10 days. Should the applicant fail to repair any
damage caused as aforesaid, the Town Engineer shall cause the same to be
repaired and the cost thereof, when determined, shall be deducted from the
amount of such deposit.
§ 555-21. Use of existing driveways.
It is not the intent of this article to prohibit the use of any properly paved
driveway for the customary purposes of a driveway, but the provisions
of § 555-19 regarding excavations shall apply whether or not there is an
existing driveway.
302. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 555-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 555-22
1:743
§ 555-22. Protection of sidewalks.
Any person driving over a sidewalk for purposes recited in § 555-19 shall
adequately protect same with planks not less than three inches in thickness.
§ 555-23. Permit required to construct or remove sidewalks.
[Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No.
MC 3511]
No person shall remove, relay, construct or reconstruct any sidewalk paving
or flagging on any street or public place in the Town without first obtaining
a permit from the Department of Public Works to do so.
§ 555-24. Fees for permits to construct or do work on sidewalks.
[Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622; 12-14-1999 by Ord. No.
MC 3134; 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by Ord. No.
MC 3306; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413303]
The applicant for the permit required by § 555-23 shall pay a fee of $26 for
each such permit. For a permit to do any work on a sidewalk, the fee shall
be $26.
§ 555-25. Construction standards for sidewalks.
All sidewalks shall be laid, relaid, constructed or reconstructed in
accordance with the standard specifications of the Town for sidewalks.
§ 555-26. Sidewalks to be laid to established grade.
All sidewalks shall be laid, relaid, constructed or reconstructed to the
established grade of the sidewalk to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer.
§ 555-27. Permit required to construct or remove curbing.
[Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No.
MC 3511]
No person shall remove, reset, construct or reconstruct any curbing or
curbstone on any street or public place in the Town without first obtaining
a permit from the Department of Public Works to do so.
§ 555-28. Fees and deposit for permits to construct curbing and for
curb cuts. [Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622; 12-14-1999
by Ord. No. MC 3134; 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005
by Ord. No. MC 3306; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 12-29-2009
by Ord. No. MC 3413; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
A. The applicant for the permit required by § 555-27 shall pay a fee of $26
for each such permit.
303. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 555-22 IRVINGTON CODE § 555-28
1:744
§ 555-29. Authority of Township Engineer regarding curbing.305
The Township Engineer is hereby authorized to designate where curbs are
to be dropped or cut for driveways and to cause such work of dropping,
reconstructing or cutting such curb to be done at the expense of the
applicant. This shall include the installation of curb cuts for the installation
of new driveways.
§ 555-30. Application to construct curbs; deposit. [Amended
7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
Any person desiring curbing to be constructed, reconstructed or dropped
shall make application to the Department of Public Works to do such work
at the applicant's expense and shall deposit with such Department such sum
as the Town Engineer shall determine is necessary to pay the cost of such
work.
§ 555-31. Curbing to be set to established grade.
All curbs shall be reset, constructed or reconstructed to the established
grade for such curb to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer.
§ 555-32. Permit required to excavate for or construct sidewalk
cellar entrances, vaults. [Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407;
7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
No person shall excavate for or construct any sidewalk cellar entrance,
hoistway, areaway or vault in any street or public place in the Town without
first obtaining permission of the Department of Public Works as provided in
§§ 555-14 to 555-18.
§ 555-33. Location of sidewalk cellar entrances or vaults.
No sidewalk cellar entrance, hoistway or vault shall extend from the
property line more than half of the distance between the property line and
the curbline nor more than five feet in any case. No greater dimension
than six feet parallel to the property line shall be permitted for such
openings. Areaways shall not project more than two feet six inches beyond
the property line.
B. The deposit to be paid by the applicant to the Department of Public
Works for curb cuts shall be $75 per linear foot, and the cost to be paid
by the applicant to the Department of Public Works to cut drain holes
shall be $65 per drain hole. Said deposit will be returned to the
applicant upon the inspection and approval of the Township
Engineer.304
304. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
305. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 555-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 555-34
1:745
§ 555-34. Vaults at street corners.
No privately owned vault shall be placed at any corner of a public street
within the lines formed by extending the property lines of the intersecting
streets.
§ 555-35. Vaults near curblines, utility mains.
No sidewalk vault shall be constructed any closer than 24 inches to the
face of the curbline nor closer than six inches to the finished grade of
the sidewalk, nor shall any vault be constructed over or around any utility
main or conduit except by special permission of the company or agency
controlling such utility.
§ 555-36. Vault covers; design load; leakproof.
§ 555-37. Sidewalk elevators.
Sidewalk elevators shall be equipped with an alarm and shall also be
protected with approved metal doors so that they will open and close with
the raising and lowering of the elevators. No doors shall remain open when
not in use. A clearly visible and legible bell warning sign with white lettering
on a red background of sufficient size shall be placed on the adjacent wall
of the building not over 10 feet above the sidewalk.
§ 555-38. Areaway covers.
All areaways shall be properly covered over flush with the sidewalk with
an approved grating of metal firmly anchored in place and of sufficient
strength to carry the pedestrian traffic.
§ 555-39. Doorways to sidewalk cellar entrances, hoistways, shafts.
Every sidewalk cellar entrance, hoistway or elevator shaft shall be covered
by entrance doors, the size, weight and bearings of which shall be sufficient
to carry all traffic likely to pass over same. A live load of not less than
300 pounds per square foot shall be provided for sidewalk areas. All doors,
when closed, shall be flush with the pavement and shall have corrugated
or similarly roughened surface with flush hinges. All doors, when opened,
shall move in a direction parallel to the street line. The opening, when
A. No vault in roadway areas shall have less than four feet of cover over all
portions but the manhole opening when it is in excess of six feet in
width.
B. Every vault shall be covered by a substantial roof of sufficient size to
support all structures above and all traffic likely to pass over the street
above. Sidewalk vaults shall be designed for a minimum live load of 300
pounds per square foot, and roadway vaults shall be designed to carry a
maximum truck weight of 24 tons. Every vault shall be rendered
leakproof by a proper waterproof coating on the exterior walls.
§ 555-34 IRVINGTON CODE § 555-39
1:746
uncovered, shall be provided with a suitable protective wire screen guard,
unless the doors are so constructed that they afford adequate protection to
pedestrians.
§ 555-40. Permit required to construct manholes and coalholes.
[Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No.
MC 3511]
No person shall excavate for or construct any manhole or coalhole in any
street or public place in the Town without first obtaining a permit from the
Department of Public Works as provided in §§ 555-14 to 555-18.
§ 555-41. Maximum size of manholes and coalholes.
No manhole or coalhole in sidewalk areas shall exceed seven square feet in
area unless specially permitted by the Town Engineer.
§ 555-42. Location of manholes and coalholes.
Manholes connected with vaults attached to abutting property shall be
placed close to the property line, while coalholes to such vaults shall be
placed as close to the curbline as the size of the vault permits. Utility
company manholes shall be located as close to the curbline as possible.
§ 555-43. Covers for manholes and coalholes.
§ 555-44. Protection of manholes when in use; leaving uncovered.
All uncovered manholes and coalholes shall be adequately protected when
in use. No manhole or coalhole shall remain uncovered for any greater time
than necessary for actual use as a manhole or coalhole, and in no case shall
be left uncovered for the purpose of supplying light or air to the vault or
basement to which it provides access.
§ 555-45. Permit required to install subsurface tanks. [Amended
7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
No person shall excavate for or install any subsurface tank in any street
or public place in the Town without first obtaining a permit from the
Department of Public Works as provided in §§ 555-14 to 555-18.
A. Every manhole or coalhole shall be provided with a solid metal cover of
sufficient weight and size, seated in a suitable frame permanently
anchored in place and bearing on masonry walls of proper thickness.
The frame and cover shall be capable of supporting all traffic to which it
may be subjected.
B. All manhole and coalhole covers shall have a roughened surface flush
with the surrounding sidewalk and have machined horizontal heavy
surfaces. The weight of the cover shall be sufficient to resist a load of
300 pounds per square foot under traffic.
§ 555-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 555-46
1:747
§ 555-46. Approval of permit by Bureau of Combustibles; conditions
of permit. [Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by
Ord. No. MC 3511; 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
No permit required by § 555-45 will be issued until and unless the Bureau of
Combustibles of the Department of Public Safety approves. No such permit
will be issued except under the condition that such tank be removed upon
notice from the Department of Public Works to do so.
§ 555-47. Location and depth of tanks.
§ 555-48. Permit required to erect sidewalk shed, fence or bridge;
approval of construction. [Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC
3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
No sidewalk fence, sidewalk bridge or sidewalk shed shall be erected
without first obtaining a permit from the Department of Public Works. No
street occupancy permit shall be issued before a plan of the proposed
construction is approved by the Town Engineer.
§ 555-49. Fee for permit to erect sidewalk structures. [Amended
1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622; 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3134;
8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by Ord. No. MC 3306;
12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413]
The applicant for the permit required by § 555-48 shall pay a fee of $45 for
each such street occupancy permit.
§ 555-50. Sidewalk shed required for certain work.
Whenever a building or structure of over one story in height and within
10 feet of the street line is to be demolished or whenever a building or
structure within 10 feet of the street line and more than two stories in
A. Tanks referred to in § 555-45 shall be placed parallel to the curbline and
as near the property line as possible.
B. The depth of such tanks shall be as specified by the Town Engineer but
all surface or utility services shall be cleared. All gas, sewer, water or
other utility services shall have an all-around clearance of at least two
feet. No tank shall be installed over any utility main or services. No tank
shall be installed at any corner of a public street within the lines formed
by extending the property lines of the intersecting streets.
C. Risers from tanks shall be flush with the surrounding paved or unpaved
sidewalk surface. Such risers shall be raised or lowered to conform to
existing or proposed sidewalk elevations.
D. Filler pipes shall be placed within 12 inches of the established curbline,
unless otherwise permitted by the Town Engineer, and shall be flush
with the surrounding surface. Test pipes shall also be flush with the
surface surrounding them.
§ 555-46 IRVINGTON CODE § 555-50
1:748
height is to be erected, the owner or the person doing or causing such
work to be done shall erect and maintain during such work, in front of
such building, a sidewalk shed of sufficient strength to sustain safely the
weight of materials that may be placed thereon and to withstand the shocks
incident to the handling of such materials or their preparation for use.
§ 555-51. Sidewalk fence required for certain work.
In a building demolition or excavation operation that does not require a
sidewalk shed, the owner or person doing or causing such work to be
done shall, unless released from so doing, erect and maintain in front of
the building, structure or premises during such operation a substantial
sidewalk fence not less than eight feet in height. Such fence may extend not
more than six feet from the street line into the street and shall be built solid
for its full length, except for such openings provided with sliding doors or
doors to swing inward as may be necessary for the proper execution of the
work.
§ 555-52. When sidewalk bridge required.
A sidewalk bridge shall be erected by the owner or person doing or causing
to be done any of the work referred to in § 555-48 in all cases determined
by the Town Engineer as necessary to provide pedestrian passage over any
part of a sidewalk otherwise made impassible or unsafe. Such bridge shall
be of substantial construction with suitable handrails approved by the Town
Engineer.
§ 555-53. Sidewalk sheds; collection bins.
§ 555-54. Protective devices on sidewalk structures.
A. All sidewalk sheds shall have watertight roofs and shall have the ceiling
of the passageway painted white and electrically lighted at the
minimum rate of 1.40 candlepower of light every 15 feet. All other parts
of such structure and fence shall be painted a color designated by the
Town Engineer and shall not be used for billposting purposes.
B. Collection bins. [Added 1-15-2008 by Ord. No. MC 3367]
(1) No collection bins of any type should be allowed within the
Township of Irvington.
(2) Anyone found in violation of the provisions of this section shall be
subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article III, Penalties, of
the Township Code.306
A. Whenever a portion of a sidewalk fence, sidewalk bridge or sidewalk
shed projects over the curbline into the roadway, such portion shall be
painted black and white with diagonal lines six inches in width.
306. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 555-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 555-54
1:749
§ 555-55. Failure to properly maintain sidewalk structures.
Upon failure to maintain a sidewalk structure in accordance with the
provisions of this article, such structure shall be removed and the street
restored to its original condition.
§ 555-56. Work prohibited without required sidewalk structure.
Whenever the Town Engineer shall direct that a sidewalk fence, sidewalk
bridge or sidewalk shed be erected, no person shall proceed with any work
of building, demolition or excavating until such order is complied with.
§ 555-57. Permit required to erect fixed awnings and marquees.
[Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No.
MC 3511]
No person shall commence to erect any fixed awning, marquee or canopy
which projects over any street or public place in the Town without first filing
plans with the Department of Public Works and applying for and obtaining
a permit therefor. No such permit will be issued until and unless the written
consent of the Division of Building Inspection has first been obtained.
§ 555-58. Fees for permit to erect or alter fixed awnings. [Amended
1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622; 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3134;
8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by Ord. No. MC 3306;
12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413]
Every applicant for a permit as required by § 555-57 shall pay the fees as
follows:
§ 555-59. Location, height, construction of fixed awnings.
No post or support for a fixed awning, marquee or canopy shall be placed
within the public sidewalk area. No fixed awning, marquee or canopy shall
be less than 10 feet above the sidewalk area. No fixed awning, marquee or
canopy shall be anchored to masonry walls. All anchorages shall be tied to
steel frames. Every fixed awning, marquee or canopy shall be constructed
so that its removal may be made at any time without causing the building or
any part thereof to become structurally unsafe. No fixed awning, marquee
B. At each end of a sidewalk shed, at the height of eight feet, a red flag
shall be displayed by day and a lighted red lantern by night at the outer
or roadway side. If the sidewalk shed is over 25 feet in length,
additional lighted red lanterns shall be uniformly spaced at a minimum
of 25 feet.
C. Signs reading "DANGER" shall be posted where necessary.
A. For new awnings, marquees or canopies, the sum of $58.
B. For any addition, alteration or repair to any awning, marquee or canopy,
the sum of $32.
§ 555-54 IRVINGTON CODE § 555-59
1:750
or canopy shall extend over the street nearer than 12 inches to the existing
or proposed curbline.
§ 555-60. Drainage of fixed awnings and marquees.
Suitable provision shall be made for the drainage of fixed awnings,
marquees and canopies, but no such drainage shall be permitted to fall on
or flow across the surface of the sidewalk.
§ 555-61. Lighting of sidewalk beneath fixed awnings.
Sufficient and suitable lighting shall be provided where necessary to light
the sidewalk beneath a fixed awning, marquee or canopy during the hours
of darkness of each day.
§ 555-62. Permit required to erect drop awnings and canopies.
[Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No.
MC 3511]
No person shall erect any drop awning or canopy which will project over
the public street or sidewalk without first filing plans with the Department
of Public Works and applying for and obtaining a permit for the erection of
such drop awning or canopy.
§ 555-63. Fees for permit to erect drop awnings. [Amended
1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622; 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3134;
8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by Ord. No. MC 3306;
12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413]
Every applicant for a permit required by § 555-62 shall pay the fees as
follows:
§ 555-64. Construction and height of drop awnings.
All frames and supports for drop awnings or canopies shall be securely
attached to the walls of the building in a substantial manner. No such
awning or canopy shall project more than a maximum of seven feet beyond
the property line over any public street or sidewalk. In no case shall any
drop awning or canopy occupy more than 70% of the distance between
the side line of the street and the curbline. All drop awnings and canopies
shall be supported solely by the building to which they are attached and
no uprights or supports shall be placed on the sidewalk. All frames of drop
A. For all drop awnings or door canopies, the sum of $0.076 per square
foot of area of surface projecting across the street line.
B. For any addition, alteration or repair to any drop awning or door
canopy, the sum of $2.06 where the cost of such alteration, addition or
repair does not exceed $50, and if the cost shall exceed $50, an
additional sum of $1.81 for each additional $25 or fraction thereof of
cost.
§ 555-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 555-64
1:751
awnings and canopies shall be at least seven feet six inches above the
sidewalk and all parts of such awning or canopy shall be at least seven feet
above the sidewalk. No stationary or temporary awning or canopy of wood
shall be erected over any public street or sidewalk.
§ 555-65. Removal of unauthorized or improperly erected awnings.
An unauthorized drop awning or canopy or any awning or canopy erected
contrary to the regulations or requirements of this article shall be removed
forthwith on receipt of notice from the Town Engineer to remove same.
§ 555-66. Placing signs on trees, utility poles or public property.
[Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No.
MC 3511; 3-25-2019 by Ord. No. MC 3694]
§ 555-67. Schedule of fines. [Added 1-26-2016 by Ord. No. MC
3563]
Except as otherwise provided in this article, the penalties for violations of
this article are as follows:
Section
Short
Description
1st
Offense
2nd
Offense
3rd
Offense
4th Offense
Maximum
Fine;
Court
Appearance
Required
§ 555-12 Failure to apply
for dumpster
permit
$250 $500 $750 $1,000
§ 555-14 Failure to apply
for permit to
disturb/
breakup
sidewalk
$250 $500 $750 $1,000
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, company, organization, broker,
subcontractor, entity, to place or direct others to place any
advertisement, poster, banner, flyer or sign upon any sidewalk, hydrant,
lamppost, tree, utility pole or telephone pole, telegraph or electric light
pole, fence, vacant structure, mailbox, traffic control box or public
property on any public street or place within the Town, except
directional or bus signs authorized by the Department of Public Works.
B. It shall also be unlawful for any person to benefit from or by the
placement of any advertisement, poster, banner, flyer, sign, upon any
sidewalk, hydrant, tree, utility pole, fence, vacant structure, mailbox,
traffic control box or public property on any public street or place
within the Town.
§ 555-64 IRVINGTON CODE § 555-67
1:752
ARTICLE III
Construction and Repair of Sidewalks
[Adopted 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622 as Ch. 171, Art. III, of the
1981 Revised Code]
§ 555-68. Maintenance in good condition; responsibility for repairs.
[Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No.
MC 3511]
All sidewalks in streets, roads and highways in the Town shall be kept in
good repair and condition to ensure for the public the safe and comfortable
use of the same, and if any owner of land in front of which sidewalks have
been constructed shall allow such sidewalk to become out of repair and
unsafe for public use, the Municipal Council, through the Director of the
Department of Public Works or his designated agent, may order the owner
to construct and repair such sidewalk at the owner's expense.
§ 555-69. Materials and manner of construction generally.
Every repair referred to in § 555-68 shall be made of the kind of material
and after the manner of construction existing in such sidewalk so out of
repair or needing construction.
§ 555-70. Inspections. [Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407;
7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
The Director of the Department of Public Works or his designated agent may
provide for the doing of any work referred to in § 555-68 under inspection
by inspectors to be selected and appointed by him.
§ 555-71. Grades.
Where the grade of the street, road or highway or the section thereof along
which any construction or repair of sidewalks is proposed to be made has
been established by law, such improvement shall be made to conform as
nearly as practicable to the grade so established.307
§ 555-72. Violations and penalties.308
A. The penalty for violations of this article are as follows:
(1) For the first violation: a fine of $50.
(2) For the second violation: a fine of $250.
(3) For the third violation: a fine of $500.
307. Editor's Note: Former §§ 171-72 through 171-82 of the 1981 Revised Code, regarding
improvements to sidewalks and notices and assessments for such improvements, which
previously followed this section, were repealed 11-26-1985 by Ord. No. MC 2799.
308. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 555-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 555-72
1:753
(4) For the fourth violation: a fine of $750. In addition, a mandatory
court appearance is required for the fourth violation.
B. Offenders must apply for permits.
§ 555-72 IRVINGTON CODE § 555-72
1:754
ARTICLE IV
Snow and Ice on Sidewalks
[Adopted 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622 as Ch. 171, Art. IV, of the
1981 Revised Code]
§ 555-73. Duty of abutting landowners to remove. [Amended
1-11-1983 by Ord. No. MC 2682]
Every owner or tenant of any land abutting upon the public highways of the
Township shall remove all snow and ice from the abutting sidewalks of such
highways within 24 hours after precipitation ceases to fall.309
§ 555-74. Depositing snow or ice in streets or onto neighboring
property. [Amended 5-23-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3018310]
§ 555-75. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-26-2016 by Ord. No.
MC 3563]
Penalties for violations of this article are as follows:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, throw or place any snow
or ice upon any portion of a street or public highway in the Town;
except, however, that snow or ice removed from that portion of the
property commonly known as the "sidewalk area" may be deposited in
the street or highway within three feet of the curbline of same.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, throw or place any snow
or ice upon any portion of the walkway or driveway of a neighbor's
property, or where it would otherwise obstruct means of egress and
ingress of said property, unless given prior permission by the owner of
adjoining property.
309. Editor's Note: Former § 171-84 of the 1981 Revised Code, Failure of owner to remove,
which previously followed this section, was repealed 1-11-1983 by Ord. No. MC 2682.
310. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided, "...that penalties imposed for violation of this
statute are pursuant to Article III of the general provisions of the Municipal Code."
§ 555-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 555-75
1:755
Section
Short
Description
1st
Offense
2nd
Offense
3rd
Offense
4th Offense
Maximum
Fine;
Court
Appearance
Required
§ 555-73 Duty of
landowners to
remove snow
and ice within
24 hours after
snowfall
$250 $500 $750 $1,000
§ 555-74 Depositing
snow or ice in
streets
$250 $500 $750 $1,000
§ 555-75 IRVINGTON CODE § 555-75
1:756
ARTICLE V
Obstructions from Sports Equipment and Games
[Adopted 3-25-1997 by Ord. No. MC 3062 (Ch. 171, Art. VI, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 555-76. Basketball; card tables; block parties.
§ 555-77. Violations and penalties.311
Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of a violation of the terms of
this article shall be subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article
III, Penalties, of the Township Code. The person or persons responsible for
placing the above items in the Township streets shall be subjected to the
aforementioned fines.
A. No person or persons shall place in any public street or on the sidewalk
of any public street any fixed or portable basket used for the playing of
basketball or any other sport for which such an apparatus can be used.
B. Placing of card tables of any kind in the Township streets shall also be
prohibited.
C. Authorized block parties by block associations shall be exempt from this
provision.
311. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 555-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 555-77
1:757

ARTICLE VI
Installation of Communications Systems
[Adopted 9-9-1998 by Ord. No. MC 3099; amended 4-13-1999 by
Ord. No. MC 3114 (Ch. 171, Art. VII, of the 1981 Revised Code)]
§ 555-78. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM — A fiber-optic cable system for the
transmission and distribution of communication signals, including any
conduit, fiber-optic cable, splicing boxes, surface markers or other facilities
located within the public right-of-way.
CUSTOMER — Any person who purchases any services provided by a
communications system.
GROSS REVENUES — All receipts collected by a licensee for all
communications and communications-related operations and services
within the Township of Irvington. Gross revenue includes revenue from the
sale or lease of customers' premises equipment, installation charges, access
charges paid to the licensee by other communications systems or carriers,
sales and occupation surcharges to customers and the lease or resale of
lines or circuit paths to third parties.
LICENSEE — The person who is issued a license in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any public street, highway, avenue, alley, bridge
or sidewalk with the Township.
§ 555-79. License required.
No person may construct a fiber-optic system in any public right-of-way,
in any easement granted to a third party within any public right-of-way
or within any existing conduit or structure within any public right-of-way
without first obtaining a license pursuant to this article.
§ 555-80. Application for license; issuance; amendment to license.
A. An application for a license shall be filed with the Township Engineer
and shall include an engineering site plan showing the proposed
location of the system, any manholes or overhead poles, the size, type
and proposed depth of any conduit or other enclosures, the relationship
of the system to all existing streets, sidewalks, poles, utilities and other
improvements within the public right-of-way and any additional
information which the Township Engineer may require.
B. The Township Engineer shall issue all licenses required by this article.
He or she shall review each application and shall grant a license if the
application complies with the requirements of this article and any other
applicable legal requirements. In granting a license, the Township
§ 555-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 555-80
1:759
§ 555-81. Installation requirements; as-built plans to be filed;
permit required for excavation; compliance with technical
standards.
Engineer may change the proposed location of the system where
necessary to avoid interference with other cables, wires, conduits,
pipes, sewers or other facilities placed within the public right-of-way.
C. If a licensee proposes to expand, reduce, relocate or modify any portion
of its system within the public right-of-way, the licensee shall file an
application for an amendment of its license with Township Engineer. An
application for an amendment shall include relevant new information of
the type required for the initial application and shall be reviewed by the
Township Engineer in the same manner as the original application. If
the amendment requires only one or more connections to the main
system and if the new connections will run entirely through existing
underground utility conduit or ducts so as not to require any excavation
in the public right-of-way, or by means of overhead wires or cables
between existing utility poles, the licensee shall not be required to pay
an additional administrative fee for the amendment.
A. No license or amendment shall be granted for any system until the
required fees have been paid and a complete application approved by
the Township Engineer.
B. The system shall be installed and constructed in accordance with the
terms of the license granted by the Township Engineer.
C. After installation, the licensee shall file with the Township Engineer an
as-built survey specifying the actual location of the system, including
any manholes or overhead poles, and the licensee shall provide such
signs or other economically feasible means of locating the system as
may be reasonably required by the Township Engineer, including a
requirement that the licensee contract with a one-call locating service
or similar locating service for location of the system by the service.
D. If it becomes necessary to dig into or in any manner break any public
right-of-way to install, construct, reconstruct, repair, operate,
disconnect or remove a system, the licensee shall first obtain a permit
from the Township to do so.
E. All technical standards governing installation, construction,
reconstruction, repair, operation, disconnection and removal of a
licensed system shall conform to applicable federal, state and Township
regulations.
F. The licensee shall be responsible for repairing or reimbursing other
licensed or franchised utilities or communications systems for any
damage to their property caused by negligence of the licensee or its
agents, employees or contractors, in connection with the installation,
§ 555-80 IRVINGTON CODE § 555-81
1:760
§ 555-82. Relocation or removal when required by public needs.
Upon 90 days' notice from the Township, the licensee shall protect, support
or temporarily or permanently disconnect, relocate within the same or other
public right-of-way, or remove any of its system when required to do so by
the Township because of street or other public excavation, construction,
repair, grading, traffic conditions, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes
or Township-owned power or signal lines; vacation or relocation of public
rights-of-way; installation or construction of any other structure by the
Township or any other public agency; or any improvement which promotes
the public health, safety or welfare.
§ 555-83. License fees.
construction, reconstruction, repair, operation, disconnection or
removal of the licensee's communications system.
G. No license required under this article shall be granted to install a
system in any space for public use.
H. Failure by the licensee to comply with any of the requirements of the
license or this article shall constitute grounds for termination of the
license by the Township.
A. As consideration for use of municipal rights-of-way, licensee shall pay
the Township the following fees:
(1) An administrative fee of $50 upon filing the initial application and
each proposed amendment to the application; and
(2) If the licensed communications system serves no customers within
the Township of Irvington other than the licensee itself, an annual
use fee which shall be the maximum of the following:
(a) One thousand dollars; or
(b) Two dollars per linear foot of route traversed by the
communication line within the public right-of-way.
(3) If the system serves customers within the Township of Irvington
other than the licensee itself, the annual use fee shall be the
maximum of the fees computed in accordance with Subsection
A(2)(b) or 6% of gross revenues derived by the licensee from the
operation of the system within the public rights-of-way during the
license year.
B. At the time of filing of each proposed amendment to the license
increasing the length of route traversed by the communication line
within the public right-of-way, the licensee shall pay to the Township
Engineer an additional use fee computed in accordance with
Subsection A(2)(b).
§ 555-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 555-83
1:761
§ 555-84. Hold harmless; insurance; bond.
C. Each annual use fee payment shall be accompanied by a report on a
form approved by the Business Administrator and the Legislative
Research Officer. Each such report shall contain a notarized verification
by the Chief Financial Officer of the licensee, and upon request by the
Township, such reports shall be verified by a certified public accountant
at the expense of the licensee.312
D. Acceptance of any use fee shall not constitute an acknowledgment that
the amount paid is correct, nor shall acceptance constitute a release of
any claim for additional sums due. Use fees shall be subject to audit by
the Business Administrator and assessment or refund if the payment is
found to be an error. If an audit results in an additional assessment, the
additional payment shall be due immediately, together with interest at
the rate of 8% per year calculated from the due date for the use fee in
question.
E. The annual use fee shall be based on a license year ending on June 30,
and the use fee for each license year shall be due on June 30 of each
year. Interest at the rate of 8% per year on any overdue use fee shall be
calculated from the due date for the use fee.
F. Nothing in this article shall limit the liability of the licensee for
applicable federal, state and local taxes, permits, registrations and
approvals.
G. Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the Township from
changing any of the fees required by this section.
A. The licensee shall defend and indemnify the Township from liability for
damages to property or injury or death to any person, including
payments made under workers' compensation laws, arising from
installation, construction, reconstruction, repair, operation,
disconnection or removal of the licensee's communications system.
Upon receipt of written notice of litigation against the Township, the
licensee shall defend the same at its own expense. A judgment against
the Township on account of a claim shall be conclusive as against the
licensee and shall entitle the Township to recover the full amount
thereof with interest and costs and attorneys' fees incurred by the
Township. A right of action shall accrue on the Township as soon as
judgment is rendered. The Township shall cooperate with the licensee's
defense of any such claim or action.
B. The licensee shall purchase and maintain general liability insurance in
an amount and coverage determined by the Risk Manager in conformity
with written standards. The licensee shall maintain insurance coverage
as long as the licensed communications system remains within the
public right-of-way. The Township shall be named as an additional
312. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 555-83 IRVINGTON CODE § 555-84
1:762
§ 555-85. Failure to secure, renew or comply with license.
§ 555-86. Transfers and assignments.
The licensee shall not transfer or assign all or any portion of its interest
in any license granted pursuant to this article without prior written
authorization of the Township Engineer, which authorization shall not be
unreasonably withheld, conditioned, delayed or denied. For purposes of
this section, a merger or corporate reorganization shall not be deemed a
transfer or assignment.
§ 555-87. Notice; appeal.
insured on the policy, which shall provide on its face that it may not be
canceled except after at least 30 days' written notice to the Township.
Immediately upon issuance of the required license, the licensee shall
file with the Township Engineer a certificate of insurance, which clearly
discloses on its face coverage in conformity with all of the foregoing
requirements, and if requested by the Business Administrator, the
licensee shall additionally submit a certified copy of the policy.
C. Immediately upon issuance of the required license, the licensee shall
file with the Township Engineer a surety bond of an approved surety in
an amount and form approved by the Township Engineer. The bond
shall protect the Township from damages and costs incurred by the
Township from any failure by the licensee to restore all public rights-ofway
and other public property affected by the installation, construction,
reconstruction, repair, operation or removal of the licensed
communications system to its proper condition in accordance with
Township standards. The bond shall be maintained by the licensee for
as long as the system remains in place within public rights-of-way and
thereafter until the licensee has satisfied in full its obligations to the
Township which arise out of or pertain to the licensed communications
system.
A. Any person who fails to secure the license required under this article or
any licensee who fails to comply with the requirements of the license or
this article or with any other applicable legal requirements shall, upon
notification of such violation by the Township Engineer, immediately
abate the violation or cause the licensee's communications system
either to be removed or to be disconnected and rendered inoperative.
B. The Township may remove or disconnect and render inoperative any
communications system used or maintained contrary to this article.
A. The Township Engineer shall promptly send by certified mail with
return receipt written notice advising each prospective licensee of any
of the following:
(1) Action by the Township Engineer in granting or denying an
application for a license.
§ 555-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 555-87
1:763
§ 555-88. Construction of article.
Nothing in this article shall be construed as an acquiescence in or
ratification of the occupation of any public right-of-way or public places of
the Township by any person now occupying the same without legal right,
nor shall this article be construed as conferring the right to occupy any
of the public right-of-way or public places of the Township upon any such
person now illegally or without authority occupying the same.
(2) Notification of failure to secure or comply with a license pursuant
to § 555-85 of this article.
B. Within three business days after receipt of any such notice from the
Township Engineer, an applicant shall have the right to a hearing before
the Business Administrator by filing a written appeal with the Business
Administrator specifying the reasons for the appeal. At least 10 days
before the date of the hearing, the Business Administrator shall notify
the applicant of the hearing date. At the hearing, the applicant may be
represented by legal counsel, may call witnesses and present evidence
and may cross-examine adverse witnesses.
§ 555-87 IRVINGTON CODE § 555-88
1:764
Chapter 560
SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Escrow fees for redevelopment and
foreclosure matters — See Ch. 282.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 365.
Zoning — See Ch. 650.
§ 555-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 555-88
1:765

ARTICLE I
Purpose; Definitions; Penalties
§ 560-1. Purpose of chapter; basic requirements.
§ 560-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the
following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed
to them:
ALLEY OR SERVICEWAY — Public or private ways open to public use,
primarily for service and access to the rear or side of the properties
otherwise abutting on a street.
APPLICANT — A developer submitting an application for development.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a construction adapted to
permanent, temporary or continuous occupancy and having a roof.
CIRCULATION — Systems, structures and physical improvements for the
movement of people, goods, water, air, sewage or power by such means
as streets, highways, railways, waterways, towers, airways, pipes and
conduits, and the handling of people and goods by such means as terminals,
stations, warehouses and other storage buildings or transshipment points.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — An open space area within or related to a
site designated as a development, and designed and intended for the use
or enjoyment of residents and owners of the development. Common open
space may contain such complementary structures and improvements as
are necessary and appropriate for the use or enjoyment of residents and
owners of the development.
COMPLETE APPLICATION — An application for development shall be
deemed to be "complete" when the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment declares that all requirements for submission have been met
A. The purpose of this chapter is to provide rules, regulations and
standards to guide land subdivision and site plan review in the Town of
Irvington in order to promote the public health, safety, convenience,
morals and general welfare. It shall be administered to ensure the
orderly growth and development of the Town, the conservation,
protection and proper use of land and adequate provisions for
circulation, utilities and services, and to achieve the purposes set forth
in the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
B. The rules, regulations and standards set forth in this chapter shall be
considered the basic requirements for the protection of the public
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Town of Irvington. Any
action taken by the Planning Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment or
Municipal Council under the terms of this chapter shall give primary
consideration to the above-mentioned matters and to the welfare of the
entire community.
§ 560-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 560-2
1:767
and that all necessary documentation has been provided which is necessary
for the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment to review and act on
the application.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district only
upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply with the
conditions and standards for the location or operation of such uses as
contained in Chapter 650, Zoning.
CUL-DE-SAC — A dead-end street or alley with a turnaround at the end.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
or the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure or of any
excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any building or
other structure or land or extension of use of land for which permission may
be required pursuant to this chapter.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by
drains, grading or other means and including control of runoff to minimize
erosion and sedimentation during and after construction or development
and the means necessary for water supply preservation or prevention or
alleviation of flooding.
FINAL APPROVAL — The official action of the Planning Board taken on
a preliminary approved major subdivision or site plan after all conditions,
engineering plans and other requirements have been completed or fulfilled
and the required improvements have been installed or guaranties properly
posted for their completion, or approval conditioned upon the posting of
such guaranties.
LAND — Includes improvements and fixtures on, above or below the
surface.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY — Any security, other than cash, which may be
accepted by the Town of Irvington for the maintenance of any improvements
required by this chapter.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision.
MASTER PLAN — A composite of one or more written or graphic proposals
for the development of the municipality as set forth in and adopted pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
§ 560-2 IRVINGTON CODE § 560-2
1:768
MINOR SUBDIVISION — A subdivision of land that does not involve the
creation of more than two lots, planned development, any new street or
extension of any off-tract improvement.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted by ordinance pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-32.
OFF-SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but within
the property (of which the lot is a part) which is the subject of a
development application or contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
OFF-TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of a
development application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
ON-SITE — Located on the lot in question.
ON-TRACT — Located on the property which is the subject of a development
application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or land area or water essentially unimproved
and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use
or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of
land adjoining or neighboring such open space; provided that such areas
may be improved with only those buildings, structures, streets and off-street
parking and other improvements that are designed to be incidental to the
natural openness of the land.
PARTY IMMEDIATELY CONCERNED — For purposes of notice, any
applicant for development, the owners of the subject property and all
owners of property and government agencies entitled to notice under the
Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Any security which may be accepted by the
Town, including cash, provided that the Town shall not require more than
10% of the total performance guaranty in cash.
PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of minimum
contiguous size as specified by ordinance to be developed according to a
plan as a single entity containing one or more structures with appurtenant
common areas to accommodate commercial or office uses, or both, and any
residential and other uses incidental to the predominant use as may be
permitted by ordinance.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — Planned unit development, planned unit
residential development, residential cluster, planned commercial
development or planned industrial development.
PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of minimum
contiguous size as specified by ordinance to be developed according to a
plan as a single entity containing one or more structures with appurtenant
common areas to accommodate industrial uses and any other uses
incidental to the predominant use as may be permitted by ordinance.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT — An area with a specified minimum
contiguous acreage of 10 acres or more to be developed as a single entity
§ 560-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 560-2
1:769
according to a plan, containing one or more residential clusters or planned
unit residential developments and one or more public, quasi-public,
commercial or industrial areas in such ranges of ratios of nonresidential
uses to residential uses as shall be specified in Chapter 650, Zoning.
PLANNED UNIT RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area with a specified
minimum contiguous acreage of five acres or more to be developed as a
single entity according to a plan containing one or more residential clusters,
which may include appropriate commercial or public or quasi-public uses
all primarily for the benefit of the residential development.
PLANNING BOARD — The Municipal Planning Board established pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.
PLAT — A map or maps of a subdivision or site plan.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — The conferral of certain rights prior to final
approval after specific elements of a development plan have been agreed
upon by the Planning Board and the applicant.
PUBLIC AREAS —
PUBLIC DEVELOPMENT PROPOSAL — A master plan, capital improvement
program or other proposal for land development adopted by the appropriate
public body, or any amendment thereto.
PUBLIC DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The land reserved or dedicated for
the installation and maintenance of stormwater sewers, drainage ditches
and sanitary sewers, or required along a natural stream or watercourse for
preserving the channel and providing for the flow of water to safeguard the
public against flood damage, sedimentation and erosion.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — An open space area conveyed or otherwise
dedicated to the Town, municipal agency, Board of Education, state or
county agency or other public body for recreational or conservational uses.
RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER — An area to be developed as a single entity
according to a plan containing residential housing units which have a
common or public open space area as an appurtenance.
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per gross acre of
residential land, including streets, easements and open space portions of a
development.
RESUBDIVISION —
A. Public parks, playgrounds, trails, paths, other recreational areas;
B. Other public open spaces;
C. Scenic and historic sites; and
D. Sites for schools and other public buildings and structures.
The further division or relocation of lot lines of any lot or lots within
a subdivision previously made and approved or recorded according to
law; or
A.
§ 560-2 IRVINGTON CODE § 560-2
1:770
SEDIMENTATION — The deposition of soil that has been transported from
its site of origin by water, ice, wind, gravity or other natural means as a
product of erosion.
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is shown:
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive
or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway, or
which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law, or which
is approved by official action as provided by this chapter, or which is shown
on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the county recording officer
prior to the appointment of a Planning Board and the grant of such Board
of the power to review plats, and includes the land between the street lines,
whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders,
gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the street
lines. For the purposes of this chapter, streets shall be classified as follows:
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below the
surface of a parcel of land.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or
more lots, tracts, parcels or other division of land, for sale or development.
The following shall not be considered subdivisions within the meaning
of this chapter if no new streets are created: divisions of property by
The alteration of any streets or the establishment of any new streets
within any subdivision previously made and approved or recorded
according to law, but not including conveyances so as to combine
existing lots by deed or other instrument.
B.
The existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but not
necessarily limited to topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains,
marshes and waterways.
A.
The location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives, parking
spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities,
utility services, landscaping, structures and signs, lighting and
screening devices.
B.
C. Any other information reasonably required pursuant to this chapter.
ARTERIAL STREETS — Those which are used primarily for fast or
heavy traffic and carry more than 500 vehicles per hour on a daily basis.
A.
COLLECTOR STREETS — Those which carry traffic from minor streets
to the major system of arterial streets, including the principal entrance
streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within
such a development, and carry from 200 through 500 vehicles per hour
on a daily basis.
B.
MINOR STREETS — Those which are primarily for access to the
abutting properties and carry less than 200 vehicles per hour on a daily
basis.
C.
§ 560-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 560-2
1:771
testamentary or intestate provisions, divisions of property upon court order,
and conveyances so as to combine existing lots by deed or other instrument.
The term "subdivision" shall also include the term "resubdivision."
SUBDIVISION COMMITTEE — A committee of three members of the
Planning Board appointed by the Chairman of the Planning Board, which
shall classify subdivisions in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
and perform such other duties relating to land subdivision as may be
delegated to it by such Board.
ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT — The Board established pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69.
§ 560-3. Sale of land prior to approval of subdivision prohibited.
If, before final subdivision approval has been granted, any person transfers
or sells or agrees to transfer or sell, except pursuant to an agreement
expressly conditioned on final subdivision approval, as owner or agent, any
land which forms a part of a subdivision for which municipal approval is
required pursuant to this chapter, such person shall be subject to a penalty
not to exceed $1,000 and each lot so transferred or sold may be deemed a
separate violation.
§ 560-2 IRVINGTON CODE § 560-3
1:772
ARTICLE II
Subdivision Procedure
§ 560-4. Compliance with applicable requirements.
The procedures for processing subdivisions shall comply with the
requirements of Chapter 365, Land Use Procedures, of the Code of the
Township of Irvington, New Jersey.
§ 560-5. Minor subdivisions.
Notice and public hearing otherwise required by the provisions of Chapter
365, Land Use Procedures, of the Code of the Township of Irvington shall
be waived if the Subdivision Committee finds that an application for
development conforms to the definition of minor subdivision in § 560-2
of this chapter; provided, however, that the Subdivision Committee may
condition such approval on terms ensuring the provision of improvements
pursuant to the provisions of Article IV of this chapter. Minor subdivision
approval shall be deemed to be final approval of the subdivision, and the
Chairman and Secretary of the Planning Board shall endorse their approval
on the plat submitted.
§ 560-6. Preliminary subdivision approval.
§ 560-7. Final site plan approval.
The Planning Board shall grant final approval if the detailed drawings,
specifications and estimates conform to the standards established by this
chapter, and provided further that the conditions of preliminary approval
have been met.
A. The developer shall submit to the Building Inspector a plat and such
other information as is reasonably necessary for an informed decision
by the Building Inspector as to whether the requirements necessary for
preliminary subdivision approval have been met. Such plat and
accompanying documents may be in tentative form for preliminary
approval by said Building Inspector. If architectural plans are required,
preliminary plans and elevations shall be sufficient. If an application for
development is found to be incomplete, the developer shall be notified
within 45 days of the date of submission of said application, or it shall
be deemed to be properly submitted.
B. Completed applications for subdivision approval shall be submitted to
the Planning Board in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 365,
Land Use Procedures, of the Code of the Township of Irvington, New
Jersey.
§ 560-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 560-7
1:773

ARTICLE III
Plat Details
§ 560-8. Plan requirements.
All plats shall be clearly and legibly drawn and shall be signed and sealed by
an engineer, land surveyor or architect licensed by the State of New Jersey.
All such plats shall be designed in compliance with Article VI of this chapter
and shall be no smaller than 8 1/2 inches by 13 inches and no larger than
30 inches by 42 inches.
§ 560-9. Application for minor subdivision.
The plat for a minor subdivision shall be at a scale of not less than one
inch equals 30 feet and shall show or be accompanied by the following
information:
§ 560-10. Application for preliminary approval of major subdivision.
The preliminary plat shall be at a scale of not less than one inch equals 60
feet and shall show or be accompanied by the following information:
A. The location of that portion which is to be subdivided in relation to the
entire tract.
B. The tract name, Tax Map sheet, block and lot numbers, date, reference,
North arrow, graphic scale and the names and addresses of the record
owner or owners, the subdivider and the person who prepared the map.
C. Existing and proposed lot lines, dimensions, bearings and elevations.
D. The location of existing streets abutting the subdivision.
E. The locations, elevations and uses of existing buildings within 100 feet
of the subject property.
F. The zoning district and boundaries within the proposed subdivision and
within 200 feet of the perimeter thereof.
G. A copy of any protective covenants or deed restrictions applying to the
land being subdivided.
H. Certification by the Collector of Taxes that taxes are paid to date.
A. A key map showing the entire subdivision and its relation to the
surrounding areas.
B. The tract name, Tax Map sheet, block and lot numbers, date, reference,
North arrow, graphic scale and the names and addresses of the record
owner or owners, the subdivider and the person who prepared the map.
C. Acreage of tract to be subdivided, to the nearest tenth of an acre.
D. Existing and proposed lot lines, dimensions and bearings.
§ 560-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 560-10
1:775
§ 560-11. Application for final approval of major subdivision.
The final plat shall be drawn in ink on tracing cloth or the equivalent at a
scale of not less than one inch equals 60 feet and in compliance with all
provisions of the Map Filing Law, N.J.S.A. 46:26B-1 et seq. The final plat
shall be accompanied by the following:
E. Contours at five-foot intervals for slopes averaging 10% or greater and
at two-foot intervals for land of lesser slope; indication of the high and
low points; and tentative cross sections and center-line profiles for all
proposed new streets.
F. The location, elevations and uses of existing buildings within 100 feet of
the subject property.
G. The location of existing and proposed property lines, streets, buildings,
monuments, watercourses, railroads, bridges, culverts, drainpipes and
any natural features such as wooded areas and rock formations.
H. The zoning districts and their boundaries within the proposed
subdivision and within 200 feet of the perimeter thereof.
I. Plans, profiles and cross sections of all proposed streets and the profiles
of existing streets to which the proposed streets shall be connected
within the proposed subdivision and within 100 feet of the perimeter
thereof where the streets are to be constructed by the subdivider or
other private person.
J. Plans and profiles, including the size, grade and elevation, of all
proposed water lines, stormwater drains and sanitary sewers and of
existing water mains, stormwater drains and sewers to which the
proposed utilities shall be connected within the proposed subdivision
and within 100 feet of the perimeter thereof where the same are to be
constructed by the subdivider or other private person.
K. Plans of proposed utility layouts (sewers, storm drains, water, gas and
electricity) showing feasible connections to existing or any proposed
utility systems.
L. A copy of any protective covenants or deed restrictions applying to the
land being subdivided.
M. Certification by the Collector of Taxes that all taxes are paid to date.
A. Date, name and location of the subdivision, name of owner, graphic
scale and North arrow.
B. Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, street names,
easements and other rights-of-way, land to be reserved or dedicated to
public use, all lot lines and other site lines, with accurate dimensions,
bearings or deflection angles, and radii, arcs and central angles of all
curves.
§ 560-10 IRVINGTON CODE § 560-11
1:776
§ 560-12. Waivers.
The Planning Board shall have the power to waive submission of any of the
above items which are not applicable to a particular application, except that
in the case of engineering requirements the waiver must be approved by
the Town Engineer.
§ 560-13. Application forms.
Upon final passage of this chapter, the Planning Board shall prepare
application forms for subdivision and site plan approval, which forms shall
provide for the submission of all information required by this chapter. Such
application forms, which shall be employed by both the Planning Board
and Zoning Board of Adjustment, shall require the signature of both the
developer and the owner of any land included in the proposed development.
C. The location, elevations and uses of existing buildings within 100 feet of
the subject property.
D. Zoning districts and their boundaries within the proposed subdivision
and within 200 feet of the perimeter thereof.
E. The purpose of any easement or land reserved or dedicated to public
use shall be designated, and the proposed use of sites other than
residential shall be noted.
F. Each block shall be numbered and the lots within each block shall be
numbered consecutively beginning with No. 1.
G. Minimum building setback line on all lots and other sites.
H. Location and description of all monuments.
I. Names of owners of adjoining properties.
J. Certification that the applicant is agent or owner of the land or that the
owner has given consent under an option agreement.
K. When approval of a plat is required by any officer or body of a
municipality, county or state, such approval shall be certified on the
plat.
L. Cross sections and profiles of streets, approved by the Municipal
Engineer.
M. Contours at five-foot intervals for slopes averaging 10% or greater and
at two-foot intervals for land of lesser slope.
N. Plans and profiles of storm and sanitary sewers and water mains.
O. Certification by the Collector of Taxes that all taxes are paid to date.
§ 560-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 560-13
1:777

ARTICLE IV
Subdivision Improvements
§ 560-14. Installation prior to final approval.
Prior to the granting of final approval, the subdivider shall have installed or
shall have furnished performance guaranties in accordance with Article V
of this chapter for the ultimate installation of the following improvements.
§ 560-15. Monuments.
Monuments shall be constructed and installed in accordance with the Map
Filing Law, N.J.S.A. 46:26B-1 et seq.
§ 560-16. Streets, sidewalks and curbs.
All streets, sidewalks and curbs shall comply with all applicable provisions
of this chapter and other Town ordinances.313
§ 560-17. Shade trees.
Shade trees shall be of the type and specie and shall be planted at locations
and intervals as may be approved by the Municipal Engineer. Existing trees
shall be preserved wherever possible. Special precautions shall be taken to
protect existing trees.
§ 560-18. Off-street parking, pedestrian walks and protective
screens.
Off-street parking and loading areas, pedestrian walks and planting strips
or natural protective screens between residential and nonresidential areas
shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of Article VI of this
chapter and, where applicable, Chapter 650, Zoning, site plan approval and
the requirements of the Municipal Engineer.
§ 560-19. Storm drains and sanitary sewers.
All storm drain and sanitary sewer installations shall be connected to public
sewers in accordance with design, location and construction specifications
as promulgated by the Municipal Engineer and shall be adequate to handle
all present and anticipated future development.
§ 560-20. Water mains and fire hydrants.
All water mains, fire hydrants and appurtenances shall be connected with
the existing water systems, with the approval of Commonwealth Water Co.,
its successor or assigns.
§ 560-21. Easements.
313. Editor's Note: See Ch. 555, Streets and Sidewalks.
§ 560-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 560-21
1:779
§ 560-22. Streetlighting and utility lines.
Streetlighting, gas, electric and telephone lines shall be installed in
accordance with the standards of the appropriate utility and with the
approval of the Municipal Engineer.
§ 560-23. Street signs. [Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407;
7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
There shall be at least one street sign at each intersection unless there
is an existing approved street sign. Said signs shall be installed by the
Department of Public Works at the expense of the applicant.
§ 560-24. Soil erosion and sediment control devices.
Soil erosion and sediment control devices of a permanent or temporary
nature shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of the New
Jersey Soil Conservation Service and shall be subject to the approval of the
Municipal Engineer.
A. Easements of necessary width shall be provided for all public sewers,
water mains and other required underground utilities.
B. Where a proposed subdivision is traversed by a natural stream or
watercourse, there shall be provided a drainage right-of-way
conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse, and such
further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the
purpose and in accordance with all applicable state and county
regulations.
§ 560-21 IRVINGTON CODE § 560-24
1:780
ARTICLE V
Performance Guaranties
§ 560-25. Performance and maintenance guaranties.
Before granting final approval of subdivision plats or site plans, the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment may require, for the purpose
of assuring the installation and maintenance of on-tract improvements:
§ 560-26. Reduction in amount; extension of time for performance.
The amount of any performance guaranty may be reduced by the Municipal
Council, by resolution, when portions of the improvements have been
certified by the Municipal Engineer to have been completed. The time
allowed for installation of the improvements for which the performance
guaranty has been provided may be extended by said body by resolution.
§ 560-27. Liability of obligor.
If the required improvements are not completed or corrected in accordance
with the performance guaranty, the obligor and surety, if any, shall be liable
thereon to the municipality for the reasonable cost of the improvements not
completed or corrected and the municipality may, either prior to or after the
receipt of the proceeds thereof, complete such improvements.
A. The furnishing of a performance guaranty in favor of the municipality in
an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of installation for
improvements it may deem necessary or appropriate, including:
streets, grading, pavement, water mains, stormwater drains, sanitary
sewers, catch basins, dry wells, cleanouts, gutters, curbs, sidewalks,
streetlighting, shade trees and landscaping, surveyor's monuments and
fire hydrants, as shown on the final map and required by the Map Filing
Law, N.J.S.A. 46:26B-1 et seq., water mains, culverts, storm sewers,
sanitary sewers or other means of sewage disposal, drainage
structures, erosion control and sedimentation control devices and
public improvements of open space. Performance guaranties required
by this chapter shall run for the period specified by the Planning Board
or Zoning Board of Adjustment, but in no case for a term of more than
three years.
B. Provision for a maintenance guaranty to be posted with the Municipal
Council for a period not to exceed two years after final acceptance of
the improvement, in an amount not to exceed 15% of the cost of the
improvement. In the event that other governmental agencies or public
utilities automatically will own the utilities to be installed or the
improvements are covered by a performance or maintenance guaranty
to another governmental agency, no performance or maintenance
guaranty, as the case may be, shall be required by the municipality for
such utilities or improvements.
§ 560-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 560-28
1:781
§ 560-28. Completion of improvements.
When all of the required improvements have been completed, the obligor
shall notify the Municipal Council, in writing, by certified mail, addressed
in care of the Municipal Clerk, of the completion of said improvements
and shall send a copy thereof to the Municipal Engineer. Thereupon the
Municipal Engineer shall inspect all of the improvements and shall file a
detailed report, in writing, with the Municipal Council, indicating either
approval, partial approval or rejection of the improvements with a
statement of reasons for any rejection. If partial approval is indicated, the
cost of the improvements rejected shall be set forth.
§ 560-29. Action by Municipal Council.
The Municipal Council shall either approve, partially approve or reject the
improvements on the basis of the report of the Municipal Engineer and shall
notify the obligor, in writing, by certified mail, of the contents of said report
and the action of said Municipal Council with relation thereto not later than
65 days after receipt of the notice from the obligor of the completion of
the improvements. Where partial approval is granted, the obligor shall be
released from all liability pursuant to its performance guaranty, except for
that portion adequately sufficient to secure provision of the improvements
not yet approved. Failure of the Municipal Council to send or provide such
notification to the obligor within 65 days shall be deemed to constitute
approval of the improvements, and the obligor and surety, if any, shall be
released from all liability pursuant to such performance guaranty.
§ 560-30. Rejection of improvements.
If any portion of the required improvements are rejected, the Municipal
Council may require the obligor or surety, if any, to complete such
improvements, and upon completion the same procedure of notification as
set forth this article shall be followed.
§ 560-31. Inspection fees.
The obligor shall reimburse the municipality for all reasonable inspection
fees paid to the Municipal Engineer for the aforegoing inspection of the
improvements.
§ 560-32. Other fees.
Any guaranties required pursuant to this article shall be in addition to any
other fees required by ordinance.
§ 560-28 IRVINGTON CODE § 560-32
1:782
ARTICLE VI
Design Standards for Subdivisions
§ 560-33. Observance of requirements.
The subdivider shall observe the requirements and principles of land
subdivision set forth in this article in the design of each subdivision or
portion thereof. If an Official Map shall have been adopted, the subdivision
shall conform to the proposals and conditions shown thereon. The streets,
drainage rights-of-way, school sites, public parks and playgrounds shown on
a duly adopted Master Plan shall be considered in approval of subdivision
plats. Where no Master Plan or Official Map exists, streets and drainage
rights-of-way shall be shown on the final plat in accordance with the
applicable provisions of the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq., and shall be such as to lend themselves to the harmonious
development of the municipality and enhance the public welfare in
accordance with the following design standards.
§ 560-34. Streets.
A. Streets in the subdivision or land development shall be of sufficient
width and suitable grade and suitably located to accommodate
prospective traffic and to provide access for firefighting and emergency
equipment to buildings and coordinated so as to compose a convenient
system consistent with the Official Map, if any, and the circulation
element of the Master Plan, if any, provided that no street of a width
greater than 50 feet within the right-of-way lines shall be required
unless said street constitutes an extension of an existing street of the
greater width or already has been shown in greater width on the
Official Map.
B. Right-of-way widths.
(1) The right-of-way width shall be measured from the lot line to lot
line and not be less than the following:
(a) Arterial streets, 80 feet.
(b) Collector streets, 60 feet.
(c) Minor streets, 50 feet.
(2) Where the Master Plan or a suitable traffic and engineering study
has designated a right-of-way width for any street, that standard
shall be followed.
C. The width of the right-of-way of internal roads, alleys and serviceways
in multifamily, commercial and industrial developments shall be
determined on an individual basis and shall in all cases be of sufficient
width and of suitable design to safely accommodate the anticipated
peak traffic, parking and loading needs, provide sufficient access and
turnaround space where needed for firefighting equipment utilized by
§ 560-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 560-34
1:783
§ 560-35. Off-street parking and loading areas.
the Department of Public Safety, and provide sufficient access and
egress for refuse collection. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC
3553]
D. Subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets that do not conform
to widths as shown on the Master Plan shall, where feasible, dedicate
additional width along either one or both sides of such street. If the
subdivision is along one side only, 1/2 of the required extra width shall
be dedicated.
E. Grades of arterial and collector streets shall not exceed 4%. Grades of
minor streets shall not exceed 10% or have a minimum grade of less
than 1/2 of 1%. Within 50 feet of the intersection of any such street with
a major arterial street, the maximum grade shall be limited to 2%.
F. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible and
shall be no less than 60°. At the street corners, curbs shall be rounded
with a curve having a radius of not less than 15 feet.
G. Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
prohibited.
H. Wherever a change of alignment of a street occurs, except at street
intersections, the deflecting street lines shall be connected by a curve
with a radius of not less than 100 feet.
I. A vertical curve of sufficient radius shall be provided at all changes of
grades of streets to provide moving vehicles with a smooth transition
and to allow sufficient sight distance to drivers in order to assure traffic
and pedestrian safety.
J. Dead-end streets or alleys (culs-de-sac) shall be avoided to the extent
feasible. Where required, they shall be of a maximum of 500 feet in
length and shall provide a turnaround at the end with a radius of not
less than 40 feet, with no parking permitted. The Planning Board shall
determine that the design is such that the firefighting apparatus of the
Town shall not be deprived of ready access to structures served by such
dead-end street or alley.
K. The name of any street dedicated for public use shall be approved by
the Planning Board, and no undedicated or private street shall be given
any name which will be a duplication of or will tend to create confusion
with any existing street. The extension of an existing street shall have
the same name as the existing street.
A. An off-street parking area shall be marked off into individual parking
stalls each 10 feet by 20 feet in size and shall provide a minimum area
of 300 square feet inclusive of access driveways and turning areas.
§ 560-34 IRVINGTON CODE § 560-35
1:784
§ 560-36. Pedestrian walks.
§ 560-37. Planting strips and natural protective screens.
Where nonresidential uses or areas abut a residential building or
development, there shall be provided, where feasible, on the nonresidential
lot or area adjacent to the side and rear lot line of a residential lot or area, a
planting strip not less than six feet wide, consisting of suitable shrubbery or
B. An off-street truck loading stall shall have a minimum width of 10 feet, a
minimum length of 45 feet and a minimum clear height of 14 feet.
C. No parking or truck loading stall shall be located within 10 feet of a
residential building.
D. Entrances and exits and driveways to a parking or truck loading area
shall be paved and shall include turning areas and shall be so
designated to assure ease of mobility, ample clearance and safety of
vehicles and pedestrians. A driveway shall have a minimum width of 10
feet, and where direction of traffic is one-way only, it shall be marked
with signs of a type approved by the Municipal Engineer.
E. A parking or truck loading area shall be surfaced with concrete or
asphalt mix and sufficiently drained so as to prevent an accumulation of
water on the surface of the areas.
F. A parking area shall be illuminated if used after sunset and such
illumination shall provide a minimum of 0.4 lumens per square foot for
self-parking and 0.8 lumens per square foot for attendant parking.
Lighting shall be shielded from motorists using the streets and
adjoining residential properties.
G. Planting strips, consisting of suitable shrubbery or hedges with a
minimum height of five feet and a density to shield effectively the yearround
undesirable visible exposure, shall be provided, where feasible,
around hard-surface parking or truck loading areas.
H. An off-street parking area which provides parking for 50 or more
vehicles shall, where feasible, be so designed that not less than 5% of
the said area, exclusive of required planting strips, shall be devoted to
landscaping.
A. Pedestrian walks and sitting areas shall be concrete surfaced so that
they will be easily maintained and shall be properly illuminated if in use
after sunset.
B. The entire route or alignment of pedestrian walks shall be visible from a
street or other public way.
C. A private pedestrian walk shall have a minimum paved width of four
feet, and if dedicated to the Town as a public walkway, the pedestrian
walk shall have an easement with a minimum width of 10 feet.
§ 560-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 560-37
1:785
hedges maintained at a height of 10 feet and a density to shield effectively
the year-round undesirable visual exposure so as to provide a natural
protective screen between incompatible uses.
§ 560-38. Blocks.
§ 560-39. Lots.
A. Block length and width or acreage within bounding roads shall be such
as to accommodate the size of lot required in the area by Chapter 650,
Zoning, and to provide for convenient access, circulation control and
safety of street traffic.
B. For commercial, group housing or industrial use, block size shall be
sufficient to meet all area and yard requirements for such use.
A. Lot sizes and dimensions shall be not less than the requirements of
Chapter 650, Zoning.
B. Insofar as it is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
streets and radial to curved streets. Lot lines shall be regular and
straight, except where the outside perimeter lines of the subdivision
tract make such an arrangement infeasible.
C. Intersecting curblines on corner lots adjacent to the street lines shall be
rounded with a curve having a radius of no less than 15 feet.
D. Where the Master Plan shows a proposed widening of an existing street
upon which lots within the proposed subdivision will front, all setbacks
on such lots shall be measured from the new street line as proposed in
the Master Plan.
E. Each lot shall front on an approved street which is at least 50 feet in
width.
F. If a lot shall not be shown to be suitable for its intended use due to
factors such as rock formations, flood conditions, topography or similar
environmental circumstances, the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment may, after hearing, withhold approval of the proposed
subdivision creating such lot.
§ 560-37 IRVINGTON CODE § 560-39
1:786
ARTICLE VII
Site Plan Review
§ 560-40. Uses requiring site plan approval. [Amended 6-27-1978 by
Ord. No. MC 2536]
No building permit shall be issued for any of the uses listed below unless
a site plan shall have first been approved by the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment; provided, however, that this requirement shall not
apply when the proposed development involves only a change in the use of
any building or other structure or use of land for which approval is required
and no new construction or structural alteration or enlargement of any
existing building or other structure is contemplated:
§ 560-41. Public hearings.
In connection with the following classes of site plans, the Planning Board
or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hold a public hearing in accordance
with the provisions of Chapter 365, Land Use Procedures, of the Code of the
Township of Irvington, New Jersey:
§ 560-42. Procedure for preliminary site plan approval.
A. Any use other than a one- or two-family dwelling.
B. Conditional uses.
C. Use variances.
D. Parking areas for four or more vehicles.
A. Any site plan requiring a variance.
B. Any site plan which includes an application for a conditional use.
C. Any site plan which includes an application for a subdivision.
D. Any development which the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment determines will have a significant impact upon the
surrounding properties, the neighborhood or the Town as a whole.
A. The developer shall submit to the Building Inspector a site plan and
such other information as is reasonably necessary for an informed
decision by the Building Inspector as to whether the requirements
necessary for preliminary site plan approval have been met. Such site
plan and accompanying documents may be in tentative form for
preliminary approval by said Building Inspector. If architectural plans
are required, preliminary plans and elevations to the nearest 0.01 of a
foot shall be sufficient. If an application for development is found to be
incomplete, the developer shall be notified within 45 days of the date of
submission of said application, or it shall be deemed to be properly
submitted.
§ 560-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 560-42
1:787
§ 560-43. Procedure for final site plan approval.
The Planning Board shall grant final approval if the detailed drawings,
specifications and estimates conform to the standards established by this
chapter, and provided further that the conditions of preliminary approval
have been met.
B. Completed applications for site plan approval shall be submitted to the
Planning Board in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 365, Land
Use, of the Code of the Town of Irvington, New Jersey.
§ 560-42 IRVINGTON CODE § 560-43
1:788
ARTICLE VIII
Site Plan Details
§ 560-44. Site plan requirements.
A. The site plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn and shall be signed and
sealed by an engineer, land surveyor or architect licensed in the State
of New Jersey and shall be at a scale of not less than one inch equals 30
feet. The site plan shall be designed in compliance with the provisions
on design standards of this chapter314 and shall show or be
accompanied by the following information:
(1) Date. All revisions shall be noted and dated.
(2) Key map showing the location of the subject property with
reference to surrounding areas and existing street intersections, at
a scale of not smaller than 100 feet to the inch.
(3) Title of development, North arrow, graphic scale, block and lot
numbers, name and address of record owner, name and address of
applicant, name and address and license number and seal of person
preparing the site plan. If the owner of the premises is a
corporation, the names and addresses of the president, secretary
and registered agent shall be submitted with the application.
(4) All distances in feet and decimals of a foot to the nearest hundredth
of a foot and all bearings given to the nearest 10 seconds.
(5) The names, as shown on the current tax records of the Town of
Irvington, of all owners of property within 200 feet of the parcel,
together with the block and lot numbers of said property.
(6) The zoning district in which the parcel is located, together with
zone boundaries included within the boundaries of the parcel and
within 200 feet therefrom.
(7) Survey data showing boundaries of the property, building or
setback lines, and lines of existing and proposed streets, lots,
reservations, easements and areas dedicated to public use,
including grants, restrictions and right-of-way.
(8) Reference to any existing or proposed covenants, deed restrictions
or exceptions covering all or any part of the parcel. A copy of such
covenants, deed restrictions or exceptions shall be submitted with
the application.
(9) The distances, measured along the right-of-way lines of existing
streets abutting the property, to the nearest intersections with
other public streets.
314. Editor's Note: See Article X of this chapter.
§ 560-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 560-44
1:789
(10) Location of any existing buildings on the site and all other
structures, including walls, fences, culverts and bridges, with spot
elevations of such buildings and structures. Structures to be
removed shall be indicated by dashed lines; structures to remain
shall be indicated by solid lines.
(11) Location, height and first-floor elevation of all proposed buildings
or other structures; also the elevation of the finished grade at each
corner of each structure. At the time of application for preliminary
site plan approval, preliminary architectural plans and elevations
shall be sufficient.
(12) Location of all existing and proposed storm drainage structures
and utility lines, whether publicly or privately owned, with pipe
size, grades and direction of flow. If any existing utility lines are
underground, the estimated location of said utility lines shall be
shown.
(13) Existing and proposed contours, referred to United States Coast
and Geodetic datum, with a contour interval of one foot for slopes
of 3% or less, and an interval of two feet for slopes of more than 3%
but less than 15%, and an interval of five feet for slopes of 15% or
more. Existing contours are to be indicated by dashed lines and
proposed contours are to be indicated by solid lines. Contours and
elevations shall be shown within 200 feet of the site.
(14) Location of existing rock outcrops, high points, watercourses, highand
low-tide levels, depressions, ponds, wooded areas, existing
trees and other significant existing features, including previous
flood elevations of watercourse, ponds and marsh areas as
determined by survey.
(15) All proposed streets, with profiles, indicating grading; and cross
sections showing width of roadway, location and width of sidewalk
and location and size of utility lines.
(16) The proposed use or uses of land and buildings, together with the
floor space of all buildings and the estimated number of employees.
If the precise use of the building is unknown at the time of
application, an amended plan showing the proposed use shall be
required prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
(17) The means of vehicular access for ingress and egress, showing in
particular the size and location of driveways and curb cuts;
walkways; the proposed traffic channels, if any; acceleration and
deceleration lanes, if any; additional width, if any; and any other
means of controlling vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
(18) The location and design of any off-street parking areas or loading
areas, showing size and location of bays, aisles and barriers.
§ 560-44 IRVINGTON CODE § 560-44
1:790
§ 560-45. Waivers.
The Planning Board shall have the power to waive submission of any of the
above items which are not applicable to a particular application; except that
in the case of engineering requirements, the waiver must be approved by
the Municipal Engineer.
(19) The location of all existing and proposed water lines, valves and
hydrants and all sanitary sewer lines or alternative means of water
supply or sewage disposal and treatment, as well as storm drains
and appurtenances.
(20) The location, direction of illumination, power and hours of
operation of existing and proposed outdoor lighting.
(21) The location and elevation plan of existing and proposed signs.
(22) The proposed screening, landscaping and planting plan, including
schedule and number and variety of plants, shrubs and trees.
(23) The location and use of all existing structures within 200 feet of the
boundaries of the site.
(24) Evidence of compliance with any state requirements which may be
applicable.
(25) Location and type of refuse disposal facilities, including
maneuvering areas.
(26) The location and treatment of open space.
(27) The following information, where applicable:
(a) Number of employees.
(b) Narrative describing nature of operation or activities to occur
on the site.
(c) Narrative describing trucking on the site; number and size of
trucks used in applicant's operation; number, size and
frequency of trucks making deliveries; time of loading and
unloading operation.
(28) Such other information or data as may reasonably be required by
the Planning Board for determination that the details of the site
plan are in accordance with the standards of this chapter.
§ 560-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 560-45
1:791

ARTICLE IX
Site Plan Improvements
§ 560-46. Installation as condition of site plan approval.
As a condition of site plan approval, the Planning Board may require that
the applicant install certain improvements on the site, consistent with the
design standards of this chapter,315 to ensure:
§ 560-47. Cost of improvements.
The Municipal Council may require a developer, as a condition of site plan
approval, to pay his pro rata share of the cost of providing reasonable
and necessary street improvements and water, sewerage and drainage
facilities, and easements therefor, located outside the property limits of
the site plan but necessitated or required by construction or improvements
within such site plan. Such requirements shall be based on circulation
and comprehensive utility service plans and shall represent the applicant's
pro rata share of the total improvements based on the pro rata share
represented by his development compared to the total area served by the
improvement. The Municipal Council may accept a dedication of land for
street widening or other public purposes.
A. Adequate vehicular and pedestrian circulation to accommodate
prospective traffic into, out of and within the site.
B. Adequate off-street parking and loading areas.
C. Adequate water supply, drainage, shade trees, sewerage facilities and
other utilities necessary for essential services to residents and
occupants.
D. Adequate landscaping and any screening necessary to protect adjoining
uses.
315. Editor's Note: See Article X of this chapter.
§ 560-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 560-47
1:793

ARTICLE X
Design Standards for Site Plans
§ 560-48. Observance of requirements.
The developer shall observe the requirements and principles of site plan
approval set forth in this article in the design of each site plan or portion
thereof.
§ 560-49. Observance of zoning requirements.
The site plan shall be consistent in layout or arrangement with the
requirements of Chapter 650, Zoning.
§ 560-50. Traffic circulation.
A. The site plan shall provide a safe and efficient circulation system for the
movement of vehicles and pedestrians into, out of and within the site.
B. Access driveways.
(1) Driveway location. All entrance and exit driveways shall be located
so as to afford maximum safety to and minimum disruption of traffic
on the street. Where practicable, no part of any driveway entrance
or exit to a public street shall be closer than 50 feet to the right-ofway
line of any intersecting street. Where the frontage of the lot is
too narrow to permit the above distance, the driveway shall be
located as far from the intersection as possible but in no case any
closer than 25 feet from a public pedestrian crosswalk.
(2) Traffic signs. To facilitate the safe and efficient movement of traffic
into and out of a site, the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment may require the installation of specified directional,
regulatory or advisory signs or pavement markings at designated
locations on the site. Where required on the site, all devices must
conform to the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
Where required off-site on the public right-of-way, all devices will
be installed by the municipality in accordance with the current
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. The prorated cost of
said off-site improvements shall be borne by the developer.
(3) Number of driveways. The number of driveways provided from a
site directly to any one street shall not exceed one driveway for a
lot frontage of 100 feet or less, two driveways for a lot frontage of
up to 200 feet, and one additional driveway for each 200 feet of lot
frontage over 200 feet. Where more than one driveway is
permitted, the Planning Board may require that each driveway be
designated as either an exit or an entrance where such designation
will facilitate vehicle and pedestrian movement within the site
without hindering traffic movement on the street.
§ 560-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 560-50
1:795
(4) Driveway and interior road dimensions. The dimensions of
entrance and exit driveways and interior roads shall be adequate to
accommodate the volume and character of vehicles anticipated to
be using the site, but not wider than necessary to accommodate the
expected traffic at a speed of 15 miles per hour. All driveways shall
require depressed curb construction, and driveway pavement shall
extend to the curb of the street with which it connects. Provisions
must be made for handicapped, barrier-free construction. The
required minimum and maximum dimensions for driveways and
interior roads are as follows:
(a) Multiple dwelling, five to 10 families: one-way operation,
minimum 12, maximum 15; two-way operation, minimum 20,
maximum 26.
(b) Multiple dwelling, over 10 families: one-way operation,
minimum 12, maximum 18; two-way operation, minimum 20,
maximum 26.
(c) Commercial and industrial: one-way operation, minimum 15,
maximum 24; two-way operation, minimum 26, maximum 40.
(d) Gasoline station: one-way operation, minimum 18, maximum
25: two-way operation, minimum 25, maximum 36.
C. Off-street parking and loading areas.
(1) The site plan shall provide for sufficient parking spaces, driveways,
maneuvering areas and loading zones to meet the requirements of
Chapter 650, Zoning.
(2) An off-street parking area shall be marked off into individual
parking stalls each 10 feet by 20 feet in size and shall provide a
minimum area of 300 square feet inclusive of access driveways and
turning areas.
(3) An off-street truck loading stall shall have a minimum width of 10
feet, a minimum length of 45 feet and a minimum clear height of 14
feet.
(4) No parking or truck loading stall shall be located within 10 feet of a
residential building.
(5) Entrances and exits and driveways to a parking or truck loading
area shall be paved and shall include turning areas and shall be so
designed as to assure ease of mobility, ample clearance and safety
of vehicles and pedestrians.
(6) A parking or truck loading area shall be surfaced with concrete or
asphaltic mix and sufficiently drained so as to prevent an
accumulation of water on the surface of the areas. In no case shall
drainage of any sort be permitted across the public walk into the
roadway.
§ 560-50 IRVINGTON CODE § 560-50
1:796
(7) A parking area shall be illuminated if used after sunset, and such
illumination shall provide a minimum of 0.4 lumens per square foot
for self-parking and 0.8 lumens per square foot for attendant
parking and shall be shielded from motorists using the streets or
adjoining residential properties.
(8) Planting strips, consisting of suitable shrubbery or hedges with a
minimum height of five feet and a density to shield effectively the
year-round undesirable visual exposure, shall, where feasible, be
provided around hard-surface parking or truck loading areas.
(9) An off-street parking area which provides parking for 50 or more
vehicles shall, where feasible, be so designed that not less than 5%
of the said area, exclusive of required planting strips, shall be
devoted to landscaping.
(10)Off-street parking and loading areas shall be designed to prevent
the maneuvering of vehicles into or out of parking or loading
spaces within any portion of a driveway that is within the right-ofway
line of any street. Off-street parking and loading areas shall be
designed so as to avoid the necessity of vehicles backing into any
street from the site.
D. Customer service areas. Any use such as a bank or gasoline station that
provides or expects to provide temporary stopping space or
maneuvering space for vehicles of patrons seeking service from their
cars shall show such space on the site plan. A gasoline station shall
provide at least two stopping spaces per pump. A bank shall provide at
least eight stopping spaces per drive-in teller station. All such stopping
spaces shall be located so as not to block any entrance or exit driveway,
unless such driveway is designed for the exclusive use of cars
patronizing a drive-in bank window. Stopping spaces shall be at least 20
feet long and eight feet wide and shall be located entirely within the
confines of the lot.
E. Sidewalks.
(1) Sidewalks shall connect the main entrance of each building with
the street or with the interior road giving access to the building.
Interior roads giving access to buildings shall have sidewalks on
both sides of such road. Sidewalks shall further be provided where
needed to protect the safety of pedestrians. All sidewalks shall be
constructed to meet the requirements of the Municipal Engineer
and the Code of the Town of Irvington.
(2) Pedestrian walks and sitting areas shall be concrete surfaced and
properly illuminated if in use after sunset.
(3) The entire route or alignment of pedestrian walks shall be visible
from a street or other public way.
§ 560-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 560-50
1:797
§ 560-51. Drainage.
§ 560-52. Sewage disposal, water supply and snow storage.
§ 560-53. Landscaping.
(4) A private pedestrian walk shall have a minimum paved width of
four feet, and if dedicated to the municipality as a public walkway,
the pedestrian walk shall have an easement with a minimum width
of 10 feet.
F. Paving and curbing. Paving and curbing shall meet the requirements of
the Municipal Engineer.
A. Surface runoff. Provisions shall be made for safe and adequate drainage
of the surface runoff waters in and from the premises so that flooding
and erosion of the property and the property of others will be
prevented. Calculations on which the design of drainage facilities is
based shall be submitted with the site plan.
B. Each development shall be required to provide adequate drainage
facilities along public streets. Where runoff from the development
requires enlargement, modification or reconstruction of existing
municipal drainage structures, such development shall pay the pro rata
cost of such improvement.
C. All drainage facilities shall be constructed to meet the requirements of
the Municipal Engineer.
D. In no case shall drainage of any sort be permitted across the public
walk into the roadway.
A. The site plan shall provide for adequate sewage disposal and water
supply systems to meet the requirements of the Municipal Engineer.
B. The site plan shall include a snow storage area with adequate provision
for drainage.
A. The site plan shall include a landscaping plan indicating the type of
landscaping to be installed and the type, size and specie of trees and
shrubs to be planted.
B. Portions of all front, rear and side yards which are not used for required
driveways, sidewalks, off-street parking or loading, accessory buildings
or playground areas shall be planted with trees, shrubs, plants and
grass lawns or ground cover in order to ensure the attractiveness of the
premises and the protection of the soil thereon. Not more than 10% of
such areas to be planted may be covered with stones or pebbles in lieu
of grass or ground cover. Existing trees of six-inch caliper or over shall
not be removed unless they are so located as to interfere unduly with
construction.
§ 560-50 IRVINGTON CODE § 560-53
1:798
§ 560-54. Garbage and refuse.
Provision shall be made for the indoor or enclosed storage and pickup of
garbage and refuse, to be approved by the Municipal Engineer.
§ 560-55. Recycling areas in new multifamily housing
developments.316 [Added 4-12-1994 by Ord. No. MC 2994]
C. Where nonresidential uses or areas abut a residential building or
development, there shall be provided, where feasible, on the
nonresidential lot or area adjacent to the side and rear lot line of a
residential lot or area, a planting strip not less than six feet wide,
consisting of suitable shrubbery or hedges maintained at a height of 10
feet and a density to shield effectively the year-round undesirable visual
exposure so as to provide a natural protective screen from incompatible
uses and surroundings.
D. Landscaped areas shall be used for piling snow rather than the public
right-of-way.
A. As used in this section, the following terms shall have meanings
indicated:
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A building containing
three or more dwelling units occupied or intended to be occupied by
persons living independently of each other, or a group of such buildings.
RECYCLING AREA — Space allocated for collection and storage of
source-separated recyclable materials.
B. There shall be included in any new multifamily housing development
that requires subdivision or site plan approval an indoor or outdoor
recycling area for the collection and storage of residentially generated
recyclable materials. The dimensions of the recycling area shall be
sufficient to accommodate recycling bins or containers which are of
adequate size and number, and which are consistent with anticipated
usage and with current methods of collection in the area in which the
project is located. The dimensions of the recycling area and the bins or
containers shall be determined in consultation with the Municipal
Recycling Coordinator and shall be consistent with the District
Recycling Plan adopted pursuant to Section 3 of P.L. 1987, c. 102
(N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13), and any applicable requirements of the
Municipal Master Plan adopted pursuant to Section 26 of P.L. 1987, c.
102.317
C. The recycling area shall be conveniently located for the residential
disposition of source-separated recyclable materials, preferably near,
but clearly separated from, a refuse dumpster.
316. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 535, Solid Waste and Recycling.
317. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
§ 560-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 560-55
1:799
§ 560-56. Outside storage.
Outside storage, when permitted, shall only be permitted in areas approved
by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment. Such areas shall, as
nearly as may be practicable, be shielded from public view and protected by
adequate fencing and screening.
§ 560-57. Retaining walls.
Retaining walls shall be designed and constructed to meet the requirements
of the Building Inspector.
§ 560-58. Additional measures.
The Planning Board may require provision of such additional measures as
it deems necessary to protect public areas or neighboring properties from
adverse effects of the proposed development which would be harmful to
health, safety, conservation of property values and general welfare.
D. The recycling area shall be well lit and shall be safely and easily
accessible by recycling personnel and vehicles. Collection vehicles shall
be able to access the recycling area without interference from parked
cars or other obstacles. Reasonable measures shall be taken to protect
the recycling area, and the bins or containers placed therein, against
theft of recyclable materials, bins or containers.
E. The recycling area or the bins or containers placed therein shall be
designed so as to provide protection against adverse environmental
conditions which might render the collected materials unmarketable.
Any bins or containers which are used for collection of recyclable paper
or cardboard and which are located in an outdoor recycling area shall
be equipped with a lid or otherwise covered so as to keep the paper or
cardboard dry.
F. Signs clearly identifying the recycling area and the materials accepted
therein shall be posted adjacent to all points of access to the recycling
area. Individual bins or containers shall be equipped with signs
indicating the materials to be placed therein.
G. Landscaping and/or fencing shall be provided around any outdoor
recycling area and shall be developed in an aesthetically pleasing
manner.
§ 560-55 IRVINGTON CODE § 560-58
1:800
ARTICLE XI
Administration
§ 560-59. Exceptions from requirements.
The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, when acting upon
applications for preliminary or minor subdivision approval or for
preliminary site plan approval, shall have the power to grant such
exceptions from the requirements for subdivision or site plan approval
as may be reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of the
provisions of this chapter if the literal enforcement of one or more
provisions of this chapter will exact undue hardship or is impracticable
because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question. If such
exception is granted, it shall be done by a resolution of the Planning Board
or Zoning Board of Adjustment, setting forth the reasons for the exception
and demonstrating that the exception will not have an adverse effect upon
surrounding properties, the neighborhood or the Town in general.
§ 560-60. Expiration of approval.
Site plan approval shall expire one year after Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment action if actual, substantial, continuing construction,
in addition to excavation and demolition, is not in progress, unless the
applicant seeks and is granted an extension of time from the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment; except that a site plan granted in
connection with an application for preliminary major subdivision approval
shall be in force for a period of three years. An applicant whose site plan
approval has expired may resubmit a site plan.
§ 560-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 560-60
1:801
Chapter 566
SUNDAY CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform Construction Code — See Ch. 240. Noise — See Ch. 397.
§ 566-1. Demolition work on Sunday prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to operate or engage in the
removal, demolition or destruction of any building, wall or structure within
the Town of Irvington on the first day of the week, commonly known as
Sunday.
§ 566-2. Excavating or grading on Sunday prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to operate or engage in
the excavation, digging or grading of land or the removal or carting away
of rubble or earth created by such excavation, digging or grading of land
within the Town of Irvington on the first day of the week, commonly known
as Sunday.
§ 566-3. Construction work on Sundays and holidays prohibited.
[Amended 1-28-2019 by Ord. No. MC 3683]
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to operate or engage in the
exterior or interior construction, demolition, erection, alteration or repair of
lots, buildings or structures of any kind within the Town of Irvington on the
first day of the week, commonly known as Sunday, and any United States of
America federal holiday or State of New Jersey state holiday.
§ 566-4. Exemptions.
§ 566-5. Existing permits.
Permits issued for any of the activities or occupations set forth in §§ 566-1,
566-2 and 566-3, heretofore issued or henceforth to be issued, shall be valid
for use on any days of the week except Sunday.
A. Exemption from the provisions of §§ 566-1, 566-2 and 566-3 shall
extend to those who, because of some unforeseen accident or
emergency, shall find it necessary to engage in such occupations,
including emergency repairs by public utility companies and by
municipal and other governmental agencies to streets and sewer lines.
B. Exemption from the provisions of § 566-3 shall extend to those
individuals who personally engage in making minor repairs to or
painting the residential structure they own and in which they reside.
§ 560-60 IRVINGTON CODE § 566-6
1:802
§ 566-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-8-1987 by Ord. No.
MC 2835318]
The penalty for violations of this chapter are as follows:
§ 566-7. Terminology.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Includes individuals, partnerships, corporations and
contractors.
Chapter 571
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform Construction Code — See Ch. 240.
Fees and licenses — See Ch. 290.
Noise — See Ch. 397.
Zoning — See Ch. 650.
A. For the first violation: a fine of $50.
B. For the second violation: a fine of $250.
C. For the third violation: a fine of $500.
D. For the fourth violation: a maximum fine of $750. In addition, a
mandatory court appearance is required for the fourth violation.
318. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 566-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 566-7
1:803

ARTICLE I
Public Swimming Pools
§ 571-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY — The Department of Housing
Services.[Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622; 9-28-1982 by
Ord. No. MC 2668; 2-13-1985 by Ord. No. MC 2769; 7-14-2009 by
Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. MC 3511]
ALTER — Any major replacement or repair to any portion or unit of any
existing swimming pool.
APPROVED — Accepted or acceptable under applicable specifications
stated or cited in this article, or accepted as suitable for the proposed use
under procedures and powers of administration delegated in this article.
AUTHORIZED AGENT — A licensed Health Officer, Sanitary Inspector or
any other properly qualified and licensed person who is delegated to
function within specified limits as the agent of the administrative authority.
CONSTRUCT — Building or installing a new swimming pool or enlarging an
existing swimming pool or any of its facilities.
LOCATE — Designating the site or place of a swimming pool.
OPERATE — To conduct, maintain or otherwise provide facilities for bathing
at swimming pools.
SWIMMING POOL — Includes fill-and-draw, flow-through and recirculation
pools, outdoor and indoor, which are artificially constructed to provide
recreational facilities for swimming, bathing or wading, and all buildings,
equipment and appurtenances thereto. It shall not include natural outdoor
ponds, rivers or lakes, nor baths used for cleansing of the body or practice
of the healing arts. It shall not include swimming or wading pools
established or maintained upon any premises by any individual for his own
or his family's use or the use of guests of his household.
WADING POOL — A shallow pool intended for use by children.
§ 571-2. License required to operate; display; operating on
suspended license.
Swimming pools shall not be operated by any person until the
administrative authority has given formal approval therefor by issuance
of an appropriate license. This license or permit shall be displayed in
a conspicuous place on the premises where it may be readily observed
by all patrons. No person shall operate a pool whose license therefor is
suspended.
§ 571-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 571-3
1:805
§ 571-3. Application for license.
Licenses to operate a swimming pool shall not be issued until a properly
executed application containing information as requested on a form
supplied by the administrative authority has been submitted and approved
by that body.
§ 571-4. Notice of denial.
Persons denied a license to operate a swimming pool shall be notified
in writing accordingly by the administrative authority. Such notice shall
specify the reason for such action and the remedial action necessary to
obtain approval for issuance of such license.
§ 571-5. Suspension of license.
The license of any person to operate a swimming pool may be suspended
at any time when in the opinion of the administrative authority or its
authorized agent such action is necessary to abate a present or threatened
menace to public health.
§ 571-6. Notification of suspension.
The person whose license to operate a swimming pool has been suspended
or his representative in charge of the pool shall, at the time such license is
suspended, be informed that the license to operate the pool is suspended,
the reason for such action and the remedial action to be taken before the
suspension may be lifted. Thereafter and within 24 hours, written notice of
suspension containing the same information given at the time a license is
suspended shall be forwarded by registered mail to the last known address
of the person whose license has been suspended.
§ 571-7. Hearings on suspension or denial.
A. Persons whose licenses to operate a swimming pool have been
suspended shall be afforded a hearing before the administrative
authority within three days after such suspension, or thereafter at such
person's option, to show cause why the suspension should be lifted. The
administrative authority shall, within seven days after such hearing,
render a written decision confirming or rescinding the suspension and
shall notify the person whose license has been suspended, in writing, of
its action and reasons therefor.
B. Persons whose licenses to operate a swimming pool have been denied
shall be afforded a hearing before the administrative authority within
seven days after such denial, or thereafter at such person's option, to
show cause why a license should be granted. The administrative
authority shall, within seven days after such hearing, render a written
decision confirming or rescinding the denial of a license and shall notify
the person whose license has been denied, in writing, of its action and
reasons therefor.
§ 571-3 IRVINGTON CODE § 571-8
1:806
§ 571-8. Monthly operating reports.
Reports of swimming pool operation shall be submitted to the
administrative authority or its authorized agent within 10 days after the
last day of the preceding month, upon report forms furnished by the
administrative authority.
§ 571-9. Site location.
The site of all proposed swimming pools shall be such that proper and
adequate water supply and waste disposal facilities will be available. In the
case of outdoor pools, topography, protection from prevailing winds, the
absence of trees in the near vicinity, distance from dusty roads and smokeproducing
industries shall be considered in determining the suitability of
proposed sites.
§ 571-10. General layout of pools.
Swimming pool layout shall be such that bathers leaving the dressing
rooms will first have access to toilets and then shower facilities. Exits and
entrances shall be located at the shallow end of the pool.
§ 571-11. Size of pools.
The swimming pool area shall be proportioned as follows:
§ 571-12. Depth of water.
The minimum depth of water in the deep portion of a swimming pool shall
not be less than six feet. The depth of water reserved for diving purposes
shall be as follows:
Height of Diving Board or Platform Minimum Water Depth
(feet) (meters) (feet)
1 to 3 1 7
3 to 5 — 8
5 to 8 — 9
8 to 10 3 10
A. Ten square feet shall be provided for each nonswimmer expected to be
present at the time of maximum load. Nonswimming sections shall be
less than 5 1/2 feet in depth.
B. Twenty-four square feet shall be provided for each swimmer expected
to be present at the time of maximum load. Swimming sections shall be
greater than 5 1/2 feet in depth.
C. Three hundred square feet shall be reserved around each diving board
or platform provided for diving purposes and such area shall not be
included in determining the area of the swimming section.
§ 571-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 571-13
1:807
§ 571-13. Depth markings.
Critical depths of swimming pools are those at both ends and also at change
of slope locations of the pool. Such critical depths shall be conspicuously
marked in a permanent manner on both the horizontal and vertical surfaces
of the pool and shall be visible in or out of the water. Markings at one-footdepth
intervals are considered desirable.
§ 571-14. Sand areas.
Sand areas for swimming pools are not recommended. If provided, sand
areas shall be separated from the pool and enclosed with a fence having a
separate entrance and exit. The exit or return gate shall be provided with a
shower and foot wash having continuous circulation. At least six inches of
sand shall be provided.
§ 571-15. Spectator areas.
A continuous physical separation between the swimming pool walkway and
the spectator area shall be provided by means of a suitable railing or
partition sufficiently high to prevent the mingling of spectators and bathers.
§ 571-16. Lighting.
A complete system of artificial lighting shall be provided for swimming pools
operated at night. Arrangement and design of lights shall be such that all
parts of the pool and its appurtenances are clearly visible to attendants.
Overhead wires shall not be carried across the swimming pool proper.
Underwater pool lighting, when provided, shall be designed, installed and
grounded so as not to create a hazard to bathers.
§ 571-17. Diving board construction; certain devices prohibited.
Diving stands, when provided, shall be rigidly constructed and properly
anchored with sufficient bracing to ensure stability under the heaviest
possible load. Slides and rope drops shall not be permitted. Fixed platforms
and floats shall not be permitted.
§ 571-18. Headroom above diving boards.
At least 13 feet of free and unobstructed headroom shall be provided above
diving boards and stands.
§ 571-19. Height of diving boards above water.
Diving boards or platforms available for use by the general public shall not
be more than 10 feet above water level.
§ 571-13 IRVINGTON CODE § 571-20
1:808
§ 571-20. Covering for springboards.
Springboards and diving platforms shall be covered with cocoa matting or
other nonslip material. The use of canvas for such purposes is prohibited.
§ 571-21. Wading pools to be separated from swimming pools.
Wading pools, if constructed adjacent to a swimming pool, shall be
separated therefrom by a fence or other partition sufficiently high to
prevent waders from entering the swimming pool area.
§ 571-22. Water depth of wading pools.
Wading pools shall not be designed or used for swimming or diving. The
maximum water depth allowed shall be 18 inches.
§ 571-23. Circulation of water in wading pools.
Wading pools may be approved only when used either in conjunction with
the regular swimming pool circulation and treatment units or continuously
wasted. The entire contents of the wading pool shall be recirculated or
wasted within at least one hour.
§ 571-24. Separate dressing rooms or bathhouses.
Swimming pool dressing rooms or bathhouses to be used simultaneously by
both sexes shall be entirely separated by partitions. Line of sight shall be
broken at entrances and exits of such dressing rooms.
§ 571-25. Floors of dressing and locker rooms.
Floors of all swimming pool dressing rooms and locker rooms shall be
constructed of smooth, finished material impervious to moisture. Wood
slats or floors shall not be permitted. Floors shall have sufficient pitch and
otherwise be constructed so as to permit proper drainage after washing
down. Walk areas used by patrons shall be of nonslip construction.
§ 571-26. Walls and partitions of dressing rooms.
Walls and partitions of all swimming pool dressing rooms and bathhouses
shall be of smooth, impervious material. If walls of wood or other similar
material are used, all cracks and joints shall be filled and the surface kept
finished with paint or other sanitary waterproof coating. Partitions shall
terminate a sufficient distance above the floor to permit flushing of the
entire floor area.
§ 571-27. Furniture in dressing rooms; locker construction.
All furniture used in swimming pool dressing rooms shall be of simple
character and easily cleaned. Lockers, where provided, shall be properly
ventilated and be of verminproof construction with tight joints.
§ 571-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 571-28
1:809
§ 571-28. Ventilation of dressing rooms and bathhouses.
Swimming pool dressing rooms or bathhouses shall be constructed to
provide ventilation at floor and ceiling levels.
§ 571-29. Required number of showers.
The following minimum number of showers shall be required, based upon
the number of lockers, baskets or other clothing storage accommodation
provided by the swimming pool:
Showers
Lockers or Baskets Male Female
Less than 100 1 1
100 to 200 2 2
200 to 500 3 3
500 to 1,000 4 5
Over 1,000 Add 1 for every 500
lockers in excess of
1,000
Add 1 for every 300
lockers in excess of
1,000
§ 571-30. Type of showers.
Manually operated shower valves shall be provided by swimming pools
to ensure a satisfactory mixture of hot and cold water without danger of
scalding. Chain pulls shall not be permitted for hot-water showers. Showers
shall be fitted with nonremovable fixed spray heads. Hot or warm water
shall be provided for indoor showers.
§ 571-31. Flooring of shower rooms.
Raised curbs or raised sills shall not be permitted between showers and
walkways or at the entrance to shower stalls. Shower stall floors located
adjacent to walkways shall be depressed below the level of the walkways.
Floor drains shall be provided in the shower rooms or stalls and shall be at
least twice the cross-sectional area of the outlet pipe. Wood slats or floor
material and slopes conducive to slipping shall not be permitted.
§ 571-32. Soap for showers.
Suitable soap dispensers readily accessible shall be installed adjacent to
each shower. The use of soap cakes shall not be permitted.
§ 571-33. Required number of toilets and lavatories.
Swimming pools shall be equipped with the following minimum facilities
based upon the number of lockers, baskets or other clothing storage
accommodations provided:
§ 571-28 IRVINGTON CODE § 571-33
1:810
Water Closets Urinals Lavatories
Lockers or
Baskets Male Female Male Female
Less than
100
1 1 1 1 1
100 to 200 2 2 2 2 2
200 to 500 3 3 2 3 3
500 to
1,000
4 5 3 3 3
Over 1,000 Add 1 for
every 500
lockers in
excess of
1,000
Add 1 for
every 500
lockers in
excess of
1,000
Add 1 for
every 500
lockers in
excess of
1,000
Add 1 for every 500
lockers in excess of
1,000
§ 571-34. Type of toilets and lavatories.
Toilets required by the preceding section shall be of the flush type and
constructed of vitreous china. Urinals shall be constructed so as to prevent
splashing. Lavatories shall be of vitreous china and shall be equipped with
tamperproof spring valve controls.
§ 571-35. Toilet stalls.
Toilet stalls shall be enclosed with noncorrosive partitions. There shall be
sufficient space between the floor and walls to permit washing. Doors, when
provided, shall swing inward.
§ 571-36. Required lifesaving equipment.
Swimming pools shall be equipped with at least two poles or shepherd's
crooks. There shall also be provided at least two life rings at least 14 inches
in diameter with a sufficient length of one-quarter-inch manila line firmly
attached to each ring. Such equipment shall be properly stored and readily
accessible.
§ 571-37. First aid equipment and personnel.
A. A minimum of first aid equipment listed below shall be properly stored
and readily available at all times when a swimming pool is open for use:
(1) Aromatic ammonia.
(2) Tincture of iodine or equivalent.
(3) Individually compressed sterile gauze.
(4) Absorbent cotton.
§ 571-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 571-37
1:811
§ 571-38. Lifeguards.
§ 571-39. Personal regulations for pool patrons.
Personal regulations covering admission, bathing and conduct of patrons
shall be conspicuously posted and strictly enforced by the swimming pool
management and shall include the following:
(5) Adhesive tape.
(6) Bandages of various widths.
(7) Rubbing alcohol.
(8) Woolen blankets (two or more).
(9) Stretcher.
B. At least one person capable of administering first aid shall be in
attendance at all times when the pool is open for use.
A. At least one senior lifeguard shall be on duty at every swimming pool at
all times who holds, as a minimum, a valid senior lifeguard certificate
issued by the American Red Cross, YMCA or other equivalent rating.
Other lifeguards required to be present and on duty while the pool is
open for business shall be based primarily upon the number of patrons
present at any time.
B. As a guide, there should be at least one lifeguard for every 150 patrons
in attendance at a pool. All persons acting as lifeguards shall be capable
swimmers proficient in lifesaving and artificial respiration procedures.
All lifeguards shall be so identified by distinguishing apparel, emblems
or signs.
A. Showers. All persons using a pool shall be directed to take a cleansing
shower in the nude, using warm water and soap, and shall thoroughly
rinse off all soapsuds before entering the pool proper. Bathers leaving
the pool area shall be required to take a second cleaning shower before
reentering.
B. Skin diseases, etc. Any person showing evidence of skin disease, sore or
inflamed eyes, cold, nasal or ear discharges or any communicable
disease shall be refused admission.
C. Excessive sunburn, open blisters, etc. Persons with excessive sunburn,
open blisters, cuts or bandages shall be refused admission.
D. Bathing caps. Women and girls shall be required to wear bathing caps.
E. Animals. No dogs or other animals shall be allowed in the pool area,
dressing rooms or other parts of the pool enclosure.
F. Food, etc. No food or drink shall be used or consumed within the pool
enclosure.
§ 571-37 IRVINGTON CODE § 571-39
1:812
§ 571-40. Suits and towels.
Bathing suits or towels rented or otherwise furnished by the swimming pool
management shall be laundered after each use with soap and hot water,
thoroughly rinsed and dried before reuse. Clean suits and towels shall be
stored separately from those unlaundered and shall not be issued from the
same counter to which used suits or towels are returned.
§ 571-41. Supervision.
Swimming pools, when open for use, shall at all times be under the
supervision of a competent director who shall be responsible for all phases
of pool operation, including the applicable provisions of this article.
§ 571-42. Maintenance.
All dressing rooms, toilets, showers, the swimming pool proper and its
surroundings shall be kept clean and orderly at all times. A suitable
disinfectant shall be used daily on floors, walls, mats and the interior
portions of dressing rooms. Toilets, lavatories and shower rooms shall be
cleaned with soap and water, disinfected daily and kept in good repair.
Toilets shall be kept supplied with a sufficient amount of toilet tissue.
Lavatories shall be supplied with soap and suitable receptacles for disposal
of paper towels. Common towels shall not be permitted.
G. Street shoes. Persons in street shoes or other spectators shall not be
permitted in the pool area.
H. Spitting, rowdyism, etc. Unnecessary expectoration, spouting of water,
roughness, rowdyism or other conduct affecting the safety and comfort
of others shall not be permitted.
§ 571-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 571-42
1:813

ARTICLE II
Family Swimming Pools
§ 571-43. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
FAMILY SWIMMING POOL — Any swimming or bathing pool or tank,
whether permanently installed, portable, collapsible or otherwise designed,
used and maintained for swimming purposes, having an inside structural
depth in excess of 24 inches or a surface area in excess of 100 square feet
or a capacity in excess of 1,800 gallons, established or maintained by any
person upon any premises as an appurtenance to a residence occupied by
not more than three families for use of the occupants of such residence
and their guests invited to use it without payment of any fee or other
consideration.
LOT — All contiguous property of the same ownership.
PERMANENT FAMILY SWIMMING POOL — All family swimming pools, as
defined in this section, which are permanently installed.
PORTABLE FAMILY SWIMMING POOL — All family swimming pools, as
defined in this section, which are not permanently installed.
§ 571-44. Location on lot; use accessory to residence. [Amended
7-14-1970 by Ord. No. MC 2255]
§ 571-45. License required to operate; term; fees; renewals.
[Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622; 8-11-1987 by Ord. No.
MC 2834; 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3027; 12-14-1999 by Ord. No.
MC 3134; 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by Ord. No.
MC 3306; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413]
A. No family swimming pool shall be constructed, installed or maintained
on any lot unless upon such lot there shall be located a residence
building or unless such lot is a part of the resident curtilage. Such pool
shall be used only as an accessory use incidental to the main use of such
premises.
B. No family swimming pool shall be constructed, installed or maintained:
(1) Nearer to the street line on which such premises front than a line
10 feet to the rear of the building line established by Town
ordinances.
(2) Less than three feet from the rear property line.
(3) With less than a one-inch setback on each side line for each one
foot of property width. Such side line need not be greater than
three feet from each side property line.
§ 571-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 571-45
1:815
§ 571-46. Building permit required; fees; application; compliance
with other regulations. [Added 7-14-1970 by Ord. No. MC 2255;
amended 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622319]
§ 571-47. Revocation of license.
Any license or any renewal thereof granted under this article for the
construction, operation or maintenance of a family swimming pool may
be revoked by the Municipal Council for failure to comply with rules and
regulations promulgated or to be hereafter promulgated pursuant to this
A. No person shall construct, operate or maintain a family swimming pool
until a license therefor shall have been issued by the Division of
Licensing of the Town, which license shall not be valid for longer than
one year from the date of issuance. A new license shall be secured on or
before May 1 of each year, which will permit operation or maintenance
of such family swimming pool until the following April 30.
B. All licenses and renewals thereof shall be in writing and shall state the
conditions thereof and the term for which the license is granted.
C. Fees.
(1) The license fee for the initial license and for each yearly renewal
thereof shall, in the case of both permanent and portable family
swimming pools, be $98 initially and $52 annually thereafter.
(2) The annual license fee for a swim club shall be $865 initially and
$700 annually thereafter.
A. No person shall install, construct or alter a family swimming pool within
the Town without first having obtained a permit from the Department of
Housing Services and paid a permit fee as set out in Chapter 240,
Construction Code, Uniform.
B. All applications for a permit to install a portable family swimming pool
shall be made on such forms as may be required by the Department of
Housing Services and shall be accompanied by a description giving the
size, shape, capacity and materials of construction and the location on
the lot.
C. The Department of Housing Services shall issue a permit for the
construction or installation of a family swimming pool, provided the
same complies with the provisions of this article, the Building Code, the
Plumbing Code320 and Chapter 650, Zoning, and after payment of the
permit fees hereinbefore specified as well as the license fee herein
provided.
319. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
320. Editor's Note: The local Building Code and Plumbing Code were superseded by the
adoption of the State Uniform Construction Code Act, L. 1975, c. 217 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119
et seq.).
§ 571-45 IRVINGTON CODE § 571-47
1:816
article, or with this article, or whenever in the determination of the Council
further operation under such license creates a menace to the health, safety
or morals of the users of the family swimming pool or to the occupants of
the neighboring properties.
§ 571-48. Lighting.
All lights for illumination of a family swimming pool in the area devoted
to the pool shall be so installed and maintained as to eliminate glare
and annoyance to adjoining properties. All such illumination shall be
extinguished during those hours when the pool is not in use.
§ 571-49. General appearance of surrounding areas.
All areas surrounding a family swimming pool shall be made and kept neat
and attractive, and no rubbish, debris, filth or litter shall be permitted to
remain or accumulate in or about such pool.
§ 571-50. Interference with neighboring properties.
All family swimming pools shall be so located, designed, maintained and
operated as not to interfere with the enjoyment of the property rights by
owners of properties adjoining the pool or located in the neighborhood.
§ 571-51. Noise.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made
or continued at any family swimming pool any loud, unnecessary or unusual
noise which annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose,
health, peace or safety of others. In the operation of any such pool, the
use or permitting the use or operation of any radio, receiving set, musical
instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing of
sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the
neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary
for convenient hearing of the persons who are in the pool premises shall be
unlawful.
§ 571-52. Prohibited hours of use.
No family swimming pool shall be used between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. on any day of the week.
§ 571-53. Inspections.
A. The Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector, Health Officer, Sanitarian
or any police officer shall have authority to make such inspections of the
construction and maintenance of any family swimming pool and
surrounding area as are necessary from time to time to ascertain that
there is compliance with this article.
§ 571-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 571-53
1:817
§ 571-54. Departmental requirements; abatement of nuisances;
water supply; discharge systems. [Added 7-14-1970 by Ord. No. MC
2255]
§ 571-55. Operating nonconforming pools.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, operate, maintain or manage
any family swimming pool without complying with the requirements of this
article and the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto.
§ 571-56. Abandonment of pool.
Should the owner abandon any family swimming pool, he shall remove the
depression and return the surface of the ground to its original grade and
approximately the same condition as before the pool was constructed.
§ 571-57. Enclosure; covering. [Added 7-14-1970 by Ord. No. MC
2255]
B. No person shall obstruct or interfere with any Building Inspector,
Plumbing Inspector, Health Officer, Sanitarian or police officer in the
performance of any duties imposed by this article.
A. Enforcement. Every family swimming pool constructed or to be
constructed in the Town shall at all times comply with the requirements
of the Building, Plumbing, Public Safety and Health Departments, and
any hazard or nuisance which may exist or develop in or in consequence
of or in connection with any such pool shall be forthwith abated or
removed by the owner upon receipt of notice from such authority so
requiring. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
B. Water supply. Potable water for filling the pool shall be introduced into
the pool in such a manner as to have at all times an air gap of at least six
inches between the orifice of the filling pipe and the surface of the
water in the pool so as to prevent back siphonage. Physical connections
between the potable water system and the family swimming pool or its
circulating systems shall not be permitted. All connections with potable
water lines or waste lines shall be made only by a duly licensed plumber
and in accordance with the Plumbing Code.
C. Discharge systems. Surface drainage of a family swimming pool shall
not be permitted where such disposal of wastewater will adversely
affect any other properties. No pool drain shall be connected directly to
the sanitary sewer system, but shall utilize the storm sewer where
available and only upon the written approval of the Town Engineer.
A. Every outdoor permanent family swimming pool shall be enclosed by a
fence of durable construction not less than four feet nor more than five
feet in height. Such enclosure shall be provided with substantial gates
of at least the height of the fence, and such enclosure and gates shall be
so designed and constructed as to reasonably prevent any child or
§ 571-53 IRVINGTON CODE § 571-57
1:818
person from gaining access. Every gate shall be kept securely locked at
all times when the pool is not in use.
B. In case of a portable family swimming pool, the pool may be covered
with a suitable strong covering, such covering to be secured in place
when not in use, and any access ladder or steps used in connection with
a portable pool shall be removed when the pool is not in use.
§ 571-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 571-57
1:819
Chapter 577
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tax liens — See Ch. 586.
§ 571-57 IRVINGTON CODE § 571-57
1:820
ARTICLE I
Tax Abatement Procedures
[Adopted 4-22-2003 by Ord. No. MC 3219 (Ch. 182, Art. I, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 577-1. Application required.
Applicants for tax exemption and abatement for new construction of
commercial or industrial structures or multiple dwellings shall provide the
municipal governing body with an application setting forth the following.
§ 577-2. Application requirements.
Projects shall file an application with the Township that shall include:
A. A general description of a project for which exemption and abatement is
sought;
B. A legal description of all real estate necessary for the project;
C. Plans, drawings and other documents as may be required by the
governing body to demonstrate the structure and design of the project;
D. A description of the number, classes and type of employees to be
employed at the project site within two years of completion of the
project;
E. A statement of the reasons for seeking tax exemption and abatement on
the project, and a description of the benefits to be realized by the
applicant if a tax agreement is granted;
F. Estimates of the cost of completing such project;
G. A statement showing;
(1) The real property taxes currently being assessed at the project site;
(2) Estimated tax payments that would be made annually by the
applicant on the project during the period of the agreement; and
(3) Estimated tax payments that would be made by the applicant on the
project during the first full year following the termination of the tax
agreement;
H. If the project is a commercial or industrial structure, a description of
any lease agreements between the applicant and proposed users of the
project, and a history and description of the users' businesses;
I. If the project is a multiple dwelling, a description of the number and
types of dwelling units to be provided, a description of the common
elements or general common elements, and a statement of the
proposed initial rentals or sales prices of the dwelling units according
§ 577-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 577-2
1:821
§ 577-3. Ordinance approval required.
Each project shall be specifically approved by ordinance.
§ 577-4. Financial agreement.
Upon approval by ordinance of the project, a financial agreement shall be
entered into. It shall include:
to type and of any rental lease or resale restrictions to apply to the
dwellings' units respecting low- or moderate-income housing; and
J. Such other pertinent information as the governing body may require.
A. Findings by the municipality, as approved by the municipal governing
body;
B. Appropriate tax exemption provisions;
C. An appropriate annual service charge schedule which shall be based
upon the provisions of relevant statutory authorization; and
D. The municipality's determinations as to:
(1) The relative benefits of the project to the redevelopment of the
redevelopment area when compared to the costs, if any, associated
with the tax exemption; and
(2) An assessment of the importance of the tax exemption to be
granted in obtaining the development of the project and in
influencing the locational decisions of probable occupants of the
project or units of the project.
§ 577-2 IRVINGTON CODE § 577-4
1:822
ARTICLE II
Hotel and Motel Occupancy Tax
[Adopted 9-9-2003 by Ord. No. MC 3236 (Ch. 182, Art. II, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 577-5. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to implement the provisions of P.L. 2003, c.
114,321 which authorizes the governing body of a municipality to adopt an
ordinance imposing a tax at a uniform percentage rate not to exceed 1% on
charges of rent for every occupancy on or after July 1, 2003, but before July
1, 2004, and not to exceed 3% on charges of rent for every occupancy on or
after July 1, 2004, of a room or rooms in a hotel subject to taxation pursuant
to Subsection (d) of Section 3 of P.L. 1966, c. 30, N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3 (sales
tax).
§ 577-6. Tax established.
There is hereby established a hotel and motel room occupancy tax in the
Township of Irvington which shall be fixed at a uniform percentage rate of
1% on charges of rent for every occupancy of a hotel or motel room in the
Township of Irvington on or after July 1, 2003, but before July 1, 2004, and
3% on charges of rent for every occupancy of a hotel or motel room in the
Township of Irvington on or after July 1, 2004, of a room or rooms in a hotel
subject to taxation pursuant to Subsection (d) of Section 3 of P.L. 1966, c.
30, N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3 (sales tax).
§ 577-7. Tax in addition to other taxes and fees.
The hotel and motel room occupancy tax shall be in addition to any other
tax or fee imposed pursuant to statute or local ordinance or resolution by
any governmental entity upon the occupancy of a hotel room.
§ 577-8. Payment of taxes.
In accordance with the requirements of P.L. 2003, c. 114, all taxes imposed
by this article shall be paid by the purchaser.
321. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 54:32D-1 et seq.
§ 577-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 577-8
1:823
Chapter 582
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees and licenses — See Ch. 290. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 620.
§ 582-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUCTION — The process by which the Township issues taxicab medallions
by offering them up for bid, taking bids, and then issuing them to the
highest bidder.
BIDDER — An individual submitting a bid for a taxicab medallion at an
auction.
CRUISING — The driving of a taxicab on the streets or public places of the
Township in search of or for purposes of soliciting prospective passengers
for hire.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Division of Police in the Department of
Public Safety.[Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
DISPATCHER — A person placed in charge of a dispatch office by the holder.
DISPATCH OFFICE — An office located in a building, staffed on a twentyfour-
hour basis from which all taxis operating under a taxicab medallion are
directed by a dispatcher by way of a dispatch system.
DISPATCH SYSTEM — A two-way communication network operated
between taxicabs and a dispatch office for the purposes of directing
taxicabs and keeping a log of taxicab calls. The log shall be made available
to the Township Police upon request.
HEARING — A public hearing before the Director or his designee at which
a licensee is given an opportunity to appear personally or be represented by
counsel and be heard and to present evidence on his behalf.
HOLDER — A person to whom a medallion has been issued.
MEDALLION — A license limited in quantity, issued by the Township that
allows an individual or entity to operate a taxicab or taxicabs in the
Township.
OPEN STAND — A public place alongside the curb of a street or elsewhere
in the Township which has been designated by the Director of the Division
of Police in the Department of Public Safety as reserved exclusively for the
use of taxicabs.[Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
§ 577-8 IRVINGTON CODE § 582-1
1:824
TAXICAB — Any automobile, taxicab or other motor vehicle engaged in the
business of transporting passengers for hire or pay within the Township,
whether operated from stands in the street or dispatched by telephone calls
to garages or in any other manner, it being the intention of this chapter to
include in the definition of "taxicab" such vehicles as carry passengers for
hire or pay for which public patronage is solicited. Any motor vehicle, other
than a bus or autobus, traveling on designated routes using the streets of
the Township for the purpose of carrying passengers for hire, for which
public patronage is solicited, and the owner of which vehicle holds himself
out as a public carrier, shall be deemed a "taxicab" and shall be licensed as
such.
TAXI DRIVER'S LICENSE — The permit granted by the Director of the
Department of Public Safety to a person to drive a taxicab upon the streets
of the Township.
TAXIMETER — A mechanical instrument or device attached to a taxicab by
which the charge for hire of a taxicab is mechanically calculated and on
which such charge is plainly indicated and visible to passengers.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Irvington, New Jersey.
TRANSFER — To sell, transfer, or in any other manner dispose of a
medallion. Where the medallion is in the name of a corporation or other
legal entity, any change in majority ownership of the corporation or other
legal entity shall constitute a "transfer" thereof.
WAITING TIME — The time during which a taxicab is not in motion from the
time of acceptance of a passenger or passengers to the time of discharge.
"Waiting time" does not include any time during which the taxicab is not in
motion due to any cause other than the request, act or fault of a passenger
or passengers.
§ 582-2. Taxicab Commission.
§ 582-3. Insurance requirements.
A. There shall henceforth be established a Taxicab Commission in the
Township of Irvington whose purpose shall be to regulate, facilitate,
monitor and enforce the operation of the taxicab service in the
Township.
B. Members. The Commission shall consist of three members with one
being appointed by the Mayor, one appointed by the Municipal Council
and one representative from the Office of the Township Attorney. The
term of office for each member shall be for one year from the date of
appointment.
A. In order to ensure the safety of the public, it shall be unlawful for the
holder of a taxicab license medallion to operate or cause or permit a
taxicab to be operated, nor shall any license medallion be issued under
this chapter, unless and until the applicant shall have complied with the
§ 582-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 582-3
1:825
§ 582-4. Taxicab license required; violations and penalties.
provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:16-1 to 48:16-12 and the acts amendatory
thereof or supplemental thereto.
B. The statutory insurance policy issued for the term of the taxicab
driver's license shall be delivered to the Director of the Department of
Public Safety or his designee with the application for the taxicab
driver's license. Upon issuance of the taxicab driver's license, the policy
approved as to form by the Township Attorney shall be thereupon filed
forthwith in the office of the Township Clerk. This provision shall not
exclude six-month insurance policies issued pursuant to full statutory
requirements.
C. The taxicab driver's license shall be effective only so long as the
statutory insurance policy shall remain in full force to the full and
collectible amounts is as required by the statute.
D. In the event of the cancellation of the insurance policy, the taxicab
driver's license shall terminate upon the effective date of the
cancellation, unless prior thereto the insurance has been reinstated by
withdrawal of the cancellation or a new policy of insurance is delivered
to the Director of the Department of Public Safety for the remainder of
the taxicab driver's license.
E. It shall be the duty of the holder of a taxicab license to, at all times,
keep in the taxicabs operating under the medallion an insurance card
issued by the Township Clerk showing that the statutory insurance is in
full force and effect at the time of operation of the taxicab. It shall be
unlawful to operate a taxicab without said insurance card and to fail to
produce said insurance card upon demand.
F. All taxicabs licensed and operated here in the Township of Irvington
shall meet the insurance requirement of $100,000 against any loss by
reason of liability imposed by law, starting with the renewal of
insurance of each individual taxicab operating under a medallion. Any
company or owner holder who fails to satisfy the aforementioned
requirement will be subject to the immediate forfeiture of their license
medallion to operate the regulated vehicle in the Township.
A. No person holder shall operate or permit a taxicab owned or controlled
by him to be operated as a taxicab upon the streets of the Township
without having first obtained a taxicab license from the Director of the
Department of Public Safety.
B. Upon conviction of a violation of § 582-4A, the Municipal Court shall
impose a fine as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article III,
Penalties, of the Township Code.
C. Any person holder who operates a taxicab or permits a taxicab owned
or controlled by him or her to be operated in the Township without
having first obtained a valid taxicab license from the Director shall, in
§ 582-3 IRVINGTON CODE § 582-4
1:826
§ 582-5. Application for taxicab license; renewals.
§ 582-6. Issuance and refusal of taxicab medallions; maximum
number of medallions.
addition to fines and penalties currently codified, cause such vehicle
to be towed by the Public Safety Department and shall be responsible
for all costs associated with such action in addition to any fines and
penalties currently codified. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC
3553]
A. An application for a taxicab license or renewal thereof shall be filed
with the Director upon forms provided by the Township. Said
application shall be verified under oath and shall contain the following
information:
(1) Name and address of the applicant; and where the applicant is not
a natural person, the name and address of all owners or
participants in the ownership of the legal entity and all officers,
directors or others of like position, whatever their title.
(2) The year, type and model of vehicle for which the license is desired,
together with clear photographs of the front, rear and both sides of
the same.
(3) The number of persons the vehicle is capable of carrying.
(4) A statement that the applicant has never been convicted in any
state of a high misdemeanor or a violation of this chapter or any
prior ordinance of the Township relating to taxicabs.
(5) Such further information as the Director may reasonably require.
B. The annual application for renewal of taxicab licenses shall be filed not
later than 30 days prior to the expiration date.
A. Issuance of taxicab medallions.
(1) The Director of the Department of Public Safety shall be
empowered to issue medallions to qualified persons and to replace
any revoked taxicab medallions that were not transferred by the
owners prior to revocation. Issuance of medallions shall be made
through application for a license, submitted by the highest bidder
at a public auction. The medallion numbers shall be set by the
Director of the Department of Public Safety.
(2) The Director of the Department of Public Safety is authorized to
delegate matters pertaining to the auction and to take such further
measures as in his/her discretion may be appropriate to the sale of
the medallions.
(3) The public auction shall be conducted in accordance with the laws
of the State of New Jersey.
§ 582-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 582-6
1:827
§ 582-7. Grounds for refusal of taxicab license.
The Director shall have the power to refuse a taxicab license required
pursuant to § 582-4 on the grounds that public convenience currently does
not require additional licensed taxicabs or that public safety will be best
served by the refusal to issue any additional licenses or that the taxi stand
desired is not in the interest of the public health, safety or welfare.
§ 582-8. Taxicab driver's license fees; expiration.
§ 582-9. Transfer of license medallions; fee; hypothecation
prohibited.
(4) Any person may submit a bid to obtain a medallion. The highest
bidder must, however, satisfy all criteria for taxicab license owners,
have a taxicab license and must meet all the provisions as set forth
in the public solicitation issued by the Township of Irvington.
(5) The highest bidder must file an application for a taxicab medallion
with the Director of the Department of Public Safety within the
time specified in the public solicitation.
B. Refusal of taxicab medallions. The Director of the Department of Public
Safety shall be empowered to refuse to issue license medallions or
renewals thereof pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The
applicant shall be permitted to appeal the Director's refusal to the
Municipal Council at its next regular meeting from the Director of the
Department of Public Safety's refusal to issue a license. In refusing any
such license, the Director of the Department of Public Safety shall state
the reasons therefor in writing, and, if the same is deemed lawful and
proper by the Municipal Council, such refusal shall be sustained.
C. Maximum number of medallions. The maximum number of taxicab
medallions issued or outstanding at any one time shall not exceed 56.
A. A taxicab driver's license shall be for a period of one year or for such
lesser period of time as the insurance required pursuant to § 582-3
remains in full force.
B. No taxicab driver's license shall be issued or renewed unless the
applicant therefor has paid an initial license fee of $300. The fee
charged for renewal or extension of said license within a one-year
period shall be $150 for each renewal or extension provided in
accordance with the provisions of § 582-3 of the Irvington Township
Code. Such license fees shall be in addition to any other fee or charge
made or established by proper authorities and applicable to said holder
for the vehicle or vehicles under his operation and control.
A. No taxicab license medallion may be sold, assigned or otherwise
transferred without the consent of the Director. A license medallion
may be transferred to another person to be used in the bona fide
§ 582-6 IRVINGTON CODE § 582-9
1:828
§ 582-10. Driver's license required.
No person shall operate a taxicab for hire upon the streets of the Township,
and no person who owns or controls a taxicab shall permit it to be so
operated, and no taxicab licensed by the Township shall be so operated at
any time for hire, unless the driver of said taxicab shall have first obtained
and shall have currently in force a taxicab driver's license issued under the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 582-11. Conditions precedent to issuance of a taxicab driver's
license.
No taxicab driver's license shall be issued to any person unless such person
shall be a holder of a taxicab license or be the lessee, servant, employee or
agent of such a holder.
§ 582-12. Minimum qualifications.
No taxicab driver's license shall be issued unless the applicant therefor:
§ 582-13. Application for taxicab driver's license; accompanying
items.
operation of a taxicab business with the consent of the Director after
the filing of an application as provided in this chapter and upon the
payment of a transfer fee of $433. No transfer may be made during the
month of January.
B. No taxicab license medallion shall be assigned, mortgaged, pledged or
otherwise hypothecated to secure a debt, loan, advance or the like,
unless such assignment, mortgage, pledge or other security
arrangement is first approved by the Director.
A. Furnishes satisfactory evidence that he or she has a valid New Jersey
automobile driver's license that he or she obtained at least one year
immediately prior to the date of the application for the taxicab driver's
license; been the holder for at least one year immediately prior to the
date of application of a valid New Jersey automobile driver's license;
B. Is at least 18 years of age;
C. Has been a resident of the State of New Jersey for at least one year;
D. Is able to read and write the English language;
E. Affirms that he or she has never been convicted in any state of a high
misdemeanor or a violation of this chapter or any prior ordinance of the
Township relating to taxicabs.
A. An application for a taxicab driver's license shall be filed with the
Director upon forms provided by the Township. The application and
shall contain the following information:
§ 582-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 582-13
1:829
§ 582-14. Investigation of application; approval or rejection of
application. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
(1) Name and address of the applicant.
(2) Places of residence for the preceding five years.
(3) Age, height, color of eyes and color of hair.
(4) Place of birth.
(5) Marital status.
(6) Previous employment and employer.
(7) Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a high
misdemeanor, misdemeanor or violation of this chapter or any
ordinance of the Township governing taxicabs.
(8) Whether a driver's license issued by any state or municipality to
him or her has ever been suspended or revoked, and for what
cause.
B. The application shall be accompanied by four passport-type
photographs of the applicant taken within 30 days of the application,
front view, size two inches by two inches.
C. When required by the Director or his designee, said application shall be
accompanied by a certificate of a licensed physician of the State of New
Jersey, dated within 60 days prior to the filing of the application, stating
that in his opinion the applicant is physically sound, with good eyesight,
and is not subject to epilepsy, vertigo, heart trouble or any other
infirmity of body or mind which might make him unfit for the safe
operation of a taxicab.
D. Upon an initial application for a taxicab driver's license, the applicant
shall submit to fingerprinting by the Public Safety Department of the
Township. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
E. The application shall also be accompanied by the license fee prescribed
in § 582-16 of this chapter.
A. Upon filing of an application for a taxicab driver's license, the Public
Safety Department shall conduct an investigation. The applicant's
photograph and fingerprints, where required, shall be forwarded to the
Bureau of Records and Identification. A report of such investigation and
a copy of the traffic and police record of the applicant, if any, shall be
attached to the application and returned to the Director for his
consideration.
B. The Director shall consider the application and the reports and
physician's certificate required to be attached thereto and shall
approve or reject the application. No license shall be issued until the
§ 582-13 IRVINGTON CODE § 582-14
1:830
§ 582-15. Issuance of taxicab driver's license; contents.
Upon the approval by the Director of an application for a taxicab driver's
license, a license shall be issued. The license shall bear the name, signature
and recent photograph of the applicant and shall bear the signature of the
Director.
§ 582-16. Expiration of taxicab driver's license; fees; display of
license.
§ 582-17. Responsibility for operation.
Every holder of a taxicab license shall be responsible for all taxicabs
operating under the holder's medallion, the operation of the vehicle for
which the license has been granted regardless of the legal relationship
between such the holder and the driver of said vehicle the taxicab.
§ 582-18. Safety requirements; child passenger restraint systems
and booster seats.
receipt of a written report from said Bureau of Records and
Identification containing the results of its investigation of the applicant.
If a delay of more than 30 days is encountered between the date of
fingerprinting and the receipt of the results of a fingerprint check
through the files of the Federal Bureau of Investigation or the New
Jersey State Police, the Director may issue a temporary license for
a period of not more than six months based upon the results of an
examination of the fingerprint files of the Township Public Safety
Department. If, when received, the results of the examination of the
fingerprint files of the Federal Bureau of Investigation or the New
Jersey State Police shows that the applicant may be ineligible to receive
a license, the temporary license may be revoked immediately and the
applicant rejected. If the applicant is rejected, the applicant may
request a hearing before the Director to offer evidence why his
application should be reconsidered.
A. Each taxicab driver's license shall be for the period ending on
December 31 following its issuance and shall expire on that date.
B. The fee for a taxicab driver's license shall be $55 per year.
C. While a taxicab driver is operating a taxicab his taxicab driver's license
shall be displayed as provided in § 582-21 of this chapter.
A. Rules and regulations shall be promulgated by the Director to provide
safe transportation of the public and shall specify such safety
equipment and regulatory devices as he shall deem necessary.
B. No taxicab driver shall operate and no owner holder shall permit to be
operated a taxicab in which a child five years of age or younger is a
passenger unless a child 18 months of age or younger is in a federally
§ 582-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 582-18
1:831
approved car seat, regardless of whether such child is in the front or
rear seat; and a child over 18 months of age but less than five years is
in a car seat, if a front seat passenger, or is in a lap belt and shoulder
harness, if a rear seat passenger.
C. No medallion taxicab license shall be issued to or renewed for any
taxicab fleet, taxicab mini fleet or independent taxicab owner unless
and until proof shall have been given to the Director or his designee
that such taxicab fleet, mini fleet or independent owner has adequately
provided for the safety of children under the age of five years who are
passengers in a taxicab operated by them, as set forth in Subsection B.
D. In the case of a taxicab fleet or mini fleet, such proof shall consist of a
written policy or posted notice at the base of operation and in all fleet
taxicabs, conspicuous to drivers, setting forth that prior to the
operation of the taxicab, children 18 months of age or younger who are
passengers in a taxicab shall be placed in federally approved child
restraint seats and children over the age of 18 months but under the
age of five years must be placed in a car seat if riding in the front seat of
the taxicab, or in a lap and/or lap and shoulder harness seat belt if
riding in the rear of the taxicab. A taxi fleet or mini fleet must at all
times keep and maintain in fleet vehicles or at the base of operation a
total number of federally approved car seats equal to 25% of the
number of licensed taxicabs in its fleet, which shall at all times be
available for use by drivers of fleet taxicabs. If a request is made for a
taxicab by telephone, the dispatcher shall inquire about the presence
and age of children who will be making the ride and inform the caller of
the policy set forth in Subsection B. He or she will dispatch only a
taxicab with a car seat if there is a child 18 months or younger. Fleet or
mini fleet owners who stop for a fare must comply with Subsection B. If
a car seat is required and the particular driver does not have one, he or
she must pass up the fare.
E. In the case of an independent owner, such proof shall consist of
evidence that the independent owner keeps and maintains a federally
approved car seat in the passenger compartment or trunk of the
licensed vehicle at all times, for use in accordance with Subsection B
above.
F. Holders of taxicab medallions licenses prior to the effective date of
§ 582-18B of the Revised Code of the Township of Irvington322 shall
have 30 days from the effective date of § 582-18B of the Revised Code of
the Township of Irvington to comply with these requirements before
any penalty may be imposed for violations thereof. The license of any
taxicab medallion of a holder owner or driver who has not complied
with the requirements of § 582-18B of the Revised Code of the Township
of Irvington after the passage of said thirty-day grace period shall be
subject to penalties provided in § 582-49 of the Revised Code of the
Township of Irvington for such violations. The requirements of
322. Editor's Note: Section 582-18B was originally enacted 2-25-1992 by Ord. No. MC 2941.
§ 582-18 IRVINGTON CODE § 582-18
1:832
§ 582-19. Inspections.
§ 582-20. Maintenance of taxicab in clean and sanitary condition.
Every vehicle operating under this chapter shall, at all times, be maintained
in a sanitary condition, shall be mechanically sound and the interior and
exterior shall be kept in good order, free from dirt, dust, dents or other
damage. Vehicles involved in accidents but are safe to operate may continue
in service after inspection by the Director or his designee for a maximum of
30 days.
§ 582-21. Taxicab identification.
§ 582-18B of the Revised Code of the Township of Irvington shall be
strictly applied to any application for licensure or renewal of a license
after the effective date of § 582-18B of the Revised Code of the
Township of Irvington.
A. Prior to the use and operation of any vehicle under the provisions of this
chapter, said vehicle must pass New Jersey State Inspection. The
Director may examine any and all such licensed vehicles at any time or
order any inspection at any time.
B. The Taxi Inspector, as a designee of the Director of the Department of
Public Safety, is hereby authorized to make an initial and periodical
inspection of taxicabs.
A. Every taxicab shall bear the following identification:
(1) A card at least three inches in height by five inches in length,
setting forth in legible letters the name of the owner, the license
number of the vehicle and year of issue, which card shall be so
affixed on the side of the taximeter that it is visible to any
passenger within the taxicab.
(2) The taxicab driver's license issued by the Director shall be so
affixed as to be visible to any passenger within the taxicab.
(3) Each taxicab shall bear in the outside of each rear door and in the
center of the rear trunk deck lid, in painted letters, in contrasting
colors, not less than eight inches in length, the taxi identification
number assigned by the Director, which number shall run in
sequence and not be duplicated. Additionally, each taxicab shall
bear on the outside of each front door, in painted letters, not less
than three inches in height, in contrasting colors, the name of the
owner, association of which the owner is a member or registered
trade name by which the owner conducts business.
(4) The name of the owner or corporate owner shall be painted in
legible letters two inches in height on the rear doors.
§ 582-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 582-21
1:833
§ 582-22. Taximeters.
(5) The schedule of rates as established in § 582-23 of the Revised
Code shall be painted on each of the rear doors of every taxicab
operating in the Township of Irvington. Said rate schedule shall be
painted in legible letters, in contrasting colors, large enough so
that they are easily identifiable.
B. Each taxicab shall be painted a distinctive color so that it can be easily
distinguished by the public. Said colors shall first be approved by the
Director.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle not licensed
under this chapter in such a manner as to mislead or tend to mislead,
deceive or defraud the public into believing that said vehicle is a taxicab
or is being operated as a taxicab.
D. In the event the name of the owner holder or the trade name of the
owner holder or association includes the name of a color and said name
is painted or placed on the outside front doors of the taxicab, then the
color referred to in the name or association shall be the dominant color
scheme of the body of the taxicab. This provision shall become effective
and applied to new taxicab vehicles acquired after the effective date of
this chapter.
E. No taxicab covered by the terms of this chapter shall be licensed if the
color scheme or the name, monogram or insignia to be used thereon
shall conflict with or imitate any color scheme, monogram, name or
insignia used by any other person, firm or corporation operating a
taxicab or taxicabs in the Township in such a manner as to mislead or
tend to mislead, deceive or defraud the public.
F. If, after a license has been issued for a taxicab hereunder, the color
scheme, name, monogram or insignia used by such person, firm or
corporation operating a taxicab or taxicabs in the Township misleads or
tends to mislead, deceive or defraud the public, the license for such
taxicab or taxicabs may be revoked by the Director after notice to the
owner.
A. It shall be unlawful to operate a taxicab in the Township unless there is
a fully operational taximeter. All taxicabs must be equipped with an
accurate taximeter fastened to the taxicab in front of the passenger
compartment and visible to all passengers at all times. Such taximeter
shall be operated by a mechanism of standard design and construction
driven either from the transmission or speedometer shaft by a flexible
and permanently attached driving mechanism and shall be sealed at all
points and connections where, if manipulated, such manipulation would
affect the correct reading and recording. Each taximeter shall have
thereon a flag or other automatic device to denote when the vehicle is
employed and when it is not employed, and it shall be the duty of the
§ 582-21 IRVINGTON CODE § 582-22
1:834
§ 582-23. Rates; display of rate schedule.
driver to throw the flag or other automatic device of such taximeter into
a nonrecording position at the termination of each trip.
B. Any representative of the Director is hereby authorized, either on the
complaint of any person or without such complaint, to inspect any
taximeter. Upon discovering any inaccuracy in the taximeter, the
taxicab shall be taken off the streets until the taximeter has been
repaired, placed in the required working condition, re-inspected and
resealed.
C. There is hereby established a penalty for operating a taxicab without a
working taximeter in the vehicle as set forth in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article III, Penalties.
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner holder or for a driver of a taxicab to
charge or cause to be charged for the use of a taxicab a sum greater
than the following rates:
(1) Between points within the Township. For conveying the first one or
more passengers between any two points within the corporate
limits of the Township, the rates shall be computed by use of an
approved taximeter as follows:
(a) For the first 1/8 of a mile or any fraction thereof: $2.15.
(b) For each additional 1/8 of a mile or any fraction thereof: $0.35.
(c) For each minute of waiting time: $0.35.
(d) Notwithstanding the foregoing rates, there shall be a minimum
charge of $3.50.
(2) For transporting one or more passengers from any point in the
Township of Irvington to any other point within the State of New
Jersey outside the Township of Irvington, there shall be an
additional charge of $2 above the amount computed by the use of
an approved taximeter.
(3) For conveying one or more passengers to any point outside the
State of New Jersey, the charge shall be 1 1/2 times the meter
reading.
B. If one or more passengers is a senior citizen 65 years or older, a
discount of 10% of the final meter charge shall be granted upon proof of
age.
C. A legible printed schedule of the aforementioned meter rates shall be
conspicuously posted within the taxicab so that it is visible to the
passengers, which printed schedule shall be provided by the Director.
Said schedule shall also be conspicuously posted in the office of the
§ 582-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 582-23
1:835
§ 582-24. Receipt required upon request.
All taxicab drivers must provide passengers with receipts for the cab ride
at the passenger's request. All taxicabs shall have notice of this option
conspicuously displayed in the taxicab.
§ 582-25. Fare disputes; fraud.
§ 582-26. Front seat restrictions.
No person, other than the licensed driver of the taxicab, shall ride or sit
in the front seat of the taxicab unless the rear seat is fully occupied by
passengers. This provision shall not apply to passengers who must sit in the
front seat for physical or health reasons.
§ 582-27. Restrictions on rental; illegal or immoral use prohibited.
§ 582-28. Solicitation of passengers.
Director and at the principal place of business of each taxicab company
operating within the Township of Irvington.
A. All disputes as to the rate of fare shall be reported by the driver to the
dispatcher. The dispatcher shall make a record of the dispute in the
official log book. If the dispatcher is unable to resolve said dispute, he
shall refer same to the Director or his designee.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with a determination
described in Subsection A of this section or hire any taxicab with intent
to defraud the person from whom it is hired of the value of such
services.
A. It shall not be unlawful for the owner of any taxicab a holder to hire out
or rent such a taxicab to a taxicab driver or any other person for use
within the Township for a stipulated sum over a specified period of time,
provided that:
(1) Said licensee driver is licensed by the Township to drive a taxicab
upon the streets of the Township; and
(2) The owner holder files with the Director of the Department of
Public Safety a certificate of insurance that the operators and
drivers of such taxicabs are covered by worker's compensation
insurance in accordance with the laws of the State of New Jersey.
The period of insurance coverage as evidenced by said certificate
shall be concurrent with the term of the taxicab driver's license.
B. No holder of a taxicab license or taxicab driver of a taxicab shall
knowingly permit his a taxicab to be used for any illegal or immoral
purpose.
§ 582-23 IRVINGTON CODE § 582-28
1:836
§ 582-29. Receipt and discharge of passengers.
Taxicab drivers shall not receive or discharge passengers in the roadway
but shall pull their taxicabs as close as possible to the right-hand curb, or
in the absence of a curb, to the extreme right-hand side of the road and
there receive or discharge passengers. On one-way streets passengers may
be discharged at either the right- or left-hand curb or side of the roadway
where no curb exists.
§ 582-30. Cruising.
§ 582-31. Additional passengers; number of passengers restricted.
§ 582-32. Refusal to carry passengers.
No taxicab driver shall refuse or neglect to carry any orderly person or
persons, upon request, to the designation requested, unless the driver is
A. No taxicab driver shall solicit passengers for a taxicab except when
positioned at an open stand while sitting in the driver's compartment of
such a taxicab or while standing immediately adjacent to the curb side
thereof.
B. No taxicab driver shall solicit taxicab patronage passengers in a loud
tone of voice or in any manner that annoys any person or obstructs the
movement of any person or by following any person for the purpose of
soliciting patronage.
A. No taxicab driver shall cruise in search of passengers except in such
areas and at such times as may be designated by the Director. Such
areas and times shall be designated only when the Director finds that
taxicab cruising would not congest traffic or endanger pedestrians or
other vehicles.
B. No taxicab driver shall cruise back and forth in front of or otherwise
interfere with the orderly access to or egress from any place of public
accommodation or assemblage.
A. No taxicab driver shall permit any additional passengers to occupy or
ride in said taxicab unless the person or persons first employing the
taxicab shall consent to the acceptance of the additional passenger or
passengers.
B. No charge shall be made for an additional passenger except when the
additional passenger rides beyond the previous passenger's
destination.
C. Unless otherwise permitted by the Director, no taxicab driver shall
permit more than four persons to be carried in a taxicab as passengers.
A child under six years of age shall not be counted as a passenger for
the purposes of this subsection.
§ 582-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 582-32
1:837
previously engaged or unable or forbidden by the provisions of this chapter
to do so.
§ 582-33. Solicitation of business for others; use other than
transportation restricted.
§ 582-34. Conduct of drivers.
A taxicab driver, when engaged in the operation of a taxicab, shall behave
in a civil and courteous manner and shall not use any indecent, profane or
insulting language.
§ 582-35. Appearance of driver.
When engaged in the operation of a taxicab, a taxicab driver shall be clean
and neat of person and dress. Proper footgear shall be worn at all times.
§ 582-36. Advertising.
Subject to such regulations as the Director may promulgate, it shall be
lawful for any person owning or operating a taxicab holder or taxicab driver
to permit advertising matter to be affixed or installed on the outside of such
taxicab, provided that the location of such advertising matter on the taxicab
shall not interfere with the comfort of passengers or the safe operation of
the vehicle. Such advertising matter shall not be of a lewd, lascivious or
obscene nature.
§ 582-37. Lost articles.
At the termination of each trip, the driver of a taxicab shall thoroughly
search the interior of such taxicab for any property lost or left therein
by a passenger. Such property, unless sooner claimed or delivered to the
property owner, must be reported in writing by the holder or the taxicab
driver to the Division of Licensing with particulars and a brief description
within 24 hours after the same has been found.
§ 582-38. Operation of taxicab by unlicensed driver.
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or operating a licensed taxicab
holder or taxicab driver to permit any such taxicab to be operated by any
person who does not hold a valid taxicab driver's license as required by this
chapter.
A. It shall be unlawful for any taxicab driver to solicit business for any
hotel, motel, rooming house, bar, tavern, restaurant, theater and the
like or to attempt to divert patronage from one business place to
another.
B. No taxicab driver, when engaged in the operation of a taxicab, shall sell
intoxicating liquors or use his vehicle for any illegal purpose or for any
purpose other than the transportation of passengers and their baggage.
§ 582-32 IRVINGTON CODE § 582-39
1:838
§ 582-39. Taxicab service.
§ 582-40. Misinformation of prospective passenger.
No taxicab driver of any taxicab shall induce any passenger to employ him
by knowingly misinforming or misleading any such prospective passenger
either as to time or place of the arrival or departure of any train, motor
vehicle or airplane or as to the location of any hotel, public place or private
residence or as to the distance between any two points, nor shall such
driver deceive any prospective passenger or make any false representations
relative to the taxicab service requested.
§ 582-41. Use of most direct route.
No taxicab driver shall convey any passenger to any other place or over any
route contrary to a passenger's instructions. Unless otherwise instructed
by the passenger, the taxicab driver shall employ the most direct route
practical between the points of departure and destination.
§ 582-42. Records.
A. Every person engaged in the taxicab business in the Township
operating pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall render
general taxicab service to the public desiring to use taxicabs.
B. Taxicab licensees or their representatives dispatchers shall answer all
calls received for taxicab service within Township limits as soon as they
can reasonably do so. If such services cannot be rendered within a
reasonable time, they shall then notify the prospective passenger as to
how long a delay there will be before the call can be answered and state
the reason therefor.
C. Any licensee or representative holder who shall refuse to accept a call
for taxicab service anywhere within Township limits at any time when
such holder has a taxicab available or who shall fail or refuse to render
general taxicab service shall be deemed in violation of this chapter.
A. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection B hereof, the a holder of a
taxicab license shall require each taxicab driver to maintain, and the
taxicab driver of each taxicab shall maintain, a daily record upon which
all trips shall be recorded. The daily record shall show the taxicab
numbers, license number of the driver, specific hours of duty, time and
place of origin and destination of each trip and the amount of fare
received for each trip. All such records shall be furnished to the holder
of the license and shall be retained by the holder for one year. The
holder shall be responsible for the maintenance of daily records of all
taxicabs operated by him under the holder's medallion.
B. In the event that one or more taxicabs are dispatched by radio from a
central location, the records required by Subsection A hereof shall be
maintained at said dispatch office by the holder or the dispatcher.
§ 582-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 582-42
1:839
§ 582-43. Open stands. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
The Director shall recommend the establishment of open stands in such
places upon the streets of the Township as he deems necessary for the
use of taxicabs operating in the Township. The Director shall make such
recommendation to the Municipal Council after taking into consideration
the needs for such stands, the convenience to the general public and the
recommendations of the Public Safety Department of the Township.
§ 582-44. Use of open stands.
§ 582-45. Parking and standing of taxicabs prohibited in certain
locations.
No taxicab driver shall park or stand a taxicab in any prohibited area or in
any area controlled by curb parking meters or at the curb within 15 feet of
the entrance to the Irvington Bus Terminal or any theater, hotel, restaurant
or similar place of public accommodation or resort with the Township.
C. Every holder shall record in a book, maintained solely for such purpose,
the time of departure from the garage of every licensed taxicab, the
name, address and license number of the taxicab driver thereof, the
license number of the taxicab and the time of the taxicab's return to the
garage.
D. All records required by this section shall be open to inspection by
representatives of the Public Safety Department. The records required
to be maintained by this section shall be kept on forms approved by the
Director and supplied by the holder or dispatcher to the taxicab driver.
[Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
A. All open stands shall be used by taxicab drivers on a first-come, firstserved
basis. A taxicab driver entering an open stand with his taxicab
shall join any waiting taxicabs from the rear and advance forward as the
preceding taxicabs depart.
B. Taxicab drivers shall remain within five feet of their respective taxicabs
and shall not solicit passengers in a loud or boisterous manner or
engage in loud or boisterous talk while waiting at the open stand.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent any passenger from boarding the
taxicab of his choice at any open stand.
D. The Director shall prescribe the maximum number of taxicabs which
may occupy any open stand at one time.
E. Private vehicles or other vehicles for hire shall not at any time occupy a
space upon the street established as an open stand.
§ 582-42 IRVINGTON CODE § 582-46
1:840
§ 582-46. Enforcement. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC
3553]
The Public Safety Department shall observe the operations of the holders
of taxicab and driver's licenses and of taxicab drivers for the purpose of
ensuring compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 582-47. Reports and complaints to be forwarded.
All complaints and/or reports received pertaining to the subject matter of
this chapter are to be forwarded to the Director or his designee.
§ 582-48. Notice of charges; hearings; appeals; suspension of
driver's license.
§ 582-49. Hearings; foreign taxicabs; false information on
applications.
A. Prior to the suspension or revocation of a license medallion or a taxicab
driver's license and/or the imposition of a monetary penalty as provided
in § 582-49 of this chapter, the taxicab license holder and/or the taxicab
driver shall be given written notice of the charges and shall be afforded
a hearing before the Director or his designee. The taxicab license
holder and/or the taxicab driver may be represented by counsel. The
decision of the Director shall be subject to appeal to the Municipal
Council of the Township. No such hearing, appeal or decision shall be
unduly delayed.
B. The hearing provided for herein shall be recorded by electronic or other
means.
C. In the event of an appeal, the licensee holder and/or taxicab driver shall
at his own cost and expense cause a written transcription of such
recording to be made and shall serve upon the Township Clerk seven
copies of the same, together with seven copies of a written
memorandum setting forth his grounds of appeal.
D. In the event that the party charged does not appear at the time and
place of hearing, then, and in that event, the medallion and/or taxicab
driver's license shall be immediately suspended, and in the discretion of
the Director or his designee the matter may be referred to the
Municipal Court.
A. Hearings. Hearings regarding the issuance of summons should be held
before the Taxicab Commission. Summonses issued to owners, drivers
or agents shall at a minimum provide for a hearing to take place within
14 days from the issuance of the summons. The person or persons to
whom a summons is issued may be represented by counsel of their
choice at such proceedings.
B. Foreign taxicabs. Foreign taxicabs shall be described and identified as
those which are not registered with the Township and do not therefore
§ 582-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 582-49
1:841
§ 582-50. False statements.
Any person who shall make any false statement in any application for a
medallion and/or taxicab driver's license or in any record that he is required
to maintain pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the penalties
provided in §§ 582-48 and 582-49 of this chapter.
§ 582-51. Removal of taxicab from service.
§ 582-52. Taxicab dispatch office.
No person, firm or corporation shall operate or permit the operation of a
taxicab dispatch office without obtaining a medallion license therefor from
the Director.
§ 582-53. Application for a license to operate a dispatch office.
possess a license to operate a taxicab service within the Township. Such
taxicabs shall be strictly prohibited from picking up fares within the
Township's geographical borders.
C. Applications. An application to obtain a taxicab license must be filled
out with all information provided being accurate and correct. Any false
information and/or misstatement regarding material information will
subject the applicants' application to be rejected and the fee paid to be
forfeited to the Township.
A. Any taxicab licensed under this chapter may be removed from the
streets by the Director or his designee if:
(1) The taxicab is found to be unsafe or in any way unsuitable for
taxicab service, or otherwise in violation of the provisions of
§§ 582-18 to 582-20 of this chapter, inclusive.
(2) The taximeter has been discovered to be inaccurate as provided in
§ 582-22.
B. If, within 60 days of the removal of the taxicab as provided in
Subsection A of this section, the taxicab is not returned to service in full
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the Director shall issue a
complaint to the taxicab license holder.
C. No taxicab shall be placed into service that is more than 10 years old.
Age is defined by the model year and not the date placed into service. In
no event is a vehicle to be placed into service that is not mechanically
sound and where the interior and exterior are not in good order. A
vehicle may remain in service as long as it is mechanically sound and
the interior and exterior are in good order.
A. A holder seeking a license to operate a dispatch office shall file an
application for a taxicab dispatch office license with the Director upon
§ 582-49 IRVINGTON CODE § 582-53
1:842
§ 582-54. Fee for taxicab dispatch office license; expiration.
A taxicab dispatch office license shall be for the year ending January 31
and shall expire on that date. No dispatch office license shall be issued or
renewed unless the applicant therefor has paid an annual licensing fee of
$535.
§ 582-55. Dispatch service to unlicensed taxicab or driver; licenses
to be on file.
No dispatch office licensed hereunder shall render service to or on behalf
of any unlicensed taxicab or taxicab driver. All taxicab licenses issued to the
holder shall be on file at all times at the dispatch office from which such
taxicabs are dispatched.
§ 582-56. Good conduct letters and releases.
Any taxicab company who attempts to employ a taxicab driver from another
taxicab company licensed to operate in the Township of Irvington must first
secure a letter that such prospective driver is in good standing with the
company that the driver is leaving; that said driver does not owe or have
any outstanding financial obligation to the company that he is leaving; and
that said driver does not owe the Township of Irvington for any outstanding
fines or violations.
§ 582-57. Schedule of fines. [Added 6-27-2017 by Ord. No. MC
3610]
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the fines for violations of this
chapter are as follows:
forms provided by him. Said application shall be under oath and shall
contain the following information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant and, when the applicant is
not a natural person, the names and addresses of all owners of the
legal entity and all officers, directors and others of like position,
whatever their titles.
(2) The address at which the dispatch office is to be maintained.
(3) The names and addresses of any holder and any taxicab driver's
owners operating out of using the dispatch service office.
B. In the event that a license to operate a taxicab dispatch office is
granted, the holder thereof shall report any changes in the information
contained in the application therefor to the Director within seven days.
§ 582-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 582-57
1:843
Section Short Description Payable Amount
§ 582-3 Insurance required, first
offense
$150
§ 582-4 Taxi license required, first
offense
$75
§ 582-18 Safety requirements, first
offense
$75
§ 582-19 Inspections, first offense $150
§ 582-20 Maintenance of taxicab in
clean and sanitary
condition, first offense
$50
§ 582-21 Taxicab identification,
first offense
$50
§ 582-22 Taxicab meter, first
offense
$500
§ 582-23 Nonuse of taximeter $250
§ 582-26 Front seat restriction,
first offense
$75
§ 582-32 Refuse to carry
passengers
$50
§ 582-34 Conduct of drivers, first
offense
$150
§ 582-36 Advertising, first offense $50
§ 582-38 Operation of a taxicab by
an unlicensed driver, first
offense
$150
§ 582-45 Parking and standing of
taxicab prohibited in
certain locations
$50
§ 582-51 Removal of taxicab from
service, first offense
$150
§ 582-55 Dispatch service to
unlicensed taxicab, first
offense
$350
Chapter 586
TAX LIENS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Moving or demolition of buildings — See Ch.
200.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 460.
Taxation — See Ch. 577.
§ 582-57 IRVINGTON CODE § 582-57
1:844
ARTICLE I
Fire-Damaged Property
[Adopted 2-13-1979 by Ord. No. MC 2559 (Ch. 185, Art. I, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 586-1. Prerequisites for payment of certain insurance claims.
[Amended 4-23-1985 by Ord. No. MC 2780]
No insurance company authorized to issue fire insurance policies in the
State of New Jersey shall pay any claims in excess of $2,500 on any real
property located within the Township of Irvington unless or until the insured
person submits an official certificate of search for municipal liens pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 54:5-12 certifying that all taxes, assessments or other municipal
liens or charges levied and assessed and due and payable to the Township of
Irvington against said property have been paid and an official certificate, on
a form certified by the Tax Collector, that demolition is not required or that
the costs of demolition have been paid or the Township of Irvington submits
a certified copy of a resolution adopted pursuant to § 586-4 as permitted by
Section 4 of Chapter 184 of the Laws of 1978 of the State of New Jersey, as
amended.323
§ 586-2. Payment of taxes and municipal liens. [Amended 4-23-1985
by Ord. No. MC 2780]
Any insurance company authorized to issue fire insurance policies in the
State of New Jersey on real properties located within the Township of
Irvington is prohibited from paying to a claimant any claim in excess of
$2,500 for fire damages on any real property located within the Township
of Irvington pursuant to any fire insurance policy issued or renewed after
the final adoption of this article and after the filing of this article with the
New Jersey State Commissioner of Insurance, until such time as anticipated
demolition costs and all taxes and assessments and all other municipal liens
or charges due and payable to the Township of Irvington appearing on the
official certificate of search shall have been paid either by the owner of such
real property or by the insurance company pursuant to the provisions of
§ 586-3 of this article and Section 3 of Chapter 184 of the Laws of 1978,
as amended,324 or the Township of Irvington submits to such insurance
company a copy of a resolution adopted pursuant to § 586-4 of this article
and pursuant to Section 4 of said Chapter 184 of the Laws of 1978, as
amended.325
§ 586-3. Contested liens or charges. [Amended 4-23-1985 by Ord.
No. MC 2780]
Unless a resolution is received in accordance with § 586-4 of this article
and in accordance with Section 4 of Chapter 184 of the Laws of 1978, as
323. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 17:36-11.
324. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 17:36-10.
325. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 17:36-11.
§ 586-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 586-3
1:845
amended,326 by an insurance company writing fire insurance policies on
real property within the Township of Irvington, such insurance company
is hereby authorized and required, prior to the payment of any claims for
fire damages in excess of $2,500 to pay the amount of the anticipated
demolition costs to the Township of Irvington in the manner provided by
Section 1 of Chapter 184 of the Laws of 1978, as amended,327 and to pay to
the Township of Irvington the amount of the liens appearing on the official
certificate and such other recorded liens or related charges as may be
certified to the insurance company. If an appeal is taken on the amount
of any lien or charge, other than an appeal on the assessed valuation of
real property pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:3-21, the insurance company shall
withhold 75% of the full amount of the lien or charge being contested
pending termination of all proceedings, at which time such moneys and
all interest accruing thereon at a rate paid on interest-bearing accounts
in state or federally chartered bank, or savings bank or savings and loan
associations in this state shall be disbursed in accordance with the final
order or judgment of the court.
§ 586-4. Installment payments of taxes and liens. [Amended
4-23-1985 by Ord. No. MC 2780]
The Municipal Council of the Township of Irvington may enter into an
agreement with the owner of any fire-damaged property to pay in full
all delinquent taxes, assessments or other municipal liens by installments
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-19 or for the redemption of the tax sale lien by
installment payments pursuant to Article 7 of Chapter 5 of Title 54 of
the Revised Statutes328 or for the payment in full of any anticipated costs
of demolition by installment, if the Municipal Council is satisfied that the
claim for fire damages is to be used to restore or improve the fire-damaged
property. An insurance company receiving a certified copy of a resolution of
agreement by the Municipal Council is authorized to make full payment on
the claim to the insured person.
§ 586-5. Priority of claims.
A municipal claim made in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 184
of the Laws of 1978329 and the provisions of this article shall be paramount
to any other claims on the proceeds of the fire insurance policy except the
claim of a holder of a mortgage on the fire-damaged property where the fire
insurance policy at the time of the loss listed the mortgagee as a named
insured, in which event the claim of the mortgagee to the proceeds shall be
paramount to the municipal lien under this article only to the extent of the
amount due and payable to the mortgagee under the mortgage contract.
326. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 17:36-11.
327. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 17:36-8.
328. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 54:5-65 et seq.
329. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 17:36-8 et seq.
§ 586-3 IRVINGTON CODE § 586-6
1:846
§ 586-6. Interpretation. [Amended 4-23-1985 by Ord. No. MC 2780]
Nothing in this article shall be construed:
§ 586-7. Alteration of certificate of search.
The official certificate of search may, from time to time, be altered by
the bonded official responsible for preparing such certificates in order to
correct any errors or omissions or to add any municipal liens or related
charges due and payable subsequent to the preparation of the official
certificate.
§ 586-8. Filing with State Commissioner of Insurance.
This article shall be filed with the New Jersey State Commissioner of
Insurance pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 184 of the Laws of 1978 of
the State of New Jersey.330
§ 586-9. Use of terms.
"Insured person" as mentioned in this article shall include all parties having
interest in the real estate affected by fire damage and all parties insured
under the terms and provisions of the fire insurance coverage of the
property damaged.
A. To obligate an insurance company for any amount in excess of the value
of the fire insurance policy on the property or the amount of the liability
of the insurance company thereunder.
B. Except as provided in the case of appeals under § 586-3, to obligate the
insurance company for any liens not appearing on the official certificate
or any certified changes submitted by the bonded official.
C. To affect the authority of the municipality to enforce its municipal lien
under any other law of the State of New Jersey; or
D. To obligate an insurance company for the payment of demolition costs
or anticipated demolition costs, as the case may be, if those costs did
not appear on an official certificate or a certified change submitted by
the bonded official.
330. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 17:36-8 et seq.
§ 586-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 586-9
1:847

ARTICLE II
Demolition of Dangerous Buildings
[Adopted 4-23-1985 by Ord. No. MC 2779 (Ch. 185, Art. II, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 586-10. Assessment for removal; action for collection.
A. Whenever the Township of Irvington, pursuant to law or pursuant to any
ordinance, code, rule or regulation adopted pursuant to law, undertakes
the removal or demolition of any building or structure which is
dangerous to human life or the public welfare or which constitutes a
fire hazard, the cost of such removal or demolition shall be as a
municipal lien against the premises.
B. Any such assessment as provided for in Subsection A hereof, plus
interest, shall be a debt of the owner of the premises in accordance with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-1.1, and the Township Attorney is
hereby authorized, in his discretion, to institute an action at law for the
collection thereof.
§ 586-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 586-10
1:849

ARTICLE III
Actions Resulting in Tax Sale, Lien Sale or Assessment for
Foreclosure
[Adopted 2-15-2000 by Ord. No. MC 3144 (Ch. 185, Art. III, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 586-11. Notification of property owners.
Prior to the commencement of any action by the Township that may result
in a tax sale, lien sale and/or the assessment of a property for foreclosure
proceedings, the Director of Revenue and Finance shall notify the property
owner, by certified mail, of his/her options to prevent said tax sale, lien
sale and/or assessment of a property for foreclosure proceedings from
commencing. Said options may include, but shall not be limited to, partial
payment tax agreements, deeding the property over to the Township in lieu
of back taxes owned, or any other measure allowable by local ordinance or
state statute.
§ 586-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 586-11
1:851
Chapter 593
THEATERS, MOTION-PICTURE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform Construction Code — See Ch. 240. Licensing procedure — See Ch. 290, Art. I.
§ 593-1. License required; proviso; responsibility of building owner.
§ 593-2. Granting of license; suspension.
All licenses pursuant to this chapter shall be granted upon the resolution
of a majority of the Municipal Council and may be revoked in like manner.
The Director of Revenue and Finance shall have the power and authority to
suspend any such license if, in his judgment, he shall deem it necessary to
do so for the protection, safety or welfare of the public. Such suspension
shall continue in effect until vacated by a majority of the members of the
Municipal Council.
§ 593-3. Applicants to file building plans and specifications.
[Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622]
All applicants for a license pursuant to this chapter, or a renewal thereof,
shall, before presenting their application to the Municipal Council, file
with the Chief Building Inspector complete plans and specifications of the
building intended to be erected or used for the motion-picture theater.
A. No person shall show forth, exhibit or cause to be exhibited in any
building within the Town any motion picture, cinematograph,
photographic representation or reproduction of any kind whatsoever,
using a film more than 10 inches in length, without having first obtained
a license for that purpose, as prescribed by this chapter, and which
license has not expired or been suspended or revoked at the time of
such exhibition; provided, however, that this chapter shall not apply to
any such motion-picture exhibition conducted at a private home or at
any place where such exhibition or showing is for any charitable,
benevolent, religious or educational purpose or where such exhibition
or showing is not open to the general public and no admission fee is
charged therefor.
B. No person being the owner or having the possession of any building
within the Town shall suffer or permit any motion picture,
cinematograph, photographic representation or reproduction of any
kind whatsoever, using films more than 10 inches in length, to be shown
or exhibited in, upon or within such building without a license in writing
for that purpose first had and obtained, as prescribed by this chapter,
and which license has not expired or been suspended or revoked at the
time of such exhibition.
§ 586-11 IRVINGTON CODE § 593-3
1:852
These plans shall show the location of the building and fully and clearly
show the location and width of all exits, passageways, fire escapes, aisles,
arrangement of seats, the lights and machinery, and also a diagram of the
lot or plot showing outlets from all exits.
§ 593-4. Certificate and deposit required; fees. [Amended 1-13-1981
by Ord. No. MC 2622; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413]
§ 593-5. Issuance of license.
The license required by this chapter, or renewals thereof, shall, after having
been granted by the Municipal Council, be issued by the Division of
Licensing.
§ 593-6. Scope of license.
Each license issued pursuant to this chapter shall apply only to one motionpicture
theater premises.
§ 593-7. Conditions of license. [Amended 11-23-1973 by Ord. No.
MC 2382]
Every license issued under this chapter shall be subject to the following
conditions:
A. All applicants for licenses under this chapter, or renewals thereof, shall
present to the Municipal Council a certificate from the Chief Building
Inspector showing that the plans and specifications as specified in
§ 593-3 have been filed in his office and that the proposed building
conforms to the provisions of this chapter, and a certified check,
payable to the Town, in the amount of the license fee required. In the
event that the license shall be granted to the applicant, the aforesaid
check will be credited on account of the license fee, and if the license
shall not be granted, the aforesaid check will be returned to the
applicant. For issuing each such certificate as provided in this section,
the Chief Building Inspector shall collect a fee for certification of plans
and specifications for a motion-picture theater in the amount of $12.
B. For every certificate of inspection, as provided for in the laws of the
state, the Chief Building Inspector shall collect a fee of $696.
A. The license shall not be transferable or assignable except with the
consent of the Municipal Council, expressed by resolution.
B. The motion-picture exhibition shall be conducted only at the place and
upon the premises specified in such license.
C. Each day of the week motion-picture exhibitions with X ratings shall be
conducted only between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight.
D. Such license shall be subject to revocation or suspension for any cause
at any time.
§ 593-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 593-7
1:853
§ 593-8. License fee. [Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622;
12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413]
The license fee in the case of every motion-picture theater or complex shall
be $427 annually for each viewing screen which license fee shall be paid in
full to the Division of Licensing before the license will be issued; provided,
however, that if the license is issued between the first Monday in December
and the first Monday in June, then the license fee shall be 1/2 the amount
prescribed therefor. In the event that the license shall be revoked, no part
of such license fee will be returned to the licensee. Such license fee shall be
imposed for revenue purposes.
§ 593-9. Prerequisites to erection of theater and exhibition of
pictures.331 [Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2622; 12-29-2009
by Ord. No. MC 3413; 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
Before any person shall erect any motion-picture theater in the Town,
he shall obtain a permit therefor as provided for in the Building Code
of the Town and a license therefor as required by this chapter. Before
any performance or exhibition of motion pictures shall be permitted upon
such theater premises, the person holding the license for such theater
shall obtain certificates from the Chief Building Inspector showing that
the building as erected or to be used for motion pictures is properly
constructed, and from the Public Safety Department that the building is
properly equipped with fire apparatus and is not dangerous from fire or
other causes. For issuing such certificates, the Chief Building Inspector and
the Public Safety Department shall collect a fee of $53 for a certificate of
occupancy.
§ 593-10. Inspections. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
All motion-picture theaters shall be open at any time for inspection or for
other similar purpose to the Chief Building Inspector, the local Board of
Health, and the Public Safety Department of the Town.
§ 593-11. Indecent pictures.
No pictures shall be exhibited at any motion-picture theater in the Town
which shall be immoral, indecent or against the public welfare.
§ 593-12. Special officer required. [Amended 1-12-2016 by Ord. No.
MC 3562]
At all times when a performance is going on in a motion-picture theater,
there shall be a special officer stationed within the building, which officer
E. Such license shall expire on the first Monday in June next after the
issuance thereof, unless sooner revoked.
331. Editor's Note: Note that the Building Code referred to herein was superseded by the
adoption of the State Uniform Construction Code Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 593-7 IRVINGTON CODE § 593-12
1:854
shall be appointed by the licensee with the approval and under the
supervision and control of the Director of Public Safety. The salary of such
special officer shall be paid by the licensee.
§ 593-13. Motion pictures in schools. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord.
No. MC 3553]
Motion-picture entertainments may be given in school buildings in the Town
with the consent, in writing, of the Board of Education, for charitable,
benevolent, religious or educational purposes, without payment of any
license fee therefor; provided, however, that a written permit for such
exhibition or showing shall first be obtained from the Director of Revenue
and Finance. In such cases, the requirements of this chapter with reference
to motion-picture theaters shall not apply, provided that the Public Safety
Department of the Town and the Chief Building Inspector shall first certify
that the school building in which the entertainment is to be given is suitable
and is so constructed as not to be dangerous from fire or other causes.
Chapter 598
TOBACCO PRODUCTS, SALE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Smoking — See Ch. 524.
§ 598-1. Original packaging required for sale or distribution.
The sale or distribution of single cigarettes or any tobacco product in any
form other than an original factory-wrapped package is hereby prohibited.
§ 598-2. Violations and penalties.332
Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of a violation of any other terms
of this chapter shall be subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter 1, Article
III, Penalties, of the Township Code.
Chapter 604
TOWING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 620.
332. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 593-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 598-2
1:855

ARTICLE I
Towing Contractors
[Adopted 6-30-1992 by Ord. No. MC 2949 (Ch. 187, Art. I, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 604-1. Statutory authorization.
§ 604-2. Establishment of a list of eligible towers.
A. N.J.S.A. 40A:11-5(1)(u) has been amended to allow motor vehicle towing
and storage contracts without bids, pursuant to reasonable
nonexclusionary and nondiscriminatory terms and conditions, which
may include the provision of such services on a rotating basis.
B. N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.49 has been amended in the first paragraph thereof to
allow a municipality to set forth nondiscriminatory and nonexclusionary
regulations governing operators engaged in the removal and storing of
motor vehicles, to include but not be limited to:
(1) A schedule of fees or other charges which an operator may charge
vehicle owners for towing services, storage services or both.
(2) Minimum standards of operator performance, including but not
limited to standards concerning the adequacy of equipment and
facilities, availability and response time and the security of vehicles
towed and stored.
(3) The designation of a municipal officer or agency to enforce the
provisions of the chapter in accordance with due process of law.
(4) The requirement that such regulations and fee schedules of
individual towers shall be made available to the public during
normal business hours of the municipality.
C. N.J.S.A. 40A:11-15(22) has been amended to allow any contract
awarded under the paragraph (u) above333 for any term not exceeding
three years.
A. There shall be no more than two towing companies authorized to
provide towing services to the Township of Irvington. Qualified towing
contractors (hereinafter referred to as "contractors") shall be invited to
submit proposals under this article to provide services for towing and
storage of vehicles involved in accidents, stolen vehicles and other
vehicles designated by the Irvington Public Safety Department, as set
forth herein, 24 hours a day, seven days a week, in the Township of
Irvington, in accordance with specifications set forth herein. Notice of
request for proposals shall be placed in the Irvington Herald or other
appropriate publication and by posting said notice conspicuously in the
Irvington Town Hall. [Amended 6-10-2008 by Ord. No. MC 3381;
333. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:11-5(1)(u).
§ 604-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 604-2
1:857
§ 604-3. Designated municipal officer.
The Director of Public Safety or his designee shall serve as the designated
municipal officer with authority to enforce the provisions of this article
in accordance with due process of law. Complaints of violation of the
conditions of this article shall be reviewed by the Director of Public Safety
or his designate, and failure to comply with its terms and specifications
shall be deemed grounds for revocation of a contract to tow and store motor
vehicles and to remove the contractor in violation from the list of eligible
towers.
§ 604-4. Basis for rotation. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC
3553]
If a contractor by virtue of its demonstrated ability to comply with the
specifications of this article is added to the list of eligible towers, the
contractor will be called and asked to provide towing and storage services
by the Irvington Public Safety Department when the need arises.
Contractors on the list will be called in succession and the names utilized
in rotating fashion whenever jobs arise. If more than one vehicle is involved
in an accident, the next tower in the rotation will be asked to take all the
vehicles involved. If for some reason a contractor is unable to perform,
completely perform or does not respond within a reasonable time, the
Public Safety Department will go to the next contractor on the list. Once
the police reach the last name on the list, the next contractor called for the
next job shall be the first name on the list. The Township reserves the right,
at its sole discretion, to call other towers not on the list in the event of an
emergency.
§ 604-5. Necessity for contract.
Each contractor qualifying to have its name placed on the list of eligible
towers must enter into a contract with the Township of Irvington, the basis
of which is set forth in the specifications. Each contract shall be for a two-
9-20-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3551; 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC
3553]
B. Proposals shall be reviewed and investigated for compliance with the
specifications set forth herein. All those contractors who meet the
standards articulated in the specifications will be included on the list of
eligible towers. Failure to comply with any specification in whole or in
part may be grounds for elimination from consideration from inclusion
on the list of eligible towers, as determined by the administration. The
Irvington Municipal Council will certify the final list.
C. All such proposals shall be submitted to the Director of Public Safety or
his designate, along with an application fee of $192. [Amended
9-29-1992 by Ord. No. MC 2958; 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. MC
3134; 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176; 10-12-2005 by Ord. No.
MC 3306; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413]
§ 604-2 IRVINGTON CODE § 604-5
1:858
year period from the date of execution or as otherwise provided in the
contract.
§ 604-6. Specifications.
A. Contractors qualifications.
(1) Any person, company or corporation applying for a place on the list
of eligible towers must have at least five years' experience as a
tower or as an employee in the towing of vehicles and vehicles
storage in order to be considered.
(2) The Department of Public Safety shall conduct a background check
of all applicants, employees and/or officers, and the conviction of a
crime of moral turpitude shall disqualify the contractor. [Amended
10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
(3) The contractor shall perform and conduct the work in compliance
with the laws of the State of New Jersey and all applicable
Township ordinances and pursuant to the directions of the officers,
agents and representatives of the Township.
(4) Contractors must furnish copies of all contracts for the towing
services to which it is currently a party.
(5) No contract contemplated by these specifications will be awarded
to any prospective contractor if any of the contractors are officers
or employees of the Township. The Township reserves the right to
cancel or rescind any contract if the successful contractor is at any
time during the contract period in violation of this section.
(6) All tow trucks must be licensed by the Township of Irvington and all
other appropriate licensing agencies.
(7) If the contractor is associated with a body shop, repair facility,
paint shop, salvage yard or recycling business, no fees shall be
discounted in favor of or subsidized by such body shop, repair
facility, paint shop, salvage yard or recycling business.
B. Employees.
(1) The contractor shall employ a sufficient number of employees to
comply with the operational requirements of the Irvington Public
Safety Department. Each contractor must submit a list of all
current employees along with any plans to hire additional
employees if awarded this contract. [Amended 10-14-2015 by
Ord. No. MC 3553]
(2) No person shall be employed by the contractor who has not been
approved by the Irvington Public Safety Department. [Amended
10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
§ 604-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 604-6
1:859
(3) Each employee of the contractor shall be provided with a photo ID
by the contractor, which shall be of sturdy construction and visibly
worn by the employee.
(4) All equipment and personnel of the contractor are subject to
inspection at all times by the Irvington Public Safety Department.
[Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
(5) Complaints of any kind relative to service, overcharging, theft,
damage, discourteous behavior and the like are to be referred to
the Director of the Irvington Public Safety Department for
investigation and further referral to the appropriate department
head for further action when necessary. [Amended 10-14-2015
by Ord. No. MC 3553]
(6) The contractor and all of his employees shall be prohibited from
using profane language in the course of their employment; and they
are further prohibited from collecting or attempting to collect a fee,
payment or charge other than provided for in these specifications
and applicable ordinances. A breach of this condition by the
contractor or its employees shall render this contract null and void
at the Township's discretion.
(7) Tow truck operators of the contractor must be at least 18 years of
age and have a valid New Jersey driver's license.
(8) Employees of the contractor are not to be represented as or be
considered as employed by the Township.
(9) The contractor is solely and completely responsible for the conduct
of his employees.
C. Wreckers.
(1) Each contractor must have three "flatbeds," which shall be defined
as equipment capable of removing a vehicle from the surface upon
which it is located to the bed of the tow trucks so as to avoid
damage to certain motor vehicles which cannot be towed in the
conventional manner due to air-lock suspension or the like.
Wreckers used by the contractor must be of such construction and
capacity that they will, with a combination of wreckers, be able to
tow any type vehicle, including uprighted or overturned vehicles.
These wreckers must be found satisfactory by the Director of
Public Safety or his designee. "Tow vehicles" means only those
vehicles equipped with a boom or booms, winches, slings, tilt beds,
wheel lifts or under-reach equipment for transport of private
passenger automobiles, including such other features as otherwise
herein set forth. [Amended 9-20-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3551]
(2) The contractor shall provide each wrecker with a shovel, broom
and other equipment necessary to clean up broken glass and debris
from the scene of an accident to which he is summoned and he shall
§ 604-6 IRVINGTON CODE § 604-6
1:860
be responsible for said cleanup, at no additional charge to the
Township or parties involved in the accident.
(3) The contractor shall respond to all calls within 20 minutes under
normal conditions. Any response beyond the 20 minutes required
herein shall require a written explanation to the Township Attorney
by the end of the next business day. He or she will then transmit
such response to the Mayor and members of the Municipal Council
Towing Committee. The failure to provide any explanation shall be
grounds for termination of the vendor's services and a
recommendation that said contractor is not reliable or responsible
as regard to future contracts. [Amended 6-10-2008 by Ord. No.
MC 3381]
(4) Each contractor shall furnish with his, its or their proposal the
following information with respect to the above-mentioned tow
trucks and rollback flatbed truck: the make, model, year and
registration number of each truck and a certified or photostatic
copy of the registration of each truck. For leased trucks, the
contractor shall be required to furnish with the proposal a copy of
each said lease with the proposal.
(5) All tow trucks used and employed in towing the vehicles shall be
kept in a clean condition and shall bear the name and address of
the contractor embossed thereon.
(6) The contractor must equip each tow truck with a radio which would
allow them to have two-way communication that will allow them to
respond to all calls within 20 minutes, under normal conditions.
Any substitution is subject to the review and approval of the
Director of Public Safety.
(7) The contractor must have access to heavy-duty towing equipment
and must attach a copy of an agreement to have the use of such
equipment from an owner thereof, if such equipment is not owned
by the contractor.
D. Specifications of wreckers.
(1) Each wrecker shall be equipped with one set of dollies.
(2) Each wrecker shall be equipped with a steering wheel lock for
towing vehicles from the rear.
(3) Each wrecker shall be equipped with towing-sling-type tow bar
rubber straps to lift the car so that no part of the metal of the
wrecker touches the car.
(4) Each wrecker shall be equipped with a special motorcycle-type
towing sling.
E. Land areas.
§ 604-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 604-6
1:861
(1) The contractor shall show proof that he owns, leases or is under
contract to own or lease a total minimum storage area which
accommodates 500 vehicles. This storage area shall consist of no
more than two permissible lots which will accommodate 500
vehicles. A deed, lease or contract shall be provided as evidence
meeting the above requirement and a letter from the Township
verifying that such use is permissible. The two storage areas
referenced herein must be within 10 minutes of the Township's
Police Headquarters. In the event that any of the chosen companies
fails to meet the required standards set forth herein, the Township
in its discretion may contract with an alternate vendor from the list
it has available during the contractual period. [Amended
6-10-2008 by Ord. No. MC 3381;9-20-2015 by Ord. No. MC
3551]
(2) There may be two or more storage areas, all of which must be
within 10 minutes travel time from Police Headquarters, Civic
Square, Irvington, hereinafter referred to as a "release area." Upon
presentation of a release, there shall be no additional cost to the
claimant of the vehicle, beyond the original cost for towing and
storage.
(3) Any lease shall extend beyond the expiration of the proposed
contract so that a sufficient amount of time is provided to allow for
the disposal of vehicles.
(4) No vehicles covered herein shall be parked upon a public street or
sidewalk except with the permission of the Director of Public
Safety. All towed vehicles must be stored by the contractor within
the storage area described in the proposal except with the
permission of the Director. Each vehicle stored in violation of these
specifications and without the permission of the Director of Public
Safety shall be subject to a penalty of $10 per day per vehicle.
(5) Visual on-site inspections of the premises shall be made and the
site approved before the award of the contract by the Department
of Public Safety. All of the land proposed to be utilized by the
contractor for storage must be level and clear of all debris and be
clearly marked as of the date of award of the contract. [Amended
10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
(6) For the purpose of property security, the entire land area must be
enclosed by a fence sufficient to provide for security. The fence
shall be of an open type to allow police units to observe any unusual
activity and not less than six feet in height. The storage area shall
be properly lighted during all hours of darkness to safeguard
against criminal activity. The contractor shall be authorized to
substitute equivalent security measures with the approval of the
Director of Public Safety.
§ 604-6 IRVINGTON CODE § 604-6
1:862
(7) Vehicles shall not be placed one on top of another without the
express written permission of the Township Attorney.
(8) Additional storage area for use in the event of an emergency shall
be provided by the contractor at his expense. Each contractor must
list the additional storage area to be utilized, along with a letter
authorizing such use by the property owner.
(9) The contractor should not have to remove more than four vehicles
to retrieve a specific vehicle in the lot. Storage shall not be more
than five deep. A sufficient amount of space shall be allowed for
Public Safety Department access for proper identification of
vehicles and shall comply with all relevant laws. A vehicle must be
retrieved within one hour from the time the owner presents the
contractor with a release and payment. A sufficient amount of
space shall be allowed to enable the Public Safety Department to
conduct an auction of vehicles from time to time, called a "staging
area." [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
(10) The contractor will maintain an indoor storage facility sufficient to
accommodate not fewer than three vehicles and 25 motorcycles
and/or mopeds for safeguarding such vehicles subject to, among
other things, impoundment or investigation or where such vehicles
are subject to forfeiture pursuant to law. The contractor must
submit proof that such storage area is secured pursuant to law and
the rules of evidence. Such storage shall be at the direction of the
Director of Public Safety or the Prosecutor of Essex County or
Attorney General of the State of New Jersey or their appropriate
designees, without cost to the Township in appropriate cases. If a
vehicle is being held on official police investigation or Township
investigation and said vehicle must be transported to another
location for further investigation, such transportation shall be
under the direction of the Director of Public Safety or his designees
or other Township official, as the case may be. There shall be no
additional charges for this service.
(11) The fee to be charged for private passenger automobile storage
shall be governed by § 604-10, Service rates and charges, of this
chapter. [Amended 9-20-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3551]
F. Removing abandoned vehicles.
(1) An abandoned vehicle is considered to be a vehicle of any size, in
any condition, abandoned anywhere within the Township (see
N.J.S.A. 39:4-56.1 et seq.) on any street or public right-of-way,
public or quasi-public place such as property owned by the Housing
Authority, Board of Education, Public Library, public parks and
playgrounds or other municipal-owned lot or property. The decision
of the Director of Public Safety as to classification shall be
considered final and binding on the contractor.
§ 604-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 604-6
1:863
(2) Removal of an abandoned vehicle shall be performed under the
direction and supervision of the Department of Public Safety on a
24 hours a day, seven days a week basis. All calls shall be answered
within a twenty-minute period. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord.
No. MC 3553]
(3) Vehicles shall be disposed of under the laws and rules of the State
of New Jersey. The contractor shall provide the Irvington Public
Safety Department with a written list of all vehicles unclaimed and
held in storage on the first business day of February, May, August
and November of each year. Such list shall include a description of
the vehicle, the VIN and registration numbers and the date on
which the vehicle was placed in storage. The contractor shall fully
cooperate with the Irvington Public Safety Department and the
Township in connection with disposal of all abandoned vehicles for
public auction. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
(4) The contractor shall be responsible for each vehicle until the final
disposition and removal as ordered by the Irvington Public Safety
Department. Any vehicle that has been sold at the Township
auction must be removed from the contractor's lot within 15 days
after receipt of the title. The contractor shall indemnify and hold
the Township harmless from any and all claims against the
Township, including attorneys fees and costs arising out of the
performance of the contract, including the storage and towing of
vehicles, and the contractor's security and bond shall so provide.
[Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
(5) At the time of the application for titles on unclaimed vehicles, the
Township shall determine if it will apply for junk title or true
saleable title. If the Township determines to apply for a true
saleable title and determines to utilize the vehicle for the Township
business and registers it in the name of the Township, then and in
that event the contractor shall waive any and all charges which
may be due on the vehicle in question. If the Township obtains a
true, saleable title and does not utilize the vehicle for its own
purpose, said vehicle shall be sold at public auction to the highest
bidder. The highest bidder shall pay all storage and towing fees
prior to receipt of said vehicle. These fees shall be in addition to the
amount of the bid. The purchase price paid shall belong solely to
the Township.
G. Removing and storing other vehicles.
(1) Vehicles involved in accidents or otherwise disabled, stolen motor
vehicles involved in suspected crimes and unregistered, illegally
parked, uninsured and undocumented vehicles must be towed,
stored and released only under the direction and supervision of the
Irvington Public Safety Department. Vehicles shall be released
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday to Friday,
and between 8:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m., Saturday, Sunday and
§ 604-6 IRVINGTON CODE § 604-6
1:864
holidays, by the contractor. There shall be no release fees charged
for releasing vehicles after normal business hours. The Public
Safety Department will be available to issue releases during the
aforesaid hours. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
(2) The contractor shall further provide towing and emergency road
service to Township vehicles, including tire changes, jump starts,
winch services, installation of snow chains, accidents, breakdowns,
insufficient fuel and other problems. Such services shall be made
available to all Township vehicles, including sanitation vehicles.
(3) In the event that an owner arrives within 12 hours at the storage
area with a proper release obtained from the Irvington Public
Safety Department following a tow of a disabled vehicle, the owner
shall only be charged for the tow and 1/2 the storage fee for
storage. Any part of the first 12 hours shall be charged at 1/2 the
normal storage fee. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC
3553]
(4) The contractor shall be required to furnish extra towing equipment
and services during storm periods, periods of snow emergency,
traffic emergency, disasters, any act of God or for any other reason,
when so designated by the Mayor or his duly authorized
representatives.
(5) With the exception of abandoned vehicles, all vehicles which are
open at a window, roof, engine or trunk compartment must be
immediately covered by the contractor so as to protect the vehicle
from damage by the elements.
(6) Owners of vehicles shall not be charged or prevented from
removing personal items, not an integral part of or affixed to the
motor vehicle, if owners present themselves at the storage area
with a release from the Public Safety Department. [Amended
10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
H. Motorized bicycles. Motorized bicycles shall be towed by the contractor
to the designated storage area, and all provisions pertaining to vehicles
shall apply.
I. Records and inspection.
(1) The contractor shall maintain records of all vehicles towed, stored
and released by him under this contractor. These records shall be
kept for a minimum of six years.
(2) The contractor shall not release any vehicle without first obtaining
a written release from the Irvington Public Safety Department.
[Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
(3) The Irvington Public Safety Department shall maintain an
inspection record of all property found anywhere in the towed
§ 604-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 604-6
1:865
vehicles, including the trunk and glove compartment, when open
or where a key is available. At the time of pickup of said vehicle,
the contractor or his employees shall review said inspection record.
The contractor or his employees, after review of said record with
the Irvington Public Safety Department, shall initial the acceptance
of said record as being complete and accurate. [Amended
10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
(4) The Township or its designees shall have access to any part of the
storage areas at any time for the purpose of inspection.
(5) Notification to owners of vehicles shall be performed by the
Irvington Public Safety Department within a reasonable period of
time. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
J. Charge for services.
(1) Fees for private passenger vehicles damaged in an accident or
recovered after being stolen may not exceed the fees established by
§ 604-10, Service rates and charges, of this chapter. [Amended
9-20-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3551]
(2) All Township vehicles will be towed, stored or otherwise serviced at
a flat rate of $1 per vehicle.
(3) All vehicles as described in Subsection G above, excepting
passenger motor vehicles stolen or damaged in an accident as
covered by N.J.A.C. 11:3-38, shall be towed and stored, if necessary,
at the rates reference below in § 604-10, except that vehicles held
for police investigation shall be towed and stored at no charge. All
vehicles described in Subsection F, Removing abandoned vehicles,
will be towed and stored, if necessary, at rates referenced below in
§ 604-10. [Amended 9-15-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3552]
(4) The daily storage charge may be imposed after 12 hours have
elapsed from the time the vehicle has been towed.
(5) The contractor may charge storage fees for a maximum of 180
days. After 180 days no further storage fee will be charged, except
in extraordinary circumstances.
(6) If an owner arrives at a scene of a tow and his or her vehicle is
hooked up to a tow vehicle, the vehicle must be released on the
spot for a fee of $25. If the vehicle has not been hooked up, then
there shall be no charge to the owner or driver. [Amended
3-9-2004 by Ord. No. MC 3257]
(7) All charges shall be posted conspicuously at the contractor's
premises and shall be prominently displayed on bills for services
rendered.
(8) Towing and storage charges shall be waived by the contractor upon
the request of the Township Attorney.
§ 604-6 IRVINGTON CODE § 604-6
1:866
(9) The contractor must accept cash and approved Visa or Master Card
as payment for towing and storage charges and must provide the
owner or operator of a motor vehicle with a receipt for any fees
paid to the contractor, regardless of the method of payment, cash
or credit card.
(10) The contractor shall prepare a bill for charges pertaining to such
vehicle and present it to the claimant of a vehicle; also, a duplicate
must be maintained by the contractor for open inspection by the
Public Safety Department. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No.
MC 3553]
(11) The Township will not be responsible for charges due and owing
from a claimant of a vehicle, nor will it assist the contractor in
collecting such charges. The contractor shall make no claim or
collect any money for towing or storage fees when the only party
responsible or liable for such fees is the Township of Irvington.
(12) All money received from an auction will be deposited with the
Township Treasurer, who will then release the proper amount to
the contractor upon presentation of his bill through the Township
Purchasing Agent. Should the total bill be in excess of the money
realized at the auction, the contractor agrees to accept this latter
amount in full payment of his bill. If the amount realized at the
auction is in excess of the total bill, then the contractor shall be
paid in full and the money remaining shall become the property of
the Township. The title fee which the Township must pay to the
State of New Jersey for the title certificates shall be passed on to
the purchaser at the auction, even if the contractor is the
purchaser, and shall be in addition to the bid price.
K. Insurance.
(1) The contractor shall secure and furnish to the Township of
Irvington a noncancelable public liability and property damage
insurance certification, naming the Township of Irvington as
coinsurer in an amount not less than $1,000,000 for each person
and $3,000,000 each accident and $500,000 property damage. In
addition, proof of worker's compensation insurance must be
provided and automobile insurance for bodily injury of not less than
$300,000 per person, $500,000 per accident and property damage
liability insurance of not less than $25,000 for each accident; in
addition, proof of garage liability in the amount of no less than
$1,000,000 combined single limit and garagekeepers liability in an
amount not less than $60,000 per location. These items are
required prior to execution of this contract.
(2) The contractor agrees to hold the Township of Irvington harmless
from any and all claims or suits arising by virtue of the furnishing
or delivery of the aforementioned services.
§ 604-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 604-6
1:867
(3) The contractor shall secure and furnish to the Township of
Irvington an insurance certificate endorsed to provide collision
coverage for vehicles in tow.
(4) All insurance provided by the contractor must be with an insurance
company licensed by the State of New Jersey and acceptable to the
Township of Irvington.
L. Miscellaneous requirements.
(1) The contractor must comply with the mandatory affirmative action
requirements under N.J.A.C. 17:27 and indicate its willingness to
comply with the language of this provision by execution of forms as
set forth by the Township Purchasing Agent.
(2) The contractor must also execute all other documents prepared by
the Township Purchasing Agent, setting forth the names and
addresses of all stockholders in the corporation, or partners in the
partnership, who own 10% or more of its stock, or of all individual
partners in the partnership who own a 10% or greater interest
therein, as the case may be.
(3) The contractor must comply with other reasonable requests for
documentation from the purchasing agent designed to disclose the
business reputation, its business organization, ability to perform
and willingness to comply with the laws of the State of New Jersey.
Each contractor may be required to enter into a formal written
contract within 10 days after the establishment of the list or as
soon thereafter as said contract shall be drawn by the Township
Attorney. Said contract shall contain, among other things, the
following: The contractor shall furnish at the time of execution of
contract a surety performance bond to the Township of Irvington in
the amount of the projected value of the contract, said bond to be
executed by the contractor as principal, and said bond to be in such
form satisfactory and acceptable to the Township Attorney. This
bond will be given in compliance with the requirements of the
statutes of the State of New Jersey in respect to bond contractors
on public works. Revised Statutes of New Jersey, 1937, N.J.S.A.
2A:44-143 through 2A:44-147 and amendments thereof, and
liability hereunder is limited as in said statutes provided.
(4) An agreement by said contractor to save harmless the Township of
Irvington and all of its employees, from any and all claims or suits
arising by virtue of furnishing or delivery of such commodity or
services.
(5) That the contractor will comply with the provisions of all applicable
State of New Jersey Statutes, all ordinances of the Township of
Irvington, and all applicable requirements of the Occupational
Safety and Health Acts.
§ 604-6 IRVINGTON CODE § 604-6
1:868
(6) It is the intent of the Township of Irvington that any purchases and
contracts made pursuant to specifications and all acts connected
with said purchases shall be controlled by the Township of
Irvington.
(7) Should any dispute arise respecting true interpretation or meaning
of these specifications, the same shall be decided by the Purchasing
Agent of the Township of Irvington, in conjunction with the
Township Attorney and the Public Safety Department, and such
decision shall be final and binding. [Amended 10-14-2015 by
Ord. No. MC 3553]
(8) Damage to property. If any property owned by the Township of
Irvington is damaged by the equipment or employees of the
contractor, the contractor shall be liable for the cost of the repairs
necessary on account of such damage, and the right is reserved to
deduct such cost from any sum or sums that may be due or become
due to the contractor.
§ 604-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 604-6
1:869

ARTICLE II
Vehicles Towed from Parking Areas
[Adopted 9-29-1992 by Ord. No. MC 2958 (Ch. 187, Art. II, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 604-7. Registration of towed vehicles; request to tow vehicles
unlawfully parked in reserved spaces. [Amended 11-9-2010 by Ord.
No. MC 3428]
§ 604-8. Justification for towing.
No car can be towed from private property unless it violates existing
parking regulations, i.e., fire lane, driveway or abandoned, etc.
§ 604-9. Absence of permit not grounds for towing.
Absence of a valid parking permit as issued by the property owner does
not constitute valid grounds for towing if the owner of the car lives at
that location, the car is registered at that location and the car is otherwise
properly parked.
§ 604-10. Service rates and charges. [Amended 3-9-2004 by Ord.
No. MC 3257; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413; 8-14-2012 by Ord.
No. MC 3469; 9-11-2012 by Ord. No. MC 3471]
A. Registration of vehicles. Any vehicle towed from a parking area in the
Township must be checked in and registered at the Irvington Public
Safety Department on Civic Square in the Township. It will not be
required for the Irvington Police to first issue a summons before said
vehicle is towed. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
B. Owners' issuance of identification. The owner of the parking space
assigned and/or leased to a resident must provide the resident with an
identification card or placard for the particular space which has been
designated as his or her official parking space. The resident who rents
and/or leases the space may notify and request vehicle to be towed from
their space if such is not authorized to park in same. Upon the arrival of
the towing company, the resident must show official proof that such
space has officially been assigned or designated to him or her. The
owner or his agent maintains the right to have the vehicle towed, also if
same is not authorized to be parked in the space in question.
A. The charge(s) for services rendered by any licensee operating in the
Township of Irvington shall not exceed the following rates: [Amended
9-15-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3552334]
334. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 98-28E of the 1981 Revised Code,
which set forth rates for towing during snow emergencies and other conditions.
§ 604-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 604-10
1:871
Service Fee/Rate
Towing:
Light duty – 5,999 pounds GVW and under $200
Medium duty – 6,000 pounds to 14,999
pounds
$250
Heavy duty – 15,000 pounds and above $400
Storage (Outside):
Light duty $32 per day
Medium duty $50 per day
Heavy duty $75 per day
Tractor trailer $100 per day
Storage (Inside):
Light duty $50 per day
Medium duty $75 per day
Heavy duty $100 per day
Winching:
Light duty $75 per 1/2 hour
Medium duty $100 per 1/2 hour
Heavy duty $200 per 1/2 hour
Service Rates for Accident and Stolen
Vehicles/Recovery Equipment:
Rotator set up fee $750 per hour
Heavy duty wreckers $400 per hour
Landoll with tractor $250 per hour
Relief box trailer $250 per hour
Heavy duty rotator $750 per hour
Relief refrigerated tractor trailer $300 per hour
Tractor only $200 per hour
Flatbed $250 per hour
Service truck $250 per hour
Front end loader (two-yard minimum
bucket)
$250 per hour
Bobcat/skid steer $250 per hour
Forklift $300 per hour
Backhoe $250 per hour
Dump truck $250 per hour
Dump trailer with tractor $250 per hour
§ 604-10 IRVINGTON CODE § 604-10
1:872
§ 604-11. Violations and penalties.
Any towing company that violates any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction, be punishable by a fine of not less than three times the amount
of the towing charge assessed by the company and not more than 10 times
said towing charge, in the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge, but in no
event will the fine exceed the amount as set forth in § 1-17A of the Revised
Code of the Township of Irvington.
Service Fee/Rate
Roll off container (40-yard) + disposal fee $250 per hour
Light tower (two-light minimum) $150 per hour
Pallet jacks $200 flat fee
Rollers (off load) $200 flat fee
Spreader bar $500 per hour
Labor:
Yard fee $75 flat
Supervisor (wrecker master) $150 per hour
Tech labor (driver, rigger) $100 per hour
Manual labor $75 per hour
Miscellaneous:
Administration fee 10% of total towing
fee
Speedy Dry $25 per bag
B. All rates shall be posted on a card at least three inches by five inches
inside the wrecker in a conspicuous place.
C. All rates shall be posted on a card at least 8 1/2 inches by 11 inches in a
conspicuous place near the payment area.
D. Vehicle owners or their agents shall be provided with a copy of the rates
for review at a reasonable time prior to making payment.
§ 604-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 604-11
1:873

ARTICLE III
Vehicles Parked Illegally at Apartment Complexes
[Adopted 5-13-1997 by Ord. No. MC 3066 (Ch. 187, Art. III, of the
1981 Revised Code)]335
§ 604-12. Vehicles parked illegally or causing obstructions.336
Any vehicle parked in handicapped spaces, fire lanes, driveways or that
block or obstruct access to the complex by emergency vehicles may be
towed away by the owner. The same shall be towed subject to provisions of
preceding sections of this chapter.
§ 604-13. Liability for expenses.
Owners of illegally parked cars will be liable for all expenses associated
with the towing of said vehicle.
335. Editor's Note: Former § 187-12, Towing of illegally parked vehicles; § 187-13, Vehicles
unlawfully parked in reserved spaces; § 187-14, Complaint required; notification of police;
§ 187-15, Summons; § 187-16, Signs required; § 187-17, Warnings not required; and
§ 187-18, Photograph and report required; authorization prior to towing, of the 1981
Revised Code, which were previously included in this article, were repealed 8-12-1997 by
Ord. No. MC 3078.
336. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 620, Vehicles and Traffic, Art. XXII, Parking in Housing
Complexes.
§ 604-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 604-13
1:875

ARTICLE IV
Tows from Private Property; Registration of Towing Companies;
Towing Lots
[Adopted 3-9-2004 by Ord. No. MC 3257337 (Ch. 187, Art. IV, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 604-14. Fees for towing from private property.
The fee for a tow (car) from private property shall be as set forth in this
chapter. Such fee shall include any winching that the tow truck may have to
perform. There shall be no additional charge for winching.
§ 604-15. Registration of towing companies.
All towing companies who wish to do business in the Township of Irvington
must remit an annual licensing fee as set forth in this chapter. In addition
thereto, each vehicle used for towing shall be assessed a charge as set forth
in this chapter. Said vehicle must display a properly retained decal provided
by the Township of Irvington. The above fees are mandatory and without
exception. Any company who fails to register and attempts to operate
without proper registration credentials shall be subjected to a fine as set
forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article III, Penalties, of the Township
Code.
§ 604-16. Towing lots.
A. All vehicles towed from the Township of Irvington must be towed to a lot
or facility within a four-mile radius of the Township.
B. All cars towed must be brought to the Irvington Police Station at Civic
Square for inspection and to be logged in on police records.
C. Towing company, complex owner, lot owner or building owner must
install signage at each and every entrance and exit of their respective
parking lots. Such sign must be a minimum 36 inches by 24 inches high
with a minimum letter height of two inches. The sign shall list the
following information:
(1) Name of towing company;
(2) Address of company lot or lots;
(3) Telephone number to towing lot;
(4) The time of parking on property for residents or visitors.
D. The lot should be open 24 hours a day.
337. Editor's Note: This ordinance also amended regulations regarding situations in which an
owner arrives at the scene of a tow; see §§ 604-10 and § 604-6J(6).
§ 604-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 604-16
1:877

ARTICLE V
Consensual and Nonconsensual Towing from Private Property
[Adopted 11-10-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3591]
§ 604-17. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BASIC TOWING SERVICE — "Towing" as defined in this section and other
ancillary services as may be specified by the Director by regulation.
CONSUMER — A natural person.
DECOUPLING FEE — A charge by a towing company for releasing a motor
vehicle to its owner or operator when the vehicle has been, or is about to
be, hooked or lifted by a tower, but prior to the vehicle actually having been
moved or removed from the property.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Includes all vehicles propelled otherwise than by
muscular power, excepting such vehicles as run only upon rails or tracks
and motorized bicycles, motorized scooters, motorized wheelchairs and
motorized skateboards.
NONCONSENSUAL TOWING — The towing of a motor vehicle without the
consent of the owner or operator of the vehicle.
PERSON — An individual, a sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
limited liability company or any other business entity.
PRIVATE PROPERTY OWNER — The owner or lessee of private property, or
an agent of such owner or lessee, but shall not include a private property
towing company acting as an agent of such owner or lessee.
PRIVATE PROPERTY TOWING — The nonconsensual towing from private
property or from a storage facility by a motor vehicle of a consumer's
motor vehicle that is parked illegally, parked during a time at which such
parking is not permitted, or otherwise parked without authorization, or the
immobilization of or preparation for moving or removing of such motor
vehicle, for which a service charge is made, either directly or indirectly.
TOWING — The moving or removing from public or private property or from
a storage facility by a motor vehicle of a consumer's motor vehicle that
is damaged as a result of an accident or otherwise disabled, is recovered
after being stolen, or is parked illegally or otherwise without authorization,
parked during a time at which such parking is not permitted, or otherwise
parked without authorization, or the immobilization of or preparation for
moving or removing of such motor vehicle, for which a service charge
is made, either directly or indirectly. Dues or other charges of clubs or
associations which provide towing services to club or association members
shall not be considered a service charge for purposes of this definition.
TOWNSHIP OFFICIAL — An employee of the Township of Irvington who is
authorized by the Township to tow vehicles within the Township of Irvington
for purposes of this article only.
§ 604-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 604-17
1:879
TOWNSHIP TOWING COMPANY — The towing company that has a current
municipal contract with the Township of Irvington to tow motor vehicles
within the Township of Irvington.
VEHICLE — Any device in, upon or by which a person or property is or may
be transported upon a highway.
§ 604-18. Consent required for towing from privately owned
property.
If a property owner wants an unauthorized vehicle towed from their
property they must call the Irvington Department of Public Safety and
request that an officer come out to tow the vehicle. The only person that can
request a tow is the property owner and/or a Township official, not a tenant
or visitor. Also the person requesting the tow must show photo identification
and provide their full name, address, phone number and e-mail address to
the police officer responding to the call.
§ 604-19. Authorization for towing.
The towing of a vehicle can only be authorized by the following:
§ 604-20. Result of unauthorized and/or prohibited parking.
If it is determined by an officer of the Irvington Department of Public Safety
that the motor vehicle is unauthorized and prohibited from parking on the
property owner's property, then:
§ 604-21. Availability of records.
Every towing company that performs private property or other
nonconsensual towing shall retain and make available for inspection by
the Division for a period of three years, invoices, job orders, logs, claims
A. The property owner who states that the vehicle was parked on their
property without permission and/or consent.
B. A Township official who determines that the vehicle presents a public
safety hazard (harboring or infested with rodents, vermin, animals,
insects, etc., or remitting toxic fumes/chemicals into the environment)
or nuisance.
A. The motor vehicles will be towed at the owner's expense;
B. The name, address, and telephone number of the towing company that
will perform the towing shall be provided;
C. The charges for the towing and storage of towed motor vehicles will be
charged to the owner of the motor vehicle;
D. The street address of the storage facility where the towed vehicles can
be redeemed after payment of the posted charges and the times during
which the vehicle may be redeemed shall be provided.
§ 604-17 IRVINGTON CODE § 604-21
1:880
for reimbursement from insurance companies and other documentation
relating to all consensual and nonconsensual towing services performed
and rates charged for the services.
§ 604-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 604-21
1:881
Chapter 610
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 555.
§ 604-21 IRVINGTON CODE § 604-21
1:882
ARTICLE I
Brush and Hedges Near Roadways and Intersections
[Amended 1-12-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3562]
§ 610-1. Duty of owners to cut brush at intersections and along
roadways upon notice.
Pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.26 et seq., the Municipal
Council hereby requires the owner, tenant or other occupants of any lands
within the Town, wherever necessary and expedient for the preservation
of the public safety, to keep all brush, hedges and other plant life growing
within 10 feet of any roadway or street and within 25 feet of the intersection
of two roadways or streets cut to a height of not more than 2 1/2 feet within
10 days after written notice by the Director of Public Safety, sent to the last
known post office address of such owner, tenant or occupant by registered
mail, to cut the same.
§ 610-2. Failure to comply with notice; lien for costs.
A. In the event the owner, tenant or occupant as set forth in § 610-1 fails,
neglects or refuses to cut such brush, hedges and other plant life within
the ten-day period as provided by said section, the Director of Public
Safety or his agent for that purpose may, on behalf of the Town, cause
such brush, hedges and other plant life to be cut.
B. In every case in which, by force of § 610-1 and this section, the cutting
of the foregoing, by reason of the failure, neglect or refusal of the
owner, tenant or occupant to cut the same, is done under the direction
of the Director of Public Safety or his agent for that purpose, the cost
thereof shall be certified to the Municipal Council, which shall examine
the certificate of cost and, if found correct, shall cause the same as
shown thereon to be charged against such lands, and the amount so
charged shall forthwith become a lien upon such lands and shall be
added to and become and form part of the taxes next to be assessed and
levied upon such lands, the same to bear interest at the same rate as
other taxes and to be collected and enforced by the same officers and in
the same manner as taxes.
§ 610-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 610-2
1:883

ARTICLE II
Shade Trees on Streets
§ 610-3. Climbing, injuring, removing; permit to cut or trim.
No person shall cut, break, climb, injure or remove, or cause or procure
any person to cut, break, climb, injure or remove, any living tree in a public
highway of the Town. No person shall injure, misuse or remove, or cause
or procure any person to injure, misuse or remove, any device placed to
protect any tree or plant in any street of the Town. Any person desiring to
cut, trim or remove any shade tree in any street of the Town may apply to
the Division of Public Property for a written permit therefor, and, upon such
permit's being granted, may climb, cut, trim or remove any tree mentioned
in such permit in accordance with the terms thereof.
§ 610-4. Permit to plant.
No person shall plant or set out any shade tree or cause or procure any
person to plant or set out any shade tree in or on any part of any public
highway of the Town without first obtaining a written permit therefor from
the Division of Public Property setting forth the conditions under which
such tree may be planted or set out and in all respects complying with the
conditions of such permit.
§ 610-5. Interfering with work of Town personnel.
No person shall in anywise interfere or cause or permit any person to
interfere with the Division of Public Property or its appointees or employees
in and about the planting, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of
stone, cement or other sidewalk, or stone, cement or other substance about
the trunk of any tree in any street of the Town.
§ 610-6. Placing stones or cement around trees.
No person shall, without a written permit from the Division of Public
Property, place or maintain or cause to be placed or maintained upon the
ground in a public highway of the Town any stone, cement or other sidewalk
or any stone, cement or other substance which shall impede the free access
of water and air to the roots of any tree in such highway. Unless otherwise
provided for in such written permit, there shall be maintained about the
base of the trunk of each shade tree in the streets of the Town nine square
feet of open ground for a tree of three inches in diameter, and for every
three inches of increase of such diameter, there shall be an increase of at
least two square feet of open ground.
§ 610-7. Attaching wires or signs to trees.
No person shall, without a written permit from the Division of Public
Property, attach or keep attached to a tree in a public highway, or to the
guard or stake intended for the protection of such a tree, a rope, wire, sign
or any device.
§ 610-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 610-8
1:885
§ 610-8. Protection of trees during construction or repair work.
In the erection or repair of a building or structure, the owner thereof shall
place such guards around or nearby trees on the public highways as shall
effectually prevent injury to them.
§ 610-9. Wires across streets.
Every person having any wire running through a public highway shall
securely fasten such wire so that it shall not come into contact with any tree
therein.
§ 610-8 IRVINGTON CODE § 610-9
1:886
Chapter 620
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Township-owned vehicles — See Ch. 122.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 555.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 582.
Towing — See Ch. 604.
§ 610-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 610-9
1:887

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 620-1. Definitions.
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey338 shall be deemed to apply to such words and
phrases used herein.
§ 620-2. Repealer.
All former traffic ordinances of the Town of Irvington are hereby repealed,
except that this repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or
punishment of any person for any act done or committed in violation of any
ordinance hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
§ 620-3. Severability.
If any part or parts of this chapter are held to be invalid for any reason,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
§ 620-4. Violations and penalties; schedule of fines.339
A. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute,
every person convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter or
any supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50
or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
B. Traffic section designated offenses. Payable fines for violations of this
chapter are as follows: [Added 1-26-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3563]
Section (Code
reference) Short Description Payable Amount
§ 620-6 Restricted use of parking
lot (Western Parkway/
Myrtle Avenue)
$45
§ 620-8 Parking or standing for the
purpose of repair
$45
§ 620-11 Parking prohibited at all
times
$45
§ 620-12 Parking prohibited (street
cleaning)
$45
§ 620-13 Parking prohibited (certain
hours)
$45
338. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq.
339. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 1, Art. IV, Local Supplemental Violations Bureau Schedule.
§ 620-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-4
1:889
Section (Code
reference) Short Description Payable Amount
§ 620-14 Limited time parking $45
§ 620-17 Parking restricted for
residents
$45
§ 620-20 Trucks over certain weight
excluded
$150
§ 620-21 One-way traffic $85
§ 620-22 One-way traffic at parking
lots
$85
§ 320-27 No parking – taxi stands $50
§ 620-28 Bus stop designated $85
§ 620-30 U-turns (certain streets) $85
§ 620-31 Certain turns prohibited $85
§ 620-32 No turn on red $85
§ 620-34 No parking when snow
covers road
$45
§ 620-35 Emergency no parking $45
§ 620-36 Off-street parking
regulations
$45
§ 620-45 No buses/truck parking
(12:00 midnight to 6:00
a.m.)
$150
§ 620-45 No truck tractor/trucks
over 20 feet parking (9:00
p.m. to 6:00 a.m.)
$150
§ 620-45I No commercial truck,
tractor, trailer, omnibus in
residential driveway
$150
§ 620-48 Parking private lot (library) $45
§ 620-52 Parking prohibited except
for certain vehicles (permit
only)
$45
§ 620-53 Parking prohibited except
for certain persons
$45
§ 620-60C Parking over the line $45
§ 620-60D Backwards to meter $45
§ 620-62 Overtime meter $45
§ 620-69 No commercial vehicle in
lots
$150
§ 620-4 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-4
1:890
§ 620-5. Unoccupied vehicles.
Any unoccupied vehicle parked in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a
nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic, and any
peace officer may provide for the removal and storage of such vehicle. The
owner or operator shall pay the reasonable cost of removal and storage of
such vehicle which may result from the removal before regaining possession
of such vehicle.
§ 620-6. Restricted use of parking lot.
Section (Code
reference) Short Description Payable Amount
Article XVII Abandoned, inoperable and
unregistered vehicles
See § 620-89
§ 620-91 Bus terminal (no driving
through)
$85
§ 620-95 Parking prohibited on
Grove Street (Sundays)
$45
§ 620-123 Handicapped parking
(resident only)
$45
§ 620-127 Prohibited parking outside
designated spaces
$45
A. Pursuant to the provisions of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey, Title
39:5A-1, the enforcement of the Motor Vehicle Act, Revised Statutes of
New Jersey, Title 39, shall apply to the parking lot containing 13
parking spaces on its plot of land lying between the easterly side of
Western Parkway and the westerly side of Myrtle Avenue extending
northerly approximately 170 feet along Myrtle Avenue from the
northerly line of Vailsburg Terrace and which plot of land is part of Lot
1, Block 107, on the Town Tax Maps, owned by the New Jersey Highway
Authority, against unauthorized persons using such parking lot not as a
matter of right.
B. As a condition for the approval granted by this section, the New Jersey
Highway Authority shall post proper signs on such parking lot, giving
notice of the private use and restriction against public parking.
C. As a condition for the approval granted by this section, the New Jersey
Highway Authority shall issue permits to those persons authorized to
use such parking lot, which permits shall be displayed on the motor
vehicles using such parking lot.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle, as defined
in § 620-78, upon the parking area described in Subsection A without
first obtaining permission so to do by securing a permit issued by the
person designated and authorized by the State Highway Authority, such
permit to be displayed upon such motor vehicle so parked thereon.
§ 620-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-6
1:891
§ 620-7. Impoundment and immobilization; sale of unclaimed
vehicles. [Added 11-23-1993 by Ord. No. MC 2986]
E. Whenever any member of the Department of Public Safety of the Town
finds any motor vehicle, as defined in § 620-78,, parked upon such
parking area described in this section without such motor vehicle's
displaying thereon a permit issued by the properly designated and
authorized person of the State Highway Authority, such member of the
Department of Public Safety of the Town shall cause such illegally
parked motor vehicle to be removed from such parking area to a police
garage or place which may be designated by the Director of Public
Safety as a garage or a place for the impounding of such vehicles, and
such impounded vehicle shall be retained and impounded at such place
until such time as the person owning or having parked such vehicle
shall first pay the charges for towing and storage as set forth in the
schedule of charges approved by the governing body of the Town of
Irvington before regaining possession of the vehicle.340 [Amended
10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553; 1-12-2016 by Ord. No. MC
3562]
A. Should any motor vehicle be found within the jurisdiction of the
Township of Irvington for which there are outstanding warrants, then
the members of the Irvington police force shall impound and/or
immobilize said motor vehicle, and the said motor vehicle shall remain
impounded or immobilized subject to the following conditions.
B. Except for motor vehicles owned by lessors who have complied with
N.J.S.A. 39:4-139.5b(1) and (2), the owners of a vehicle that has been
impounded and/or immobilized pursuant to the authority of this section
of the Revised Code of the Township of Irvington shall pay by 12:00
midnight of the 30th day following the day on which the vehicle was
impounded or immobilized the amounts necessary to pay the said
warrants as well as the other fees and costs outlined in this section of
the Revised Code. Said moneys shall be paid to the Administrator of the
Irvington Municipal Court. If such moneys are not paid by the owner of
the said motor vehicle by 12:00 midnight of the 30th day following the
day of impoundment or immobilization, then the Administrator of the
Irvington Municipal Court shall advise the Municipal Clerk, who shall
give notice of an auction sale of the said vehicle by certified mail to the
owner of the said vehicle, if his name and address are known, and to the
holder of any security interest filed with the Director of Motor Vehicles
of the State of New Jersey. In addition, notice of the auction sale shall
be given by publication in a form to be prescribed by the Director of
Motor Vehicles. Said publication shall be made at least five days prior to
the date of any such auction sale in a newspaper published in the State
of New Jersey and circulating within the Township of Irvington.
340. Editor's Note: Former § 192-7, Hospital and ambulance area, and former § 192-8, Parking
or standing for purpose of sale, of the 1981 Revised Code, which previously followed this
section, were repealed 4-14-1987 by Ord. No. MC 2826.
§ 620-6 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-7
1:892
§ 620-8. Parking or standing for purpose of repair.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make or permit to be made any repairs
to a vehicle parked or standing upon any street within the Town, except that
emergency repairs may be made so as to permit the vehicle to proceed.
§ 620-9. Erection of signs.
The provisions of this chapter shall take effect upon the erection of signs as
provided by the New Jersey statutes.
C. At any time prior to the aforesaid auction sale, the owner of the motor
vehicle or any other person entitled to the motor vehicle may reclaim
possession of the motor vehicle upon payment of the reasonable costs of
removal and storage of the motor vehicle, as well as paying any fine,
penalty and court costs assessed against the vehicle for the violation
that gave rise to the impoundment or immobilization of the motor
vehicle, and any outstanding warrants against the vehicle. However, the
owner/lessor of the motor vehicle who has complied with N.J.S.A.
39:4-139.5b(1) and (2) shall be entitled to reclaim possession of the said
motor vehicle without payment, and the lessee of the said vehicle shall
be liable for any fines, penalties, court costs and outstanding warrants
against the vehicle.
D. Any proceeds obtained from the sale of an impounded or immobilized
motor vehicle at public auction pursuant to this chapter in excess of the
total amount owed to the municipality for the reasonable costs of
removal and storage of the motor vehicle, any fine or penalty and court
costs assessed against them for the violation that gave rise to the
impoundment or immobilization of the motor vehicle and any
outstanding warrants against the vehicle shall be returned to the owner
of the motor vehicle if his name and address are known.
§ 620-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-9
1:893

ARTICLE II
Parking
§ 620-10. Regulations not exclusive.
The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey statute or as
hereinafter provided.
§ 620-11. Parking prohibited at all times.
§ 620-12. Parking prohibited during certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule II
(§ 620-95) of any day (except Sundays and public holidays341) upon any of
A. No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or
parts thereof described in Schedule I (§ 620-94), attached to and made
a part of this chapter.
B. No person shall park or cause to be parked any eighteen-wheeler
vehicle and/or eighteen-wheeler cab in the Township of Irvington.
[Added 8-10-2004 by Ord. No. MC 3271]
C. Bus vehicles. [Added 5-30-2012 by Ord. No. MC 3465]
(1) Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
BUS VEHICLE(S) — Any bus or nonconforming van vehicle with a
passenger capacity of more than 15 persons.
NONCONFORMING VAN(S) — Any vehicle which does not conform
to the applicable Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards for
transport bus vehicle(s) used to transport passengers.
(2) In accordance with § 620-94 (Schedule I: No Parking), no person
shall park or cause to be parked any bus vehicle in the Township of
Irvington.
D. No person shall park or cause to be parked any type of motor vehicle in/
on lawns, rear yards, front yards, side yards, across sidewalks, across
driveways, across garages, across carports, in/on vacant lots, etc., nor
shall they jump the curb (driving over a curb without an apron) to park
in areas that are not delineated as parking spaces. [Added 8-15-2017
by Ord. No. MC 3614; amended 3-11-2019 by Ord. No. MC 3690]
341. Editor's Note: Pursuant to Ord. No. MC 2758 adopted December 11, 1984, as amended by
Res. No. DP 98-0310-9 adopted March 10, 1998, the days to which this exception applies
are Sundays and legal holidays as promulgated by the State of New Jersey and the
religious holidays of Yom Kippur, Rosh Hashanah, the first two and last two days of
Passover, the first two and last two days of Succoth, Shavuot, Good Friday, Eid al-Fitr and
§ 620-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-12
1:895
the streets or parts of streets described in said Schedule II, attached to and
made a part of this chapter.
§ 620-13. Stopping or standing prohibited.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle during the times specified in
Schedule III (§ 620-96) of any day (except Sundays and public holidays342)
upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in said Schedule III,
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 620-14. Parking time limited.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in
Schedule IV (§ 620-97) at any time between the hours listed in said
Schedule IV of any day (except Sundays and public holidays343) upon any of
Eid al-Adha. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 36:1-1, the public holidays recognized by the State of
New Jersey are January 1, known as "New Year's Day"; the third Monday in January, known
as "Martin Luther King's Birthday"; February 12, known as "Lincoln's Birthday"; the third
Monday in February, known as "Washington's Birthday"; the day designated and known as
"Good Friday"; the last Monday in May, known as "Memorial Day"; July 4, known as
"Independence Day"; the first Monday in September, known as "Labor Day"; the second
Monday in October known as "Columbus Day"; November 11, known as "Armistice Day" or
"Veterans Day"; the fourth Thursday in November, known as "Thanksgiving Day";
December 25, known as "Christmas Day"; any general election day in this state; every
Saturday; and any day heretofore or hereafter appointed, ordered or recommended by the
Governor of this state or the President of the United States as a day of fasting and prayer
or other religious observance or as a bank holiday or holidays.
342. Editor's Note: Pursuant to Ord. No. MC 2758 adopted December 11, 1984, as amended by
Res. No. DP 98-0310-9 adopted March 10, 1998, the days to which this exception applies
are Sundays and legal holidays as promulgated by the State of New Jersey and the
religious holidays of Yom Kippur, Rosh Hashanah, the first two and last two days of
Passover, the first two and last two days of Succoth, Shavuot, Good Friday, Eid al-Fitr and
Eid al-Adha. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 36:1-1, the public holidays recognized by the State of
New Jersey are January 1, known as "New Year's Day"; the first Monday in January, known
as "Martin Luther King's Birthday"; February 12, known as "Lincoln's Birthday"; the third
Monday in February, known as "Washington's Birthday"; the day designated and known as
"Good Friday"; the last Monday in May, known as "Memorial Day"; July 4, known as
"Independence Day"; the first Monday in September, known as "Labor Day"; the second
Monday in October known as "Columbus Day"; November 11, known as "Armistice Day" or
"Veterans Day"; the fourth Thursday in November, known as "Thanksgiving Day";
December 25, known as "Christmas Day"; any general election day in this state; every
Saturday; and any day heretofore or hereafter appointed, ordered or recommended by the
Governor of this state or the President of the United States as a day of fasting and prayer
or other religious observance or as a bank holiday or holidays.
343. Editor's Note: Pursuant to Ord. No. MC 2758 adopted December 11, 1984, as amended by
Res. No. DP 98-0310-9 adopted March 10, 1998, the days to which this exception applies
are Sundays and legal holidays as promulgated by the State of New Jersey and the
religious holidays of Yom Kippur, Rosh Hashanah, the first two and last two days of
Passover, the first two and last two days of Succoth, Shavuot, Good Friday, Eid al-Fitr and
Eid al-Adha. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 36:1-1, the public holidays recognized by the State of
New Jersey are January 1, known as "New Year's Day"; the third Monday in January, known
as "Martin Luther King's Birthday"; February 12, known as "Lincoln's Birthday"; the third
Monday in February, known as "Washington's Birthday"; the day designated and known as
"Good Friday"; the last Monday in May, known as "Memorial Day"; July 4, known as
"Independence Day"; the first Monday in September, known as "Labor Day"; the second
Monday in October known as "Columbus Day"; November 11, known as "Armistice Day" or
"Veterans Day"; the fourth Thursday in November, known as "Thanksgiving Day";
December 25, known as "Christmas Day"; any general election day in this state; every
Saturday; and any day heretofore or hereafter appointed, ordered or recommended by the
Governor of this state or the President of the United States as a day of fasting and prayer
or other religious observance or as a bank holiday or holidays.
§ 620-12 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-14
1:896
the streets or parts of streets described in said Schedule IV, attached to and
made a part of this chapter.
§ 620-15. Angle parking.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts thereof
described in Schedule V (§ 620-98), attached to and made a part of this
chapter, except at the angle designated and only within the painted white
stall lines.
§ 620-16. Impoundment. [Added 10-22-1987 by Ord. No. MC 2795;
10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
Any vehicle found within the Township of Irvington may be impounded or
immobilized by the Department of Public Safety if there are any outstanding
warrants against the vehicle.
§ 620-17. Parking restricted for residents; parking permit required;
fee. [Added 9-25-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3178]
§ 620-18. Business employee permit parking; fee. [Added
11-23-2004 by Ord. No. MC 3279; amended 6-23-2015 by Ord. No.
MC 3540]
A. No person shall park a vehicle between the hours and days specified in
Schedule VA (§ 620-99) upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in said Schedule VA, attached to and made a part of this
chapter, unless said person is a resident of the street.
B. Residents' vehicles must receive and display a parking permit provided
by the Township of Irvington.
C. Vehicles parked in violation of this section shall be subject to towing,
and the vehicle owners shall be subject to the fines set forth in
§ 620-4B.344
D. Fees and limitation on permits. [Added 6-23-2015 by Ord. No. MC
3540]
(1) There is a fee of $35 per year with a limit of two parking permits,
and any request beyond two is $50 per permit with a limit of two.
(2) There shall be no more than four permits per household.
E. Any owner of a corner property at an intersection of a resident-only
parking street shall be entitled to receive one parking permit from the
Township. The owner must apply for and submit all necessary
paperwork and applicable fees in order to receive such parking permit.
[Added 5-17-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3570]
344. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 620-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-18
1:897
§ 620-19. Boat and trailer parking on residential property; fines.
[Added 6-14-2005 by Ord. No. MC 3291345]
A. There shall be business employee/employee permit parking Townshipwide
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. at all public lots at
any meter in a commercial district.
B. Any employee who parks pursuant to the above provision must be
employed at a business in the Township and provide proof of same when
requested.
C. A parked vehicle falling under the authority of this section must
properly display a parking permit decal, sticker or placard in a manner
that is clearly visible.
D. An monthly fee of $20 per vehicle must be paid to the Township of
Irvington upon registration with the licensing division of the Township.
A. Boats and trailers used for the purpose of pulling or towing boats are
prohibited in driveways and yards of residential property.
B. Schedule of fines. The fines for violations of this section are as follows:
[Added 9-13-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3582]
(1) For the first violation: a fine of $50.
(2) For the second violation: a fine of $250.
(3) For the third violation: a fine of $500.
(4) For the fourth violation: a fine of $1,000. In addition, a mandatory
court appearance is required for the fourth violation.
345. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. MC 3291 was codified as § 139-77 of the 1981 Revised Code
of the Township Irvington.
§ 620-18 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-19
1:898
ARTICLE III
Truck Exclusions
§ 620-20. Trucks over certain weight excluded.
Trucks over the specified gross weight are hereby excluded from the streets
or parts of streets described in Schedule VI (§ 620-100) except for the
pickup and delivery of materials on such streets, said Schedule VI attached
to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 620-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-20
1:899

ARTICLE IV
One-Way Streets
§ 620-21. One-way streets designated.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VII (§ 620-101),
attached to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as oneway
streets in the direction indicated.
§ 620-22. One-way parking plazas.
The areas described in Schedule VIII (§ 620-102), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as one-way traffic areas in the
direction indicated.
§ 620-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-22
1:901

ARTICLE V
Stop and Yield Intersections
§ 620-23. Through streets designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule IX (§ 620-103), attached to and made a part
of this chapter, are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall
be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the through
street except where yield signs are provided for in the designations.
§ 620-24. Stop intersections designated. [Amended 4-24-2012 by
Ord. No. MC 3462]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedule X (§ 620-104), attached to and made a part of this chapter,
are hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed
as provided therein. Multi-way stop signs are also described in Schedule X
(§ 620-104).
§ 620-25. Yield intersections designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedule XI (§ 620-105), attached to and made a part of this chapter, are
hereby designated as yield intersections. Yield signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
§ 620-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-25
1:903

ARTICLE VI
Special Zones and Areas
§ 620-26. Loading zones designated.346
The locations described in Schedule XII (§ 620-106) attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as loading zones.
§ 620-27. Taxi stands designated.
The locations described in Schedule XIII (§ 620-107), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as taxi stands.
§ 620-28. Bus stops designated.
The locations described in Schedule XIV (§ 620-108), attached to and made
a part this chapter, are hereby designated as bus stops.
§ 620-29. Bus parking. [Added 5-23-2017 by Ord. No. MC 3607]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-8e, the following described location is designated
as a bus stop for municipal buses and trams:
A. Irvington senior bus parking only in front of 1073 to 1081 Springfield
Avenue. Beginning at a point, said point being the southerly
intersection of the rights-of-way of Lincoln Place and Springfield
Avenue and running along the southerly right-of-way of Springfield
Avenue in an easterly direction 250 feet to a point in said right-of-way
and extending easterly a distance of 35 feet, said point being 10 feet
easterly of the existing pedestrian crosswalk on Springfield Avenue
located at 1077 Springfield Avenue.
346. Editor's Note: See also Art. XXVI, Procedure to Establish Commercial Loading Zones, of
this chapter.
§ 620-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-29
1:905

ARTICLE VII
Turn Prohibitions and Lane Reservations
§ 620-30. U-turns.
No person shall make a U-turn on any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule XV (§ 620-109), attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 620-31. Prohibited turns at intersections.
No person shall make a turn of the kind designated (left, right, all) at any of
the locations described in Schedule XVI (§ 620-110), attached to and made
a part of this chapter.
§ 620-32. Prohibited right turns on red signal.
No person shall make a right turn when facing a steady red signal (stop
indication) at any of the locations described in Schedule XVII (§ 620-111),
whenever official signs are present prohibiting such turn.
§ 620-33. Lane use reservations.
The lane locations described in Schedule XVIII (§ 620-112), attached to and
made a part of this chapter, are designated as lane use reservations and
traffic shall move only as indicated.
§ 620-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-33
1:907

ARTICLE VIII
Emergency No Parking
§ 620-34. Designation of snow emergency no-parking areas.
§ 620-35. Posting of signs.
§ 620-36. Removal of vehicles.
Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this article shall
be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of
traffic, and any peace officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle.
The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal and storage which
may result from such removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 620-37. Effectiveness of article.
The effectiveness of this article is contingent on signs being erected as
required by law.
A. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers
the street or highway, no vehicle shall be parked on either side of any of
the streets or parts thereof described in Schedule XIX (§ 620-113),
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
B. The above parking prohibitions shall remain in effect after the snow has
ceased until the streets have been plowed sufficiently and to the extent
that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of traffic.
A. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or sections of streets where temporary emergency no-parking
signs are displayed. The Director of Public Safety, or in his absence the
ranking police officer, is authorized to declare an emergency and to
direct the posting of said emergency no-parking signs when weather
conditions, accidents, fires or public celebrations dictate or require the
avoidance of hazards or other conditions which interfere with the free
flow of traffic. [Amended 1-12-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3562]
B. Notification that the emergency no-parking signs are being or will be
posted shall be given to the operator or owner of any vehicle which has
been parked prior to the posting of the signs.
§ 620-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-37
1:909

ARTICLE IX
Speed Limits
§ 620-38. Speed limits established.
The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule XX (§ 620-114), attached to and made a part
of this chapter, is hereby established as regulated by state law, N.J.S.A.
39:1-1 et seq.
§ 620-39. Posting of signs.
Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits as authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 620-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-39
1:911

ARTICLE X
Traffic Control Signals
§ 620-40. Traffic signals established.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection of
those streets described in Schedule XXI (§ 620-115), attached to and made
a part of this chapter.
§ 620-41. Installation of signals.
The traffic signal installation shall be in accordance with the provisions of
An Act Concerning Motor Vehicles and Traffic Regulations, Subtitle 1 of
Title 39 of the Revised Statutes,347 shall conform to the design and shall be
maintained in operation as authorized by the Department of Transportation
of the State of New Jersey.
347. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq.
§ 620-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-41
1:913

ARTICLE XI
No-Passing Zones
§ 620-42. No-passing zones established.
No-passing zones are hereby established and maintained along those
streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XXII (§ 620-116), attached
to and made a part of this chapter, as authorized by the New Jersey
Department of Transportation in accordance with the sketch dated and
numbered as indicated.
§ 620-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-42
1:915

ARTICLE XII
Street Closings and Parking During Emergencies
§ 620-43. Authority to effect street closings and prohibit parking
during certain emergencies.
A. The Mayor is hereby authorized to effect street closings by regulations
and to close streets or portions thereof to motor vehicle traffic if he
shall find that a safety problem exists for ingress to and egress from any
public or private school or for the provision of recreational facilities for
children attending such school, or both, due to a lack of a suitable area
surrounding such school; to close by regulation any portion of any
street within the block upon which it is located to the use of through
traffic during such time as he shall determine, not to exceed one hour
between 7:30 a.m. and 10:00 a.m., two hours between 11:00 a.m. and
2:00 p.m. and one hour between 2:30 p.m. and 4:30 p.m. on any days
during which such school is in session; to permit the use of such
portions of such street during such hours for ingress and egress to and
from such school and for use by the pupils of such school for
recreational purposes under proper supervision, and to provide
adequate police facilities for such supervision and for the control of
traffic upon such portion of such street, upon the posting of adequate
and proper warning signs indicating that such street is so closed and
the purpose thereof, during the time when same is so closed, as
provided in N.J.S.A. 40:67-16.7.
B. The Mayor is hereby authorized to effect street closings by regulations
for such closings or portions thereof to motor vehicle traffic on any day
or days or during specified hours whenever he finds that such closing is
necessary for the preservation of the public safety, health and welfare,
as provided for in N.J.S.A. 40:67-16.9 or in cases of emergencies set
forth in Subsection C of this section.
C. Upon the declaration of an emergency for snowplowing, snow removal,
street or sidewalk repair, tree removals, fires, public demonstrations,
public celebrations and other hazards or emergencies, there shall be no
parking upon streets or sections of streets where temporary emergency
no-parking signs are displayed. The Director of Public Safety, Fire
Chief, Municipal Engineer, Director of Public Works, the Mayor, or in
the absence of any of the foregoing, then the person who has been
designated as being in charge in the respective department, is hereby
authorized to declare an emergency and to direct the posting of such
emergency no-parking signs when same dictate or require the
avoidance of parking hazards or other conditions which interfere with
the free flow of traffic or in order to preserve the public safety, health
and welfare. [Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014
by Ord. No. MC 3511; 1-12-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3562]
D. Notification that emergency no-parking signs are being or will be
posted shall be given to the operator or owner of any vehicle which has
been parked prior to the posting of such emergency no-parking signs.
§ 620-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-43
1:917
§ 620-44. Emergencies on county roads. [Added 9-23-2003 by Ord.
No. MC 3239]
E. The closing of streets and the regulations therefor provided for in
Subsections A, B and C of this section shall not become effective unless
and until the same shall first have been approved by the Commissioner
of Transportation of the State Department of Transportation as
required by N.J.S.A. 40:67-16.10.
F. Whenever an emergency is declared or proclaimed by the Mayor or
adopted by a resolution of the Municipal Council by reason of heavy
snowfall, extreme weather conditions, accidents, fires, street or
highway repair or hazardous conditions or emergency conditions
relating to safety or the welfare of the public, the Mayor or the
Municipal Council by resolution may direct that the enforcement of the
municipal parking ordinances shall be suspended during such
designated emergency period or times for violations of parking
ordinances or regulations on certain designated streets or locations in
the Township of Irvington. [Added 4-14-1987 by Ord. No. MC 2827]
A. Upon declaration of an emergency by the Essex County Sheriff's
Department Office of Emergency Management that an emergency
exists, there shall be no parking on streets or sections of streets as set
forth below. Said streets shall have signs posted, pursuant to law, that
state "Emergency No Parking When Emergency Declared."
Name of Streets Side Location
Chancellor
Avenue
Both Between 43rd Street and Route 78
Clinton Avenue Both Between Florence Avenue and
Springfield Avenue
Coit Street Both Between Winans Avenue and Lyons
Avenue
Grove Street Both Between Lyons Avenue and Dassing
Avenue
Lyons Avenue Both Between Springfield Avenue and
Cordier Street
Sanford Avenue Both Between Springfield Avenue and
Sanford Place
Springfield
Avenue
Both Between Becker Terrace and 21st
Street
Stuyvesant
Avenue
Both Between Hillside Avenue and South
Orange Avenue
§ 620-43 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-44
1:918
ARTICLE XIII
Overnight Parking of Certain Vehicles
§ 620-45. Parking trucks, trailers, recreational vehicles and similar
vehicles on streets overnight; parking trucks on residential
driveways. [Amended 4-26-1988 by Ord. No. MC 2853; 4-24-2001 by
Ord. No. MC 3170; 4-21-2004 by Ord. No. MC 3260; 11-10-2016 by
Ord. No. MC 3587]
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Includes, but is not limited to, vehicles with
the following types of registrations: commercial, contractor, and bus.
For the purposes of this chapter, any vehicle containing advertising
matter intending to promote the interest of any business, or any vehicle
used in connection with the business, whether or not said vehicle is
registered as a commercial vehicle with the New Jersey State Division
of Motor Vehicles, is considered a commercial vehicle.
PARK or PARKING — The standing, idling or waiting on a street, road or
highway of a vehicle not actually engaged in receiving or discharging
passengers or merchandise, unless for the purpose of complying with
traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals.
PERSON — Natural persons, firms, associations, partnerships and
corporations.
B. Overnight parking of commercial vehicles is prohibited.
C. Overnight parking of trucks and/or buses. No person shall park the
following vehicles overnight on any public street in the Township of
Irvington:
(1) Any tractor truck cabs with or without trailers attached; or any
trailer or combination of trailers incapable of being moved on its or
their own power.
(2) Pickup trucks, vans or trucks or any type of commercial markings.
Trucks or any type loaded or equipped in a manner that would lead
a reasonable observer to believe that same was being used for
commercial or industrial purposes.
(3) Buses of any type. Jitneys and taxicabs.
D. No person, firm or corporation who owns or operates a commercial
vehicle, excluding emergency vehicles, or those permitted pursuant to
§ 620-46, shall park or let stand said vehicle on any public roadway or
street in the Township between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. If
any such vehicle should be disabled, that shall not be grounds for any
changes to the effect of this section, and any such vehicle so disabled
shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator so as not to
constitute a violation as herein set forth.
§ 620-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-45
1:919
§ 620-46. Regular vehicles with commercial plates or markings;
permit required; fee. [Added 9-25-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3179;
amended 5-7-2002 by Ord. No. MC 3192]
E. Exceptions. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit the parking or
storing of commercial vehicles, or equipment related thereto, on a
residential street while it is being used in the transaction of business
with the owner or occupant of residential property in the area. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to vehicles owned by a public
utility, as defined in N.J.S.A. 48:2-13, when such vehicles are being used
for work in connection with the furnishing or supplying of the
commodity which by law the public utility is authorized to furnish or
supply.
F. Enforcement. Enforcement of this section shall be the responsibility of
the Irvington Department of Public Safety. After the issuance of a
summons, such vehicle may be towed or otherwise removed from the
public street, with the owner of such vehicle being responsible for the
cost of such removal.
G. Penalties. Any person convicted of violating this section shall be liable
to a fine of $150 for each such violation, and each day in which such
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation or offense.
H. Any vehicle in violation of this section is subject to being towed with the
owner of such vehicle being responsible for all costs.
I. It shall be unlawful to park any commercial truck, tractor, trailer or
omnibus in residential driveways in the Township of Irvington. Parking
of such vehicles inside an attached or detached garage shall not be
considered a violation of this chapter. The definition of the above
vehicles shall be those as described in the Irvington Municipal Code.
The same penalties as outlined in Subsection G of this section shall
apply to this provision. [Amended 3-13-2018 by Ord. No. MC 3635]
J. No person shall park a recreational vehicle, motor home, trailer or
camper on any municipal street in the Township of Irvington between
the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day. Signs shall be posted on
all highways and streets at the Township limits to such effect.
Enforcement of this section shall be the responsibility of the Irvington
Department of Public Safety. After the issuance of a summons, such
vehicle may be towed or otherwise removed from the public street, with
the owner of such vehicle being responsible for the cost of such
removal. [Amended 11-8-2018 by Ord. No. MC 3673]
A. Any individual shall be permitted to park one regular vehicle (car) with
commercial plates or markings overnight upon the receipt of a permit
from the Irvington Public Safety Department and submission of an
annual fee to the Township of $50. Trucks, buses of any sort, vans and
stretch limousines are not included in this provision and are subject to
the restrictions previously set forth in § 620-45. A transfer fee of $1
§ 620-45 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-46
1:920
shall be assessed to an applicant desiring to use his or her permit on
another or substitute vehicle. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC
3553]
B. No more than one household member shall be granted parking
permission for a vehicle as described in Subsection A.
§ 620-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-46
1:921

ARTICLE XIV
Library Parking Areas
§ 620-47. Designated for use by library employees, Library Board,
etc.
The following described premises, heretofore established and used as
municipal parking areas, are hereby designated for the parking of motor
vehicles of the following persons only: employees of the library duly
authorized by the Library Board of the Town, members and officers of the
Library Board and members of the governing body during certain specified
hours.
§ 620-48. Designated for use by Library Board employees, members
and officers during certain times.
A. Civic Square Library parking area. Beginning at a point in the easterly
line of Civic Square West, which point is 192 feet south of the
intersection with the southerly line of Clinton Avenue and thence
continuing on the same line in a southerly direction 92 feet more or
less; thence easterly at right angles to the easterly line of Civic Square
75 feet; thence northerly at right angles 92 feet more or less; thence
westerly 75 feet to a point in the easterly line of Civic Square west
which is the point and place of beginning. This description is meant to
include the parking area built and designed for the incidental use of the
Irvington Public Library.
B. Union Avenue Library parking area. Beginning at a point in the
southerly line of Lehigh Place 45 feet distant from the intersection of
the same with the westerly line of Union Avenue and thence running in
a westerly direction a distance of 55 feet more or less; thence running
at right angles in a southerly direction a distance of 65 feet more or
less; thence running at right angles and parallel to Lehigh Place in an
easterly direction a distance of 71 feet more or less; thence running at
right angles and parallel to Union Avenue in a northerly direction a
distance of 33 feet more or less; thence running at right angles and
parallel to Lehigh Place a distance of 16 feet more or less; thence
running at right angles and parallel to Union Avenue a distance of 32
feet more or less to a point which is the point and place of beginning.
A. No motor vehicle except those of duly authorized employees, members
and officers of the Library Board, with an official sticker of the Library
Board affixed to such vehicle, shall enter, stand or park upon the
following locations:
(1) Upon the Union Avenue Library Branch parking area hereinabove
described, during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on Tuesday,
Wednesday and Friday: from 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. on Monday
and Thursday and from 8:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. on Saturday of each
week and when the library shall remain open for business.
§ 620-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-48
1:923
§ 620-49. Applicability of state law.
The aforesaid parking areas being established on land owned and
maintained by the Town under the N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the provisions of Title
39348 (Motor Vehicles and Traffic Regulations of the Revised Statutes of
New Jersey) shall be applicable to such parking areas upon the approval of
the Director of the State Division of Motor Vehicles.
§ 620-50. Violations and penalties.349
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by state statute, any person
who violates this article shall be subject to the penalties in § 620-4B.
Vehicles parked in violation of this article may be towed.
(2) Upon the Civic Square Library parking area hereinabove
described, during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. on Monday
through Friday and 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on Saturday of each
week and when the library shall remain open for business.
B. All persons except those specified herein are hereby prohibited from
parking such vehicles upon the aforementioned specified library
parking area during the time and hours hereinabove specified.
348. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq.
349. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 620-48 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-50
1:924
ARTICLE XV
Parking Areas for Certain Vehicles and Employees
[Amended 1-12-1988 by Ord. No. MC 2845; 9-28-1999 by Ord. No.
MC 3126; 1-13-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3525]
§ 620-51. Parking areas designated for Township-owned vehicles
and Township employees.
§ 620-52. Parking prohibited except for certain vehicles.
A. The following described premises owned by the Township are hereby
established as municipal parking areas for the parking of motor
vehicles owned by the Township and its duly authorized officers and
employees:
(1) Township Hall parking area. All that parcel and parcels of
municipally owned land and premises on the easterly side of Civic
Square West adjoining, adjacent to the rear of the Municipal Town
Hall and the rear of the Public Safety Building garage and
described as follows: Beginning at a point in the easterly side line
of Civic Square West, which point is approximately 110 feet
northerly from the northerly side line of Tremont Street and
running thence along the easterly side line of Civic Square West
approximately 350 feet to the southerly line of the present parking
lot of the Irvington Library; thence running easterly along said
southerly line of the library parking lot to the rear wall of the
Township Hall building; thence along the rear wall of the Township
Hall building (facing Civic Square West) in a northerly direction to
the end of said building; thence along the southerly wall of said
building in an easterly direction to the rear wall of the police
garage; thence northerly along the police garage building to the
rear lot lines of the residences facing Tremont Street; thence
westerly along the said rear lot lines of said residences to the
easterly side line of Civic Square West and point and place of
beginning.
(2) Portions of the Civic Square parking lots as follows: All that parking
lot immediately adjoining the Public Safety Building on the south
and which parking lot has a frontage of approximately 65 feet on
Civic Square.
(3) Portions of Civic Square as follows: All that part of Civic Square on
the east side commencing 256 feet in a southerly direction from its
intersection with Clinton Avenue to a point 589 feet in a southerly
direction from the same.
B. All parking of authorized vehicles in parking spaces directly facing the
Irvington Municipal Building must be parked head on with the front of
such parked vehicle directly facing the Municipal Building commonly
referred to as "Township Hall."
§ 620-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-52
1:925
§ 620-53. Parking prohibited except for certain persons.
All persons, except the drivers of municipally owned vehicles and of the
vehicles of duly authorized officers, officials and employees as hereinbefore
provided, are hereby prohibited from parking vehicles upon the aforesaid
premises.
§ 620-54. Applicability of state law.
The aforesaid parking areas being established on land owned and
maintained by the Township and being provided for the parking of vehicles
under N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, and the provisions of Title 39 (Motor Vehicles
and Traffic Regulations of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey)350 shall be
applicable to such parking areas upon the approval of the Director of the
State Division of Motor Vehicles.
§ 620-55. Violations and penalties.
A. No vehicles, except those owned by the Township and by employees and
officers of the Township duly authorized by permits issued by the
Business Administrator, and except vehicles of elected officials of the
Township properly identified, shall enter upon or park on the
aforementioned-described land and premises.
B. Said permits shall match the designated parking area for police, fire
and civilian, and any such vehicle without the appropriate matching
parking permit shall be subject to the penalties below.
A. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by state statute, any
person whose vehicle is located in an employee parking lot and/or
parking space not authorized to that vehicle or permit holder, the
vehicle will be subject to ticketing and towing in order to allow
authorized vehicles to park appropriately.
B. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by state statute, any
person who violates this article shall be subject to the penalties in
§ 620-4B.351
350. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq.
351. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 620-52 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-55
1:926
ARTICLE XVI
Metered Parking
§ 620-56. Definitions.
§ 620-57. Zones designated; hours, rates and time limits.
A. The following words and phrases, which are not defined in Subtitle 1 of
Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey,352 shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section for purposes of
this article:
PARKING METER — A mechanical device or meter not inconsistent
with this article placed or erected for the regulation of parking by
authority of this article. Each parking meter installed shall indicate by
proper legend the legal parking time established by ordinance and,
when operated, shall at all times indicate the balance of legal parking
time and, at the expiration of such period, shall indicate illegal or
overtime parking.
PARKING METER SPACE — Any space within a parking meter zone,
adjacent to a parking meter and which is duly designated for the
parking of a single vehicle by lines painted or otherwise durably
marked on the curb or on the surface of the street or lot adjacent to or
adjoining the parking meters.
PARKING METER ZONE — Any restricted street or off-street parking
lot upon which parking meters are installed and in operation.
B. Whenever any words and phrases except those defined above are used
in this article, the meanings respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1
of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to
apply to such words and phrases used herein.
A. On-street parking meter zones. Parking or standing a vehicle in a
parking meter space in the on-street parking meter zones described
below shall be lawful during the hours specified only upon the deposit
of such amount as is indicated for each specified period of time.
Name of Street Side
Time Limit/
Hours Location
Ball Street East 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 9:00
p.m., except
Sunday
From Nye Avenue to
Clinton Avenue
Becker Terrace Both 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 9:00
p.m., except
Sunday
From 35 feet north of
Springfield Avenue
north for 145 feet
352. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq.
§ 620-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-57
1:927
Name of Street Side
Time Limit/
Hours Location
Chancellor
Avenue
Both 1 hour; 8:00
a.m. to 9:00
p.m., except
Sunday
From Cornell Street to
Sheridan Street
Civic Square
[Repealed
1-12-1988 by
Ord. No. MC
2845]
Civic Square
[Added
1-12-1988 by
Ord. No. MC
2845]
East 3 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
midnight, except
Sunday
From Clinton Avenue
to 289 feet south of
Clinton Avenue
Civic Square
[Added
1-12-1988 by
Ord. No. MC
2845]
East 3 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
midnight, except
Sunday
From 589 feet south of
Clinton Avenue to
Springfield Avenue
Civic Square West 3 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
midnight, except
Sunday
From Clinton Avenue
to 273 feet south of
Clinton Avenue
Civic Square West 3 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 12:00
midnight, except
Sunday
From Springfield
Avenue north for 613
feet
Clinton Avenue Both 1 hour; 8:00
a.m. to 9:00
p.m., except
Sunday
From Washington
Avenue to Orange
Avenue
Clinton Avenue Both 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 9:00
p.m., except
Sunday
From Washington
Avenue to the Newark
line
Clinton Avenue North 1 hour; 8:00
a.m. to 9:00
p.m., except
Sunday
From 35 feet west of
Stuyvesant Avenue
west for 66 feet
Clinton Avenue South 1 hour; 8:00
a.m. to 9:00
p.m., except
Sunday
From Stuyvesant
Avenue to Grant Place
§ 620-57 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-57
1:928
Name of Street Side
Time Limit/
Hours Location
Elmwood
Avenue
North 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 9:00
p.m., except
Sunday
From Grant Place to
Sherman Place
Forty-Third
Street
West 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 9:00
p.m., except
Sunday
From 35 feet south of
Springfield Avenue
south for 150 feet
Franklin Terrace Both 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 9:00
p.m., except
Sunday
From 35 feet north of
Springfield Avenue
north for 100 feet
Frederick
Terrace
West 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 9:00
p.m., except
Sunday
From 50 feet north of
Springfield Avenue
north for 95 feet
Linden Avenue
[Repealed
9-26-2000 by
Ord. No. MC
3155]
Myrtle Avenue
[Amended
4-26-1988 by
Res. No. DP
88-0426-11;
repealed
9-26-2000 by
Ord. No. MC
3155]
New Street Both 1 hour; 8:00
a.m. to 9:00
p.m., except
Sunday
From Springfield
Avenue to Clinton
Avenue
Nye Avenue North 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 9:00
p.m., except
Sunday
From New Street to
Nesbit Terrace
Orange Avenue Both 1 hour; 8:00
a.m. to 9:00
p.m., except
Sunday
From Springfield
Avenue to Clinton
Avenue
§ 620-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-57
1:929
Name of Street Side
Time Limit/
Hours Location
Prospect Avenue
[Repealed
12-27-2000 by
Ord. No. 3161]
Sharon Avenue East 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 9:00
p.m., except
Sunday
From Springfield
Avenue to Clinton
Avenue
Smith Street East 1 hour; 8:00
a.m. to 9:00
p.m., except
Sunday
From Springfield
Avenue to Clinton
Avenue
Springfield
Avenue
North 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 9:00
p.m., except
Sunday
From Civic Square to
the Maplewood line
Springfield
Avenue
North 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 9:00
p.m., except
Sunday
From Eastern Parkway
to the Newark line
Springfield
Avenue
[Amended
10-22-1985 by
Ord. No. MC
2797;
12-27-2000 by
Ord. No. MC
3160]
South 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 9:00
p.m., except
Sunday
From Lincoln Place to
the Maplewood line,
except in front of 1211
Springfield Avenue
Springfield
Avenue
South 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 9:00
p.m., except
Sunday
From Sharon Avenue
to the Newark line
Springfield
Avenue [Added
8-10-2004 by
Ord. No. MC
3270]
South 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 9:00
p.m., except
Sunday
In front of 1387
Springfield Avenue
Springfield
Avenue [Added
8-10-2004 by
Ord. No. MC
3270]
South 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 9:00
p.m., except
Sunday
In front of 1393
Springfield Avenue
§ 620-57 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-57
1:930
Name of Street Side
Time Limit/
Hours Location
Stuyvesant
Avenue
East 1 hour; 8:00
a.m. to 9:00
p.m., except
Sunday
From 45 feet north of
Clinton Avenue north
for 66 feet
Thirty-Eighth
Street
Both 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 9:00
p.m., except
Sunday
From 35 feet south of
Springfield Avenue
south for 100 feet
Union Avenue Both 1 hour; 8:00
a.m. to 9:00
p.m., except
Sunday
From Nye Avenue to
Springfield Avenue
Union Avenue
[Added
5-24-1988 by
Res. No.
DP-88-0524-19]
East 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. to 9:00
p.m., except
Sunday
From Chancellor
Avenue to Berkshire
Place
Union Avenue
[Added
5-24-1988 by
Res. No. DP
88-0524-19]
East 1 hour; 8:00
a.m. to 9:00
p.m., except
Sunday
From Paine Avenue to
Chancellor Avenue
Washington
Avenue
[Amended
4-26-1988 by
Res. No. DP
88-0426-11]
West 2 hours; 8:00
a.m. 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From 184 feet north of
Springfield Avenue
north for 78 feet
B. Off-street parking meter zones. Parking or standing a vehicle in a
parking meter space in the off-street parking meter zones described
below shall be lawful only when not in excess of the maximum parking
time indicated during the hours of operation specified, on each entire
day, and only upon the deposit of such amount as is indicated for each
specified period of time. No allowance shall be made for payments of
lessor amounts for lessor amounts of time. [Amended 12-12-1995 by
Ord. No. MC 3027; 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3134; 11-9-2000
by Ord. No. MC 3158]
§ 620-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-57
1:931
§ 620-58. Duties of Department of Public Safety. [Amended
10-14-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3553]
§ 620-59. Location of meters; indication of legal or illegal use.
Parking meters installed in the parking meter zones referred to in § 620-57
shall be placed upon the curb immediately adjacent to the individual
parking places described by this article. Each parking meter shall be placed
or set in such manner as to show or display by a signal that the parking
space adjacent to such meter is or is not legally in use. Each parking
Name of Lot
(Location) Hours Time Limit/Rate
Plaza No. 3, Civic Square
Plaza; adjacent to northwest
corner of Springfield Avenue
and Civic Square
All 12 hours; $0.25/30 mins.
Plaza No. 4, Lehigh Place
Plaza; Union Avenue between
Chancellor Avenue and Lehigh
Place
All 10 hours; $0.25/30 mins.
Plaza No. 5, Washington
Avenue Plaza; bounded by
Irvington Terminal, Clinton
Avenue, Springfield Avenue
and Washington Avenue
All 3 hours between 8:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m.; $0.25/
30 mins.
Plaza No. 6, Orange Avenue
Plaza; between Smith Street
and Orange Avenue, except
that portions of this plaza are
limited to two-hour metered
parking
All 10 hours; $0.25/30 mins.
Plaza No. 6, Orange Avenue
Plaza, shall also include twohour
limit
All 2 hours; $0.25/30 mins.
A. In parking meter zones established pursuant to the provisions of this
article, the Irvington Public Safety Department shall have the authority
to cause parking meters to be installed and shall cause parking meter
spaces to be designated as provided by this article. No parking meter
shall be installed in any location where standing or parking therein
would infringe upon or violate the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-138.
B. The Irvington Public Safety Department is hereby authorized to provide
for the supervision, control, repair and replacement of parking meters
installed pursuant to this article and for the maintenance of such
meters in good working order.
§ 620-57 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-59
1:932
meter installed shall indicate by a proper legend the legal parking time
established.
§ 620-60. Marking of spaces; parking within spaces.
§ 620-61. Deposit of coins in meters; amount of parking time
allowed. [Amended 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3027; 12-14-1999 by
Ord. No. MC 3134; 11-9-2000 by Ord. No. MC 3158; 9-14-2010 by
Ord. No. MC 3427]
Whenever any vehicle shall be parked in any space adjacent to which a
parking meter is located in accordance with the provisions of this article,
the operator of such vehicle shall, upon entering such parking space,
deposit or cause to be immediately deposited:
A. Street parking areas provided for by this article shall have lines or
markings painted or placed upon the curb or upon the street adjacent
or next to the parking meter and each vehicle shall be parked within the
lines or markings so established.
B. The parking areas in municipally operated parking plazas shall have
lines or markings adjacent to each parking meter installed for the
purpose of designating the parking space regulated by each parking
meter, within the limits of which every vehicle shall be parked.
C. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle across any such lines or
markings or to park such vehicle in such a position that the same shall
not be entirely within the area so designated by such lines or markings.
D. All vehicles shall be parked "front end" (head on) to such parking
meters in all of the aforesaid municipally owned and operated parking
plazas, and it shall be unlawful for any such vehicle to be backed into
any such meter zone in such municipally owned and operated parking
plazas.
A. In parking meters located on public streets as set forth in § 620-57, a
$0.25 coin of the United States of America. Upon the deposit of a $0.25
coin and the placing of such parking meter in operation, such street
parking space may be occupied by such vehicle for 20 minutes, unless
parking on such streets is prohibited by other ordinances as reflected
by posted signs.
B. In parking meters located on public streets as set forth in § 620-57, a
$0.25 coin of the United States of America. Upon the deposit of a $0.25
coin and the placing of such parking meter in operation, such street
parking space may be occupied by such vehicle for 20 minutes, unless
parking on such street is prohibited by other ordinances as reflected by
posted signs.
C. In parking meters located on parking plazas as set forth in § 620-57, a
$0.25 coin of the United States of America. Upon the deposit of a $0.25
§ 620-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-61
1:933
§ 620-62. Overtime parking generally.
§ 620-63. Increasing parking time prohibited.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this article for any
person to deposit or cause to be deposited in a parking meter any coin
for the purpose of increasing or extending the parking time of any vehicle
beyond the legal parking time which has been established for the parking
space adjacent to which such meter is placed.
§ 620-64. Parking when overtime signal displayed prohibited.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this article for any
person to permit a vehicle to remain or be placed in any parking space
adjacent to any parking meter while such meter is displaying a signal
indicating that the vehicle occupying such parking space has already been
parked beyond the period of time prescribed for such parking space.
§ 620-65. Deposit of slugs prohibited.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this article to deposit
or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug, device or metallic
substitute for a proper coin of the United States of America.
§ 620-66. Additional limitations on metered parking.
Metered parking shall be further limited within certain hours or prohibited
entirely during specified hours whenever so provided or authorized by this
coin and the placing of such parking meter in operation, such parking
space may be occupied by such vehicle for 20 minutes.
D. In parking meters located on parking plazas as set forth in § 620-57, a
$0.25 coin of the United States of America. The deposit of a $0.25 coin
will allow the parking space to be occupied for 20 minutes.
A. If any vehicle shall remain parked in any metered parking space beyond
the parking limit fixed for such space, or in the event that such parking
meter provides for the deposit of five-, ten- or twenty-five-cent coins,
then beyond the time provided for any such meter as a result of such
deposit, the parking meter shall, by its dial and pointer, indicate such
illegal parking, and in that event such vehicle shall be considered as
parking overtime and beyond the legal parking time in any such area
where such meter is located, which shall be a violation of this article
and punished as provided by this article.
B. It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this article for
any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the
name of or driven by such person to be parked overtime or beyond the
period of legal parking time established for any parking meter zone as
described by this article.
§ 620-61 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-66
1:934
chapter or any other ordinance and as indicated by signs posted in the
particular area.
§ 620-67. Coin legend.
Every parking meter installed upon the public streets or upon the
municipally operated parking plazas shall contain a legend indicating the
number and types of coins which must be deposited for the respective
periods, if there is more than one.
§ 620-68. Parking municipally owned vehicles on parking plazas.
[Amended 1-12-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3562]
The Director of Public Safety is authorized to designate areas for parking
on municipal parking plazas for vehicles used for municipal purposes or
municipally sponsored or approved purposes. No such vehicle shall be
parked in such designated areas without the express authority of the
Director of Public Safety, and when so authorized such vehicles shall not
be required to comply with the provisions of this article relating to time
regulations and the depositing of coins in such parking meters while parked
in such designated areas. All vehicles used for municipal purposes or for
municipally sponsored or approved purposes shall be properly identified.
§ 620-69. Vehicles which may be parked on parking plazas.
The parking of motor vehicles on any of the parking plazas covered by this
article shall be limited to types of vehicles commonly referred to as private
passenger automobiles and motorcycles, and it shall be unlawful to park any
commercial or other type of vehicle thereon.
§ 620-70. Plaza parking permits; fees.
A. The Parking Division of the Township of Irvington is hereby authorized
to issue a limited number of one-month or three-month parking permits
or tickets for the parking of motor vehicles upon each of the municipally
operated parking plazas. The number of parking permits and the fees
for the same are described in § 620-117, attached to and made part of
this chapter. [Amended 10-27-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2643;
8-13-1991 by Ord. No. MC 2928]
B. The charge or fee is payable in advance at the time of issuance and such
permit or ticket shall be valid for a full twenty-four-hour period during
each day of the period of the permit. The parking permit shall be used
only on the parking plaza for which it is indicated and said permit shall
not be reserved but shall be issued to the first person appearing to pay
the fee for same. [Amended 10-27-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2643]
C. The Division of Parking shall not issue any permit prior to seven days
before the month for which the permit shall be in force.
§ 620-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-71
1:935
§ 620-71. Permit to be affixed to vehicle.
The permit or ticket issued pursuant to the provisions of § 620-70 shall be
attached to the vehicle which is being so parked, to indicate that the same
is authorized by virtue of such monthly parking permit.
§ 620-72. Period of validity.
A monthly parking permit or ticket authorized by § 620-70 shall be valid
only for the parking of the vehicle for which it has been issued upon all
of the municipally operated parking plazas during the effective period for
which it has been issued.
§ 620-73. Fees not refundable.
No refund shall be made of the monthly parking permit fee specified by
§ 620-70, or any part thereof, for any reason.
§ 620-74. Parking spaces not reserved.
§ 620-75. Parking with expired permit.
It shall be unlawful to park or attempt to park any vehicle upon a
municipally operated parking plaza with an outdated or expired monthly
parking permit unless the required coins are deposited in the parking meter
as specified by this article.
§ 620-76. Applicability of certain provisions.
While a vehicle is being parked under authority of a valid monthly parking
permit or ticket, the provisions of this article relating to the deposit of coins
in parking meters and the parking time allotted for such coin deposit shall
not apply to such vehicle.
§ 620-77. Certain plazas exempt.353
The municipal parking plazas contiguous to the Irvington Municipal
Building are hereby declared to be exempt from the provisions of this
article.354
A. Except as herein provided for parking on Parking Plaza No. 6, Orange
Avenue Plaza, a vehicle parking under the authority of a monthly
parking permit may be parked upon any available portion of the
designated municipal parking plaza, and no area shall be reserved for
such vehicle nor shall any parking space be guaranteed for the use of
such monthly permit vehicle.
B. On Parking Plaza No. 6, Orange Avenue Plaza, any vehicle parking
under the authority of a monthly permit shall be limited to parking only
in those spaces specifically set aside and metered for ten-hour parking.
353. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 620-71 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-77
1:936
354. Editor's Note: Original Ch. 192, Art. XVII, Cruising, added 7-11-2000 by Ord. No. MC 3152,
consisting of §§ 192-72 through 192-77, which previously followed this section, was
deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 620-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-77
1:937

ARTICLE XVII
Abandoned, Inoperable and Unregistered Vehicles
[Amended 5-9-2017 by Ord. No. MC 3602]
§ 620-78. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words shall have the meanings
ascribed to them as follows:
ABANDONED VEHICLE — Any vehicle that has not been moved for seven
consecutive days or more and is apparently deserted.
ANTIQUE VEHICLE — Any vehicle 25 years of age or older.
HIGHWAY — Any street, alley or public way within the Township.
INOPERABLE VEHICLE — Any vehicle from which, for a period of at least
seven days, the engine, wheels or other parts have been removed, or on
which the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged or
otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its
own motor power, or, if not equipped with an engine when manufactured,
incapable of being moved.
PERSON — Any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation
or other legal entity.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Any real property within the Township which is
privately owned and which is not public property as defined in this section.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Any street or highway, which shall include the entire
width between the boundary lines publicly maintained for the purposes of
vehicular travel, and any other property or facility owned by a public entity.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Irvington.
TRAILER — Every vehicle without motive power in operation designed for
carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and
so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle.
However, a trailer commonly referred to as a "fifth wheel" trailer is
considered a trailer by this definition.
TRAVEL TRAILER — A trailer, not used commercially, designed to provide
living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use, and of a size or
weight not requiring an over dimension permit when towed on a highway or
Township street.
UNREGISTERED VEHICLE — Any vehicle which is not properly and
currently registered with the State of New Jersey Motor Vehicle
Commission.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway or Township street or
requiring a certificate of title under the statutes of the State of New Jersey,
except devices moved by human power, devices used exclusively upon
stationary rails or tracks and snowmobiles as defined in the Snowmobile
Registration and Safety Act.355
§ 620-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-78
1:939
VEHICLE OWNER — A person who holds legal title to a vehicle, or in the
event a vehicle is the subject of an agreement for conditional sale or lease
thereof with the right of purchase upon the performance of the conditions
stated in the agreement and with the immediate right of possession vested
in the conditional vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of such
vehicle is entitled to possession, then such conditional vendee, lessee or
mortgagor shall be deemed the owner for the purposes of this chapter.
§ 620-79. Declaration of nuisance.
The administration may find and declare that abandoned vehicles,
inoperable vehicles and unregistered vehicles, whether located upon
private property or upon public property, constitute a safety hazard and
a public nuisance detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the
general public by harboring disease, providing breeding places for vermin,
inviting plundering, creating fire hazards and presenting physical dangers
to children and others, and by creating scenic blights which degrade the
environment and adversely affect land values and the proper maintenance
and continuing development of the Township.
§ 620-80. Exemptions.
This article shall not apply to the following:
§ 620-81. Storage of unregistered vehicles.
No person shall accumulate, store or allow any unregistered vehicle to be
located upon any public property or private property within the Township
for a period exceeding seven days.
A. A vehicle which is kept within an enclosed building when not in use.
B. An operable antique vehicle properly and currently registered with the
office of the New Jersey Secretary of State.
C. A vehicle on the premises of a place of business engaged in the
wrecking or junking of motor vehicles, or on the premises of a place of
business engaged in the sale of new or used automobiles; provided,
however, that the latter business does not store or display inoperable
vehicles.
D. A vehicle which has been rendered temporarily incapable of being
driven under its own motor power in order to perform ordinary service
or repair operations for a period of not more than seven days from the
date the vehicle became inoperable.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon a motor vehicle, omnibus,
road tractor, trailer, truck, truck tractor, boat, motor home or other
commercial vehicle on any vacant lot, unoccupied building, public
street or highway; on any municipally owned or operated parking lot;
355. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 39:3C-1 et seq.
§ 620-78 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-81
1:940
§ 620-82. Covering or storing vehicles.
Covering, tarping, or storing an abandoned, inoperable or unregistered
vehicle in an unenclosed building or structure will not be considered to
resolve an abandoned, inoperable or unregistered vehicle as a public
nuisance. Any abandoned, inoperable or unregistered vehicle belonging to
an individual who is in the process of selling the vehicle will have 30 days
from the date of receiving a notice from the Township.
§ 620-83. Duty to dispose of abandoned, inoperable or unregistered
vehicles.
Any person not exempted under § 620-80 shall dispose of any abandoned,
inoperable or unregistered vehicle owned by him or her, and if the vehicle
is located upon private property, the owner or person occupying the private
property shall dispose of the abandoned, inoperable or unregistered vehicle
as set forth in this chapter, upon written notice received from the Township
commanding the disposition thereof.
§ 620-84. Notice.
on any property which is owned, leased or maintained by the Township;
on any property which is owned, leased or maintained by the Board of
Education; on any property which is owned, leased or maintained by the
Library Board of Trustees; or on any property which is owned, leased
or maintained by the Irvington Housing Authority.
B. Whenever any member of the Department of Public Safety finds or is
notified of any motor vehicle, omnibus, road tractor, trailer, truck, truck
tractor, boat, motor home or other commercial vehicle abandoned on
any vacant lot, unoccupied building, public street or highway of the
Township or on any public property described in this article, such
member shall issue a motor vehicle summons to move or secure its
removal to such garage or place as may be designated by the Director
of Public Safety and/or his designee as a garage or place for the
impounding of such vehicles, and such vehicle shall be retained and
impounded until the person owning the same shall first pay the
reasonable costs of the removal and storage which may result from
such removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
A. If the abandoned, inoperable or unregistered vehicle displays
registration plates or decals from which the last known vehicle owner
may be determined in a reasonably expeditious manner, notice as set
forth in this chapter shall be sent to the last registered vehicle owner,
and if the vehicle is located upon private property, to the owner or
occupant of the private property upon which the vehicle is located.
B. All notices provided by this section shall be sent by registered or
certified mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid. Notice to one
vehicle owner will be considered notice to all vehicle owners and notice
to one owner or occupant of private property will be considered notice
§ 620-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-84
1:941
to all owners and/or occupants of private property upon which the
vehicle is located. Refusal to accept delivery of the notice shall be
deemed acceptance for purposes of this section. The date of notice for
purposes of this section shall be the day after the date such notice
was deposited with the United States Postal Service. Notice may be
personally served by a Township police officer or other law enforcement
agent authorized by the Business Administrator upon the vehicle owner,
or if the vehicle is located upon private property, upon an owner or an
occupant of the private property above the age of 14 years, in which
case the date of notice shall be the date of personal service.
C. If the vehicle is located upon public property, the notice will be
substantially in the form set forth in this subsection:
NOTICE TO REMOVE VEHICLE FROM PUBLIC PROPERTY
TO: Name Date
Address
A vehicle described as:
Make: ___________________
Year: ___________________
Color: ___________________
with registration plates number _____ (the vehicle) is registered in the
name(s) of _____ with the State of _____. The vehicle is located at _____
outside of an enclosed building and is deemed to be an abandoned,
inoperable or unregistered vehicle under Article XVII of the Township
of Irvington Municipal Code (the Code). You are hereby notified that
the vehicle must be removed, disposed of or placed in an enclosed
building within seven days of the day after the date this notice was
deposited with the United States Postal Service. If you fail to remove,
dispose of, or place the vehicle in an enclosed building within the
specified period, or within any extension granted by the Township
Attorney, the Township may cause the towing or removal of the vehicle
without further notice to you, and you may be charged with a violation
of the Code and may be subject to penalties pursuant to Article XVII
of the Township of Irvington Municipal Code. In addition, the costs
of towing and storage, including court costs and reasonable attorneys
fees, may be assessed against you.
D. If the vehicle is located upon private property, the notice shall be
substantially in the form set forth in this subsection:
NOTICE TO REMOVE VEHICLE FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY
TO: Name Date
Address
§ 620-84 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-84
1:942
§ 620-85. Hearing regarding vehicle located upon private property.
A vehicle described as:
Year: ___________________
Make: ___________________
Color: ___________________
with registration plates number _____ (the vehicle) is registered in the
name(s) of _____ with the State of _____. The vehicle is located at _____
outside of an enclosed building and is deemed to be an abandoned,
inoperable or unregistered vehicle under Article XVII of the Township
of Irvington Municipal Code (the Code). You are hereby notified that
the vehicle must be removed, disposed of or placed in an enclosed
building within seven days of the day after the date this notice was
deposited with the United States Postal Service. You may request a
hearing on the matter of whether the above-described vehicle is an
abandoned, inoperable or unregistered vehicle in violation of Article
XVII of the Code by submitting a written request for such a hearing
to the Township Attorney addressed as set forth below, within seven
days of the day after the date this notice was deposited with the United
States Postal Service. If you submit such a request for a hearing, a
hearing date will be set and you will be advised of the time, date and
place of such hearing at least three days in advance of the date of such
hearing. The Township Attorney shall, upon good cause being shown,
grant an extension of the hearing of not more than 30 days if you
submit to the Township Attorney an affidavit that the vehicle is being
held for sale or for expeditious repair as defined by Article XVII of the
Code. To request a hearing, you must hand deliver or mail by certified
mail, return receipt requested, a request for such a hearing in writing
to the Township Attorney c/o, Township of Irvington, 1 Civic Square,
Irvington, NJ 07111. If you fail to request a hearing within seven days
of the day after the date this notice was deposited with the United
States Postal Service and you do not remove, dispose of, or place the
vehicle in an enclosed building within the specified period, or within
any extension granted by the Township Attorney after a hearing, you
may be charged with a violation of the Code and may be subject to
penalties pursuant to the Township of Irvington Municipal Code. In
addition, the costs of towing and storage, including court costs and
reasonable attorney's fees may be assessed against you.
A. The person or persons to whom the notice as specified in § 620-84D is
directed shall have the right to a hearing before the Township Attorney
on the matter of whether the vehicle cited in such notice is an
abandoned, inoperable or unregistered vehicle in violation of this
chapter. To obtain such a hearing, a written request for such a hearing
must be submitted by hand delivery or by certified mail, return receipt
requested, addressed to the Township Attorney c/o, Township of
Irvington, 1 Civic Square Irvington, New Jersey 07111 within seven
days of the day after the date this notice was deposited with the United
§ 620-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-85
1:943
§ 620-86. Towing.
States Postal Service. In the event that a hearing is so requested, the
Township Attorney shall, as soon as reasonably practicable, set a time,
date and place for the hearing before the Township Attorney, and shall
cause the person or persons so requesting the hearing to be provided
with written notice of the time, date and place of the hearing at least
three days in advance of the date of the hearing. Enforcement of this
chapter shall be stayed pending the hearing and determination by the
Township Attorney.
B. The owner of the vehicle, or the owner or occupant of the private
property upon which the vehicle is located, may apply for an extension
of time of the hearing by submitting to the Township Attorney an
affidavit that the vehicle is being held for sale or expeditious repair.
Upon receipt of any such application for an extension of time, the
Township Attorney shall, upon good cause being shown, grant an
extension of the hearing of not more than 30 days. As used in this
section, "expeditious repair" means:
(1) The necessary parts for repair have been ordered but are not
available for installation in the vehicle for reasons not within the
control of the owner of the vehicle;
(2) The vehicle is scheduled to be repaired by a person whose regular
course of business includes the repair of vehicles and the
scheduled repair date is within 30 days; or
(3) The vehicle is in such condition of being inoperable as a result of a
vehicular accident, and the owner of the vehicle or any third party
to whom, or from whom, a claim for the damages sustained in such
accident is anticipated, is investigating or preparing a claim for
such damages.
A. Public property. In the event the notice provided for in § 620-84C is not
complied with, the Township may cause the towing or removal of the
abandoned, inoperable or unregistered vehicle from public property
without further notice to the vehicle owner.
B. Private property. In the event the notice provided for in § 620-84D is not
complied with, except as provided in Subsection B(1) of this section, a
hearing maybe requested before the Township Attorney.
(1) In the event a request for a hearing before the Township Attorney is
made as set forth in § 620-85, and the Township Attorney
determines the vehicle is an abandoned, inoperable or
unregistered vehicle, the Township Attorney shall set a reasonable
date by which the vehicle shall be disposed of or enclosed within a
building. The date shall be no less than seven days after the date of
the hearing.
§ 620-85 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-86
1:944
§ 620-87. Record of vehicles towed.
When a vehicle is authorized to be towed, the Township shall keep and
maintain a record of the vehicle listing the color, year of manufacture,
manufacturer's name, manufacturer's series name, body style, vehicle
identification number and license plate year and number, if any, displayed
on the vehicle. The record shall also include the date and hour of tow,
location towed from, location towed to, reason for towing and the name of
the Township official authorizing the tow.
§ 620-88. Cumulative remedies.
The provisions and remedies of this article shall be in addition to any other
provisions and remedies provided by this Code or the New Jersey Compiled
Statutes.
§ 620-89. Violations and penalties.
C. It shall be the responsibility of the vehicle owner, or the owner of the
private property upon which the vehicle is located, if applicable, to
deliver a written notice to the Township Attorney and to provide
documentation and/or demonstration of operability of the vehicle and
that the vehicle has been properly registered if the vehicle has been put
into operable condition and/or registered with the State of New Jersey
Motor Vehicle Commission following issuance of the notice described in
§ 620-84 hereof. In the event no such written notice and evidence of
compliance herewith is received by the Business Administrator, it shall
be presumed that the vehicle remains abandoned, inoperable or
unregistered and the Township may immediately cause the towing or
removal of the vehicle from public property.
D. Whenever a vehicle is towed or removed by a towing service pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter, the owner of the vehicle and the owner
or occupant of the property upon which the abandoned, inoperable or
unregistered vehicle is located, if applicable, shall be jointly and
severally responsible for all towing and storage charges.
E. Within 48 hours of the removal of the vehicle, the Township will send
notice to the vehicle owner and any lienholder, if known, and to the
owner or occupant of the private property from which the vehicle was
removed, if applicable, that the vehicle has been impounded and stored
for violation of this chapter. The notice shall give the location of the
vehicle and the costs, if any, incurred by the Township for removal.
F. Any vehicle towed or removed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
will be stored and claimed or disposed of in accordance with the
applicable provisions of the New Jersey Vehicle Code, as amended,
entitled "Abandoned, Lost, Stolen or Unclaimed Vehicles"356 which is
incorporated in this chapter by reference.
356. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 39:10A-1 et seq.
§ 620-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-89
1:945
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article will be subject
to penalties pursuant to Chapter 604, Towing, effective date October 5,
2015, of this Code. If the Township incurs expenses, including
reasonable attorneys' fees, in enforcing this article, the vehicle owner
and the owner or occupant of private property notified as set forth in
§ 620-84 will be jointly and severally responsible for the expenses.
B. Each day that any person or corporation shall continue to keep,
maintain, park, store, place or abandon such vehicle, machinery or
mechanical equipment upon such premises after the time contained in
the aforesaid notice shall expire shall be deemed to be a separate
offense and violation of this article.
C. Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the following: A fine not exceeding
$100 a day but with a total fine not to exceed a maximum of $1,000 for
such vehicle, machinery or mechanical equipment not removed after
aforesaid notice expired, in addition to the cost of the tow/removal of
the vehicle, machinery or mechanical equipment and any additional
fees the Township incurred due to the removal/tow of the vehicle,
machinery or mechanical equipment.
§ 620-89 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-89
1:946
ARTICLE XVIII
Public Service Bus Terminal
§ 620-90. Area designated.
The following described premises, owned by the Town and heretofore
leased to Public Service Coordinated Transport (now known as "Transport
of New Jersey") and commonly referred to as the "Irvington Public-Service
Bus Terminal," is designated as a bus terminal for the use and benefit of
certain buses and the public as more particularly set forth in the lease
dated February 1, 1969: Beginning in the northerly line of Clinton Avenue
at a point therein distant westerly 128.73 feet from the corner formed
by the intersection of the said northerly line of Clinton Avenue with the
westerly line of Washington Avenue; thence north 60 degrees 20 minutes
west along said northerly line of Clinton Avenue 103.94 feet; thence north
32 degrees 39 1/2 minutes east along lands of Public Service Electric and
Gas Company 154.25 feet to the southerly line of Springfield Avenue; thence
north 80 degrees 10 minutes east along said line of Springfield Avenue
87.37 feet to line of lands formerly of L. Meyer and others; thence south 11
degrees 8 minutes east along said Meyer line 72.32 feet; thence south 37
degrees 30 minutes west and still along said Meyer line 98 feet to lands of
First Christian Church; thence north 52 degrees 3 minutes west along said
lands of First Christian Church 12.61 feet; thence south 30 degrees 21 1/
2 minutes west, and still along said lands of First Christian Church, 119.52
feet to the point and place of beginning.
§ 620-91. Use of premises restricted to authorized vehicles and
persons; identification.
A. On and after the effective date hereof and the posting of proper signs, it
shall be unlawful for any vehicle, other than buses duly authorized and
such other vehicles specified in Subsection C of this section, to use any
portion of the premises described in § 620-90 hereof as a thoroughfare
or to stop, stand or park upon any portion of the same.
B. No person shall operate any private motor vehicle, other than those
permitted by Subsection C of this section, upon any portion of such bus
terminal premises as a thoroughfare, or shall cause any such vehicle to
stop, stand or be parked upon any portion of such premises.
C. Only authorized buses, accredited officials of Transport of New Jersey
using their private motor vehicles, other accredited and authorized
vehicles of such Transport of New Jersey and authorized delivery trucks
shall use such described premises. Each such vehicle authorized to be
parked under this section shall be properly and clearly identified
thereon.
D. All persons except as herein specified are hereby prohibited from using
any private motor vehicles upon such premises as herein provided.
§ 620-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-92
1:947
§ 620-92. Applicability of state law.
The aforesaid bus terminal areas being established on land owned by the
Town, the provisions of Title 39 (Motor Vehicles and Traffic Regulations
of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey)357 and N.J.S.A. 39:4-197 shall be
applicable to such areas.
§ 620-93. Violations and penalties.
A. All persons violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
B. The driver or owner of any vehicle violating the provisions of this article
shall be subject to being summoned before the Municipal Court for such
violation, and such vehicle may be towed away at the cost and expense
of such driver or owner.
357. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq.
§ 620-92 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-93
1:948
ARTICLE XIX
Schedules
§ 620-94. Schedule I: No Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 620-11, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts or streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Allen Street North From Lenox Avenue to Orange
Avenue
Augusta Street West Entire length
Avon Avenue Both From Springfield Avenue to
Twenty-First Street
Ball Street East From 100 feet south of Nye Avenue
to 100 feet north of Nye Avenue
Ball Street West From Clinton Avenue to May
Street
Ball Street [Added
1-16-1992 by Ord. No.
MC 2935]
West From Lyons Avenue north for 129
feet
Banta Place North Entire length
Beach Spring Road
[Added 11-27-1990 by
Res. No. MC
90-1127-126]
East Entire length
Berkshire Place North From Coit Street west for 235 feet
Boyden Avenue
[Amended 10-23-1990
by Ord. No. MC 2913]
North From the westerly projected
curbline of Fortieth Street to the
Township line
Boyden Avenue South From Stuyvesant Avenue to the
Maplewood line
Brookside Avenue East 35 feet south of entire cul-de-sac at
north end of street
Brookside Avenue West From Springfield Avenue to
Madison Avenue
Bross Place Both From Durand Place west for 93
feet 6 inches
Bruen Avenue West From Springfield Avenue to Clinton
Avenue
Chancellor Avenue
[Added 11-10-1994 by
Ord. No. MC 3006]
North From Mt. Vernon Avenue to
Norwood Avenue
§ 620-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-94
1:949
Name of Street Side Location
Chancellor Avenue North From Union Avenue east for 95
feet
Chancellor Avenue North From Union Avenue west for 55
feet
Chancellor Avenue South From Fortieth Street to the
Maplewood line
Chancellor Avenue South From Stuyvesant Avenue west for
100 feet
Chancellor Avenue South From Union Avenue east for 40
feet
Chancellor Avenue South From Union Avenue west for 70
feet
Chestnut Avenue West From Chancellor Avenue to Paine
Avenue
Civic Square [Amended
1-12-1988 by Ord. No.
MC 2845]
East From Springfield Avenue north for
25 feet
Civic Square [Amended
1-12-1988 by Ord. No.
MC 2845]
West From Springfield Avenue north for
25 feet
Cleremont Avenue
[Added 1-16-1992 by
Ord. No. MC 2935]
East From Lyons Avenue south for 122
feet
Cleremont Avenue East From Mt. Vernon Avenue north for
146 feet
Cleremont Avenue East From Mt. Vernon Avenue south for
100 feet
Cleremont Avenue East From Welland Avenue to Lyons
Avenue
Cleremont Avenue West From 270 feet south of Denman
Place south for 68 feet
Cleremont Avenue West From Mt. Vernon Avenue north for
184 feet
Cleremont Avenue West From Mt. Vernon Avenue to Union
Avenue
Clinton Avenue North From Cummings Street east for 95
feet
Clinton Avenue North From Cummings Street west for 85
feet
Clinton Avenue North From Florence Avenue to Ellery
Avenue
§ 620-94 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-94
1:950
Name of Street Side Location
Clinton Avenue North From Harrison Place east for 92
feet
Clinton Avenue North From Harrison Place west for 50
feet
Clinton Avenue [Added
10-23-1990 by Ord.
No. MC 2913]
North From the easterly curbline of
Kerrigan Boulevard to the westerly
curbline of Ellery Avenue
Clinton Avenue North From Springfield Avenue west for
100 feet
Clinton Avenue North From Stuyvesant Avenue east for
100 feet
Clinton Avenue South From Ball Street to Augusta Street
Clinton Avenue South From Coit Street east for 50 feet
Clinton Avenue South From Coit Street west for 60 feet
Clinton Avenue [Added
10-23-1990 by Ord.
No. MC 2913]
South From the easterly projected
curbline of Florence Avenue to a
point 140 feet east therefrom
Clinton Avenue South From New Street west for 100 feet
Clinton Avenue
[Amended 10-23-1990
by Ord. No. MC 2913]
South From the easterly projected
curbline of Stuyvesant Avenue to a
point 110 feet east therefrom
Clinton Avenue South From Stuyvesant Avenue west for
85 feet
Clinton Avenue South From Union Avenue east for 128
feet
Clinton Avenue West From Springfield Avenue north for
70 feet
Coit Street East From Clinton Avenue south for 150
feet
Coit Street East From Nye Avenue south for 60 feet
Coit Street West From Clinton Avenue south for 100
feet
Coit Street West From Nye Avenue to Hillside line
Cordier Street West Entire length
Cummings Street East From Clinton Avenue north for 85
feet
Cummings Street West From Clinton Avenue north for 75
feet
§ 620-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-94
1:951
Name of Street Side Location
Durand Place [Added
1-29-2008 by Ord. No.
MC 3371]
East From Springfield Avenue south for
134 feet
Durand Place West From Springfield Avenue south for
134 feet
Eastern Parkway East From 100 feet south of Eighteenth
Avenue to 50 feet north of
Breckenridge Terrace
Eastern Parkway East From North Maple Avenue north
for 200 feet
Eastern Parkway East From 35 feet north of Sixteenth
Avenue north for 190 feet
Eastern Parkway East From Springfield Avenue to North
Maple Avenue
Eastern Parkway West Entire length
Eighteenth Avenue North From 150 feet east of Eastern
Parkway to Western Parkway
Eighteenth Avenue North From Grove Street east for 75 feet
Eighteenth Avenue North From Myrtle Avenue east for 65
feet
Eighteenth Avenue North From Myrtle Avenue west for 40
feet
Eighteenth Avenue South From Grove Street east for 145
feet
Eighteenth Avenue South From Grove Street west for 75 feet
Eighteenth Avenue South From Myrtle Avenue east for 50
feet
Eighteenth Avenue South From Myrtle Avenue west for 90
feet
Eighteenth Avenue South From Western Parkway to 100 feet
east of Eastern Parkway
Ellis Avenue East From Springfield Avenue south for
115 feet
Ellis Avenue West From Springfield Avenue south for
225 feet
Ellis Avenue West From Springfield Avenue to
Berkeley Terrace
Elmwood Avenue South From Sanford Avenue to the
Maplewood line
Ens Place Both Entire length
§ 620-94 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-94
1:952
Name of Street Side Location
Fifteenth Avenue North From Grove Street east for 90 feet
Fifteenth Avenue North From Grove Street west for 105
feet
Fifteenth Avenue South From Grove Street east for 74 feet
Fifteenth Avenue South From Grove Street west for 150
feet
Florence Avenue [Added
10-23-1990 by Ord.
No. MC 2913]
East From the southerly projected
curbline of Clinton Avenue to a
point 130 feet south therefrom
Florence Avenue [Added
10-23-1990 by Ord.
No. MC 2913; repealed
12-29-2015 by Ord.
No. MC 3560]
Fortieth Street [Added
10-8-1985 by Ord. No.
MC 2794]
East From Springfield Avenue south for
a distance of 150 feet
Fortieth Street
[Amended 10-23-1990
by Ord. No. MC 2913]
East From the northerly projected
curbline of Stuyvesant Avenue to a
point 85 feet north therefrom
Fortieth Street [Added
10-23-1990 by Ord.
No. MC 2913]
West From the northerly projected
curbline of Boyden Avenue to a
point 160 feet north therefrom
Fortieth Street West From Chancellor Avenue to Boyden
Avenue
Fortieth Street West From Springfield Avenue to
Wagner Place
Fred W. Petzinger Street
[Amended 11-23-1993
by Ord. No. 2984]
South From Myrtle Avenue to Linden
Avenue
Fuller Place South Entire length
Grant Place West From Elmwood Avenue north for
275 feet
Grove Street East From 50 feet north of Clinton
Avenue north for 50 feet
Grove Street East From Clinton Avenue south for 100
feet
Grove Street East From Eighteenth Avenue south for
205 feet
Grove Street East From 246 feet north of Marshall
Street north for 94 feet
§ 620-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-94
1:953
Name of Street Side Location
Grove Street East From Smalley Terrace to Rodwell
Avenue
Grove Street East From Springfield Avenue south for
220 feet
Grove Street East From Springfield Avenue to 35 feet
south of Marshall Street
Grove Street West Entire length
Harrison Place Both From Clinton Avenue north for 100
feet
Harrison Place West From 35 feet south of Springfield
Avenue south for 135 feet
Hoffman Place Both Entire length
Kuna Terrace Both From Chancellor Avenue south for
50 feet
Lenox Avenue East From Orange Avenue to Madison
Avenue
Lincoln Place [Amended
11-23-1993 by Ord.
No. MC 2985]
East From Springfield Avenue to Nye
Avenue
Lincoln Place [Amended
11-23-1993 by Ord.
No. MC 2985]
West From Springfield Avenue to Nye
Avenue
Madison Avenue North From Lenox Avenue to Stuyvesant
Avenue
Madison Avenue North From Western Parkway to Linden
Avenue
Madison Avenue South From Eastern Parkway to 100 feet
west of Washington Avenue
Madison Avenue South From Lenox Avenue to Linden
Avenue
Madison Avenue South From Stuyvesant Avenue east for
160 feet
Maple Avenue East From Springfield Avenue south for
75 feet
Maple Avenue West From 35 feet south of Springfield
Avenue south for 50 feet
Marshall Street North From 105 feet west of Grove Street
west for 27 feet
Marshall Street North From 232 feet west of Grove Street
west for 28 feet
§ 620-94 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-94
1:954
Name of Street Side Location
Marshall Street North From North Maple Avenue east for
132 feet
Marshall Street North From 35 feet north of North Maple
Avenue north for 90 feet
Marshall Street South From 215 feet west of Grove Street
west for 30 feet
Marshall Street South From 35 feet east of North Maple
Avenue east for 130 feet
Mill Road North From 103 feet west of Nesbit
Terrace to Stuyvesant Avenue
Mill Road South From Manor Drive to the Garden
State Parkway
Mill Road [Amended
10-23-1990 by Ord.
No. MC 2913]
South From the easterly projected
curbline of Walker Avenue to a
point 60 feet east therefrom
Mt. Vernon Avenue North From Cleremont Avenue east for
100 feet
Mt. Vernon Avenue South From Cleremont Avenue to Chester
Avenue
Mt. Vernon Avenue South From Cleremont Avenue to Union
Avenue
Mt. Vernon Avenue West From Chester Avenue to
Chancellor Avenue
Myrtle Avenue East From Eighteenth Avenue north for
65 feet
Myrtle Avenue East From Eighteenth Avenue south for
80 feet
Myrtle Avenue East From Springfield Avenue north for
80 feet
Myrtle Avenue East From Western Parkway to the
Newark line
Myrtle Avenue East From Western Parkway to
Valisburg Terrace
Myrtle Avenue West From Eighteenth Avenue south for
50 feet
Myrtle Avenue West From Eighteenth Avenue to
Stockman Place
Myrtle Avenue West From Oraton Parkway to the
Newark line
Myrtle Avenue West From Springfield Avenue north for
120 feet
§ 620-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-94
1:955
Name of Street Side Location
Myrtle Avenue West From Western Parkway to
Valisburg Terrace
Nesbit Terrace East From 129 feet south of Nye Avenue
south for 100 feet
Nesbit Terrace West From Hardgrove Terrace to Mill
Road
Nesbit Terrace West From Nye Avenue to Lyons Avenue
New Street Both From Springfield Avenue to Nye
Avenue
New Street East From Clinton Avenue south for 175
feet
New Street West From Clinton Avenue south for 75
feet
Newton Place East Entire length, from the sixteenth to
the last day of each month
Newton Place West Entire length, from the first to
fifteenth day of each month
North Maple Avenue Both From Springfield Avenue to
Eastern Parkway
Nye Avenue North From Ball Street east for 100 feet
Nye Avenue North From Ball Street to New Street
Nye Avenue [Added
11-29-1994 by Ord.
No. MC 3009]
North From Lincoln Place to Nesbit
Terrace
Nye Avenue North From Twenty-First Street east for
150 feet
Nye Avenue North From Union Avenue to 100 feet
west of New Street
Nye Avenue South From Nesbit Terrace to the
Newark line
Orange Avenue West From Clinton Avenue south for 150
feet
Orange Avenue West From 108 feet north of Springfield
Avenue north for 24 feet
Orange Place South Entire length
Paine Avenue South From Union Avenue to Hillside line
Park Place East From Springfield Avenue to Nye
Avenue
Park Place West From Springfield Avenue to Lyons
Avenue
§ 620-94 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-94
1:956
Name of Street Side Location
Renee Place North Entire length
Rosehill Place North From 110 feet west of Fern Avenue
west for 135 feet
Rosehill Place South From Norwood Avenue east for 30
feet
Rosehill Place South From Norwood Avenue west for 30
feet
Rutgers Street East From Chancellor Avenue south for
50 feet
Rutgers Street South From Union Avenue west for 300
feet
St. Paul's Drive North From Nesbit Terrace to Stuyvesant
Avenue
Sharon Avenue East From Springfield Avenue south for
75 feet
Sharon Avenue
[Repealed 11-10-1994
by Ord. No. MC 3007]
Sheridan Street Both From Chancellor Avenue south for
50 feet
Sheridan Street
[Amended 9-25-2007
by Ord. No. MC 3356]
West From Chancellor Avenue for 147
feet northerly
Sixteenth Avenue South From Grove Street to Eastern
Parkway
South Twentieth Street West From Clinton Avenue to Buffington
Street
South Twenty-First
Street [Repealed
1-15-2008 by Ord. No.
MC 3369]
Springfield Avenue North From Clinton Avenue west for 80
feet
Springfield Avenue North From Eastern Parkway east for
180 feet
Springfield Avenue North From Grove Street east for 85 feet
Springfield Avenue North From Myrtle Avenue east for 125
feet
Springfield Avenue North From Myrtle Avenue to Clinton
Avenue
§ 620-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-94
1:957
Name of Street Side Location
Springfield Avenue North From Washington Avenue to
Brookside Avenue
Springfield Avenue North From Washington Avenue to
Eastern Parkway
Springfield Avenue South From Clinton Avenue east for 75
feet
Springfield Avenue South From Grove Street east for 85 feet
Springfield Avenue South From Grove Street west for 130
feet
Springfield Avenue South From Sharon Avenue east for 110
feet
Springfield Avenue South From Washington Avenue to
Sharon Avenue
Stuyvesant Avenue East From Beechwood Place to Boyden
Avenue
Stuyvesant Avenue
[Amended 10-23-1990
by Ord. No. MC 2913]
East From the northerly projected
curbline of Clinton Avenue to a
point 75 feet north therefrom
Stuyvesant Avenue
[Amended 10-23-1990
by Ord. No. MC 2913]
East From the southerly projected
curbline of Clinton Avenue to a
point 310 feet south therefrom
Stuyvesant Avenue
[Amended 10-23-1990
by Ord. No. MC 2913]
East From the northerly projected
curbline of Mill Road to a point
230 feet north therefrom
Stuyvesant Avenue
[Added 10-23-1990 by
Ord. No. MC 2913]
East From the southerly projected
curbline of Stuyvesant Avenue to a
point 175 feet south therefrom
Stuyvesant Avenue East From West Allen Street to West
Rich Street
Stuyvesant Avenue
[Amended 10-23-1990
by Ord. No. MC 2913]
North From the easterly projected
curbline of Fortieth Street to a
point 135 feet east therefrom
Stuyvesant Avenue North From Stuyvesant Avenue west for
150 feet
Stuyvesant Avenue
[Amended 10-23-1990
by Ord. No. MC 2913]
South From the easterly projected
curbline of Stuyvesant Avenue to a
point 90 feet east therefrom
Stuyvesant Avenue
[Amended 10-23-1990
by Ord. No. MC 2913]
South From the westerly curbline of
Walker Avenue to a point 190 feet
west therefrom
§ 620-94 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-94
1:958
Name of Street Side Location
Stuyvesant Avenue
[Amended 10-23-1990
by Ord. No. MC 2913]
West From the southerly projected
curbline of Boyden Avenue to a
point 190 feet south therefrom
Stuyvesant Avenue
[Amended 10-23-1990
by Ord. No. MC 2913]
West From the northerly projected point
215 feet north therefrom
Stuyvesant Avenue
[Amended 10-23-1990
by Ord. No. MC 2913]
West From the southerly projected
curbline of Clinton Avenue to a
point 75 feet south therefrom
Stuyvesant Avenue West From Mountain View Place south
for 60 feet
Stuyvesant Avenue
[Amended 10-23-1990
by Ord. No. MC 2913]
West From the northerly projected
curbline of Stuyvesant Avenue to a
point 190 feet north therefrom
Thirty-Eighth Street East From Bross Place to Wagner Place
Twenty-First Street East From Fourteenth Avenue to the
Newark line
Union Avenue East From Chancellor Avenue north for
250 feet
Union Avenue East From Chancellor Avenue south for
250 feet
Union Avenue East From Garden State Parkway Exit
143A to Denman Place
Union Avenue East From Nye Avenue north for 100
feet
Union Avenue East From Nye Avenue south for 200
feet
Union Avenue East From Springfield Avenue south for
100 feet
Union Avenue West From Nye Avenue north for 50 feet
Union Avenue West From Nye Avenue to Mill Road
Union Avenue West From Springfield Avenue south for
65 feet
Wagner Place South From Stuyvesant Avenue to
Fortieth Street
Walker Avenue
[Amended 10-23-1990
by Ord. No. MC 2913]
East From the southerly projected
curbline of Mill Road to a point
140 feet south therefrom
Walker Avenue
[Amended 10-23-1990
by Ord. No. MC 2913]
West From the southerly projected
curbline of Stuyvesant Avenue to a
point 80 feet south therefrom
§ 620-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-94
1:959
Name of Street Side Location
Washington Avenue Both From Springfield Avenue to Clinton
Avenue
Washington Avenue East From Madison Avenue south for
100 feet
Washington Avenue East From Springfield Avenue north for
560 feet
Washington Avenue West From Springfield Avenue north for
184 feet
Washington Avenue
[Amended 4-26-1988
by Res. No. DP
88-0426-11]
West From 310 feet north of Springfield
Avenue to Madison Avenue
West Denman Place South From 108 feet east of Union
Avenue east for 75 feet
Western Parkway East From Madison Avenue to Myrtle
Avenue
Western Parkway West From 150 feet north of Eighteenth
Avenue to 100 feet south of
Eighteenth Avenue
Western Parkway West From Madison Avenue north for
220 feet
William S. Bull Street
[Amended 11-23-1993
by Ord. No. MC 2984]
West From Springfield Avenue to
Tremont Street
Woolsey Street West Entire length
§ 620-95. Schedule II: No Parking Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 620-12, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours listed upon any of the following described streets or
parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Adams Street North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Adams Street South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Allen Street North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Allen Street South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Argyle Terrace North 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Thursday
Entire length
§ 620-94 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-95
1:960
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Argyle Terrace South 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
Entire length
Arsdale Terrace North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Wednesday
From Mill Road
to the Union line
Arsdale Terrace South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Friday
From Mill Road
to the Union line
Arverne Terrace North 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
Entire length
Arverne Terrace South 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Thursday
Entire length
Augusta Street East 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Augusta Street West 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Avon Avenue North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Monday
From 21st Street
to the Newark
line
Avon Avenue South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Thursday
From 21st Street
to the Newark
line
Bachman Place North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Bachman Place South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Ball Street East 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Ball Street West 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Bamford Place North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Bamford Place South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Banta Place North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Banta Place South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Beaumont Place North 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Friday
Entire length
Beaumont Place South 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Wednesday
Entire length
§ 620-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-95
1:961
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Becker Terrace East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Becker Terrace West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Bedford Terrace North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Bedford Terrace South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Beech Spring
Road
East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Wednesday
From Mill Road
to the Union line
Beech Spring
Road
West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Friday
From Mill Road
to the Union line
Beechwood
Place
East 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Beechwood
Place
West 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Bell Street North 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Monday
From the dead
end east for 35
feet
Bell Street North 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Bell Street South 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Bell Street South 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Thursday
From the deed
end east for 35
feet
Berkeley Terrace North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Monday
From Grove
Street to Ellis
Avenue
Berkeley Terrace North 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Thursday
From Eastern
Parkway to
Grove Street
Berkeley Terrace South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Thursday
From Grove
Street to Ellis
Avenue
Berkeley Terrace
[Added
11-29-1994 by
Ord. No. MC
3008]
South 7:30 a.m. to 9:15 a.m.
and 2:30 p.m. to 4:00
p.m., school days
From Grove
Street west for
180 feet
§ 620-95 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-95
1:962
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Berkeley Terrace South 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
From Eastern
Parkway to
Grove Street
Berkley Street East 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Wednesday
From Stuyvesant
Avenue to the
Maplewood line
Berkley Street West 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Friday
From Stuyvesant
Avenue to the
Maplewood line
Berkshire Place North 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
Entire length
Berkshire Place South 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Thursday
Entire length
Beverly Street Both 5:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m.,
Tuesday
From Twentieth
Street to the
Newark line
Breckenridge
Terrace
North 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
Entire length
Breckenridge
Terrace
South 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Thursday
Entire length
Brighton Terrace North 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
Entire length
Brighton Terrace South 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Thursday
Entire length
Brookside
Avenue
East 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Brookside
Avenue
West 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Bross Place North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Bross Place South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Bruen Avenue East 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Bruen Avenue West 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Bryant Court East 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
Entire length
Bryant Court East 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Thursday
From the dead
end north for 35
feet
§ 620-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-95
1:963
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Bryant Court West 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
From the dead
end north for 35
feet
Bryant Court West 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Thursday
Entire length
Buffington
Avenue
Both 5:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m.,
Tuesday
Entire length
Campfield Street East 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
Entire length
Campfield Street West 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Thursday
Entire length
Carolina Avenue East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Monday
From Orange
Avenue to the
Newark line
Carolina Avenue West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Thursday
From Orange
Avenue to the
Newark line
Chancellor
Avenue [Added
10-11-1989 by
Ord. No. MC
2889; amended
6-14-2005 by
Ord. No. MC
3295]
North 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.,
Tuesday
Entire length
Chancellor
Avenue [Added
10-11-1989 by
Ord. No. MC
2889; amended
6-14-2005 by
Ord. No. MC
3295]
South 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Chapman Place East 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Friday
Entire length
Chapman Place West 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Wednesday
Entire length
Chapman Street East 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Chapman Street West 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Chester Avenue East 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
Entire length
§ 620-95 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-95
1:964
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Chester Avenue West 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Thursday
Entire length
Chestnut Avenue East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Chestnut Avenue West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Civic Square East 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Civic Square West 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Civic Square
West [Amended
4-12-1988 by
Res. No. DP
88-0412-8]
East 8:00 a.m. to 8:45 a.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Civic Square
West [Amended
4-12-1988 by
Res. No. DP
88-0412-8]
West 8:00 a.m. to 8:45 a.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Clements Place North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Clements Place South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Cleremont
Avenue
East 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
Entire length
Cleremont
Avenue
West 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Thursday
Entire length
Clinton Avenue Both 5:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m.,
Tuesday
From Springfield
Avenue to
Newark line
Clinton Avenue
[Added
10-11-1989 by
Ord. No. MC
2889; amended
6-14-2005 by
Ord. No. MC
3295]
North 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.,
Monday
Entire length
§ 620-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-95
1:965
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Clinton Avenue
[Added
10-11-1989 by
Ord. No. MC
2889; amended
6-14-2005 by
Ord. No. MC
3295]
South 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.,
Tuesday
Entire length
Clinton Terrace North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Clinton Terrace South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Coit Street Both 5:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m.,
Tuesday
From Lyons
Avenue to Nye
Avenue
Coit Street
[Added
10-11-1989 by
Ord. No. MC
2889; amended
6-14-2005 by
Ord. No. MC
3295]
East 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.,
Tuesday
Entire length
Coit Street East 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Monday
From Nye
Avenue to
Clinton Avenue
Coit Street
[Added
10-11-1989 by
Ord. No. MC
2889; amended
6-14-2005 by
Ord. No. MC
3295]
West 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Coit Street West 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Thursday
From Nye
Avenue to
Clinton Avenue
Coit Street
[Added
5-7-2002 by
Ord. No. MC
3195; repealed
3-25-2003 by
Ord. No. 3216]
§ 620-95 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-95
1:966
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Columbia
Avenue
East 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Columbia
Avenue
West 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Coolidge Street
[Added
6-26-2012 by
Ord. No. MC
3466]
East 10:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday
Northerly from
the intersection
of Stuyvesant
Avenue and
Coolidge Street
for a distance of
210 feet
Coolidge Street North 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Coolidge Street South 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Coolidge Street
[Added
6-26-2012 by
Ord. No. MC
3466]
West 10:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday
Northerly from
the intersection
of Stuyvesant
Avenue and
Coolidge Street
for a distance of
210 feet
Cordier Street Both 5:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m.,
Tuesday
Entire length
Cornell Street North 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
Entire length
Cornell Street South 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Thursday
Entire length
Cottage Place North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Cottage Place South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Crescent Lane
[Amended
10-10-1990 by
Res. No. MC
90-1010-101]
North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Crescent Lane
[Amended
10-10-1990 by
Res. No. MC
90-1010-101]
South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Monday
Entire length
§ 620-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-95
1:967
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Cummings
Street
East 1:00 p.m. to 3:30 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Cummings
Street
West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Dassing Avenue North 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
Entire length
Dassing Avenue South 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Thursday
Entire length
Delmar Place North 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Thursday
From Western
Parkway to
Columbia
Avenue
Delmar Place North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Thursday
From Columbia
Avenue to
Carolina Avenue
Delmar Place South 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Monday
From Western
Parkway to
Columbia
Avenue
Delmar Place South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Monday
From Columbia
Avenue to
Carolina Avenue
Denman Place Both 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
Entire length
Drakes Lane East 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Drakes Lane East 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Friday
From the dead
end south for 35
feet
Drakes Lane West 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Wednesday
From the dead
end south for 35
feet
Drakes Lane West 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Dupont Place North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Dupont Place South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Durand Place East 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Durand Place West 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
§ 620-95 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-95
1:968
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Eastern Parkway East 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Thursday
Entire length
Eastern Parkway West 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
Entire length
Eberhardt Place North 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Eberhardt Place South 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Edmund Place North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Edmund Place South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Eighteenth
Avenue
North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Thursday
From Grove
Street east to
the Newark line
Eighteenth
Avenue
North 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Thursday
From Eastern
Parkway to
Grove Street
Eighteenth
Avenue
North 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Thursday
From Western
Parkway west to
the Newark line
Eighteenth
Avenue
South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Monday
From Grove
Street east to
the Newark line
Eighteenth
Avenue
South 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
From Eastern
Parkway to
Grove Street
Eighteenth
Avenue
South 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Monday
From Western
Parkway west to
the Newark line
Ellery Avenue East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Ellery Avenue West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Ellis Avenue East 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Ellis Avenue West 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Elm Place East 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Wednesday
From the dead
end north for 35
feet
§ 620-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-95
1:969
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Elm Place East 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Friday
Entire length
Elm Place West 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Wednesday
Entire length
Elm Place West 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Friday
From the dead
end north for 35
feet
Elmwood Avenue North 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Wednesday
From Springfield
Avenue to
Sanford Avenue
Elmwood Avenue North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Wednesday
From Sanford
Avenue to the
Maplewood line
Elmwood Avenue South 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Friday
From Springfield
Avenue to
Sanford Avenue
Elmwood Avenue South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Friday
From Sanford
Avenue to the
Maplewood line
Elmwood
Terrace
East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Elmwood
Terrace
West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Ens Place North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Ens Place South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Essex Street North 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Friday
Entire length
Essex Street South 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Wednesday
Entire length
Fabyan Place West 5:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m.,
Tuesday
Entire length
Fairchild Place North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Fairchild Place South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Feiner Place North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Feiner Place South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Friday
Entire length
§ 620-95 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-95
1:970
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Fern Avenue East 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
Entire length
Fern Avenue West 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Thursday
Entire length
Fifteenth Avenue North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Monday
From Grove
Street to the
Newark line
Fifteenth Avenue North 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Thursday
From Eastern
Parkway to
Grove Street
Fifteenth Avenue South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Thursday
From Grove
Street to the
Newark line
Fifteenth Avenue South 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
From Eastern
Parkway to
Grove Street
Fleetwood Place East 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Fleetwood Place West 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Florence Avenue East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Florence Avenue West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Fortieth Street North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Friday
From Chancellor
Avenue to
Springfield
Avenue
Fortieth Street North 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Friday
From Stuyvesant
Avenue to
Chancellor
Avenue
Fortieth Street South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Wednesday
From Chancellor
Avenue to
Springfield
Avenue
Fortieth Street South 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Wednesday
From Stuyvesant
Avenue to
Chancellor
Avenue
Forty-First
Street
North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
§ 620-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-95
1:971
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Forty-First
Street
South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Forty-Second
Street
North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Forty-Second
Street
South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Forty-Third
Street
North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Forty-Third
Street
South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Fourteenth
Avenue
North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Monday
From Grove
Street east to
the Newark line
Fourteenth
Avenue
North 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Thursday
From Grove
Street west to
the Newark line
Fourteenth
Avenue
South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Thursday
From Grove
Street east to
the Newark line
Fourteenth
Avenue
South 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
From Grove
Street west to
the Newark line
Franklin Terrace East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Franklin Terrace West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Frederick
Terrace
East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Frederick
Terrace
West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Fred W.
Petzinger Street
[Amended
11-23-1993 by
Ord. No. MC
2984]
North 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Fred W.
Petzinger Street
[Amended
11-23-1993 by
Ord. No. MC
2984]
South 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
§ 620-95 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-95
1:972
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Fuller Place North 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Monday
From Myrtle
Avenue to
Linden Avenue
Fuller Place North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Monday
From Linden
Avenue to
Orange Avenue
Fuller Place South 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Thursday
From Myrtle
Avenue to
Linden Avenue
Fuller Place South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Thursday
From Linden
Avenue to
Orange Avenue
Garwood Place North 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Garwood Place South 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Gifford Place North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Gifford Place North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Friday
Entire cul-de-sac
at west end of
street
Gifford Place South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Wednesday
Entire cul-de-sac
at west end of
street
Gifford Place South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Glorieux Street
[Amended
11-12-2019 by
Ord. No. MC
3715]
East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Tuesday
From Nesbit
Terrace to Park
Place
Glorieux Street East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Friday
From Krotik
Place to Park
Place
Glorieux Street East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Friday
From Nesbit
Terrace to
Stuyvesant
Avenue
Glorieux Street West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Grace Street East 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
§ 620-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-95
1:973
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Grace Street West 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. From 300 feet
south of Nye
Avenue south for
25 feet
Grace Street West 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Grant Place East 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Friday
Entire length
Grant Place West 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Wednesday
Entire length
Greene Terrace East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Greene Terrace West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Grove Street
[Added
10-11-1989 by
Ord. No. MC
2889; amended
6-14-2005 by
Ord. No. MC
3295]
East 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.,
Tuesday
Entire length
Grove Street East 6:30 a.m. to 1:00 p.m.,
Sunday
From Sixteenth
Avenue to
Roosevelt
Terrace
Grove Street
[Added
10-11-1989 by
Ord. No. MC
2889; amended
6-14-2005 by
Ord. No. MC
3295]
West 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Grove Terrace North 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Thursday
Entire length
Grove Terrace South 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
Entire length
Hardgrove
Terrace
East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Hardgrove
Terrace
West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Friday
Entire length
§ 620-95 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-95
1:974
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Harding Terrace East 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Harding Terrace West 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Harper Avenue East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Harper Avenue West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Harrison Place East 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Harrison Place West 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Hawthorne
Avenue
Both 5:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m.,
Tuesday
Entire length
Hazel Place East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Hazel Place West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Headley Terrace East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Headley Terrace West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Hennesy Place North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Hennesy Place South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Herpers Street North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Herpers Street South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Highland
Terrace
North 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
Entire length
Highland
Terrace
South 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Thursday
Entire length
Hillside Terrace East 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.
Wednesday
From Clinton
Avenue to the
Newark line
Hillside Terrace East 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Friday
From Beaumont
Place to Clinton
Avenue
§ 620-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-95
1:975
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Hillside Terrace West 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Friday
From Clinton
Avenue to the
Newark line
Hillside Terrace West 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Wednesday
From Beaumont
Place to Clinton
Avenue
Hoffman Place East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Hoffman Place West 1:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Hollywood
Avenue
North 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Hollywood
Avenue
South 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Hopkins Place North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Hopkins Place South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Howard Street East 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Howard Street West 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Isabella Avenue East 1:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Isabella Avenue East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire cul-de-sac
at south end of
street
Isabella Avenue West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire cul-de-sac
at south end of
street
Isabella Avenue West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Krotik Place East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Krotik Place West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Kuna Terrace North 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Thursday
From Chancellor
Avenue to
Berkshire Place
§ 620-95 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-95
1:976
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Kuna Terrace North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Monday
From Paine
Avenue to
Chancellor
Avenue
Kuna Terrace South 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
From Chancellor
Avenue to
Berkshire Place
Kuna Terrace South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Thursday
From Paine
Avenue to
Chancellor
Avenue
Lafayette Place North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Lafayette Place North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Thursday
From the dead
end west for 35
feet
Lafayette Place South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Monday
From the dead
end west for 35
feet
Lafayette Place South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Laurel Avenue North 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Wednesday
From Stuyvesant
Avenue to
Sanford Avenue
Laurel Avenue North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Friday
From Sanford
Avenue to the
Maplewood line
Laurel Avenue South 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Friday
From Stuyvesant
Avenue to
Sanford Avenue
Laurel Avenue South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Wednesday
From Sanford
Avenue to the
Maplewood line
Laventhal
Avenue [Added
8-6-2013 by
Ord. No. MC
3496]
Both 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Monday
From the end of
the cul-de-sac
northerly a
distance of 25
feet
Laventhal
Avenue [Added
8-6-2013 by
Ord. No. MC
3496]
Both 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Thursday
From the end of
the cul-de-sac
northerly a
distance of 25
feet
§ 620-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-95
1:977
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Laventhal
Avenue
[Amended
8-6-2013 by
Ord. No. MC
3496]
East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Monday
From Union
Avenue southerly
to a distance 25
feet from the
end of the culde-
sac
Laventhal
Avenue
[Amended
8-6-2013 by
Ord. No. MC
3496]
West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Thursday
From Union
Avenue southerly
to a distance 25
feet from the
end of the culde-
sac
Lehigh Place East 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
Entire length
Lehigh Place West 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Thursday
Entire length
Lenox Avenue East 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Lenox Avenue North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Lentz Place East 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Lentz Place West 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Leslie Place East 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Leslie Place West 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Liberty Street North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Liberty Street North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Friday
From the dead
end west for 35
feet
Liberty Street South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Wednesday
From the dead
end west for 35
feet
Liberty Street South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Lincoln Place North 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Friday
Entire length
Lincoln Place South 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Wednesday
Entire length
§ 620-95 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-95
1:978
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Linden Avenue East 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Linden Avenue West 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Lindsley Avenue East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Lindsley Avenue West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Loretto Street Both 5:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m.,
Tuesday
Entire length
Lyons Avenue
[Added
10-11-1989 by
Ord. No. MC
2889; amended
6-14-2005 by
Ord. No. MC
3295]
North 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Lyons Avenue
[Added
10-11-1989 by
Ord. No. MC
2889; amended
6-14-2005 by
Ord. No. MC
3295]
South 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.,
Tuesday
Entire length
Madison Avenue North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Monday
From
Montgomery
Avenue to Ellis
Avenue
Madison Avenue North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Friday
From Stuyvesant
Avenue to
Orange Avenue
Madison Avenue North 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Thursday
From Linden
Avenue to
Washington
Avenue
Madison Avenue North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Monday
From Linden
Avenue to
Orange Avenue
Madison Avenue South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Wednesday
From Stuyvesant
Avenue to
Orange Avenue
§ 620-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-95
1:979
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Madison Avenue South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Thursday
From
Montgomery
Avenue to Ellis
Avenue
Madison Avenue South 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Monday
From Linden
Avenue to
Washington
Avenue
Madison Avenue South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Thursday
From Orange
Avenue to
Linden Avenue
Manor Drive North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Manor Drive South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Maple Avenue East 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Monday
From Clinton
Avenue to
Springfield
Avenue
Maple Avenue East 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Thursday
From May Street
to Clinton
Avenue
Maple Avenue West 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Monday
From May Street
to Clinton
Avenue
Maple Avenue West 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Thursday
From Clinton
Avenue to
Springfield
Avenue
Maple Place East 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Wednesday
Entire length
Maple Place East 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Friday
From the dead
end north for 35
feet
Maple Place West 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Wednesday
From the dead
end north for 35
feet
Maple Place West 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Friday
Entire length
Marshall Street North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Marshall Street South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Monday
Entire length
§ 620-95 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-95
1:980
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Martin Place East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Martin Place West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
May Street
[Added
2-8-2005 by
Ord. No. MC
3285]
Both 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday
From Augusta
Street to Ball
Street
May Street
[Amended
2-8-2005 by
Ord. No. MC
3285]
North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Monday
From Grove
Street to
Augusta Street
May Street
[Added
7-13-1999 by
Ord. No. MC
3122]
South 12:00 midnight to 6:00
a.m., all days
Entire length
May Street
[Amended
2-8-2005 by
Ord. No. MC
3285]
South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Thursday
From Grove
Street to
Augusta Street
McAllister Place North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Monday
From the dead
end west for 35
feet
McAllister Place North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
McAllister Place South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
McAllister Place South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Thursday
From the dead
end west for 35
feet
McGotty Place East 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
Entire length
McGotty Place East 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Thursday
From the dead
end south for 35
feet
McGotty Place West 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
From the dead
end south for 35
feet
§ 620-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-95
1:981
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
McGotty Place West 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Thursday
Entire length
Medbourne
Avenue
North 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
Entire length
Medbourne
Avenue
South 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Thursday
Entire length
Melrose Avenue East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Melrose Avenue West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Melville Place North 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Thursday
Entire length
Melville Place South 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
Entire length
Mill Road Both 5:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m.,
Tuesday
Entire length
Momm Court North 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Wednesday
Entire length
Momm Court North 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Friday
Entire cul-de-sac
at west end of
street
Momm Court South 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Wednesday
Entire cul-de-sac
at west end of
street
Momm Court South 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Friday
Entire length
Montgomery
Avenue
East 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Montgomery
Avenue
West 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Montgomery
Avenue [Added
10-11-1995 by
Ord. No. MC
3025]
West 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.,
Monday through Friday,
inclusive, school days
From Hopkins
Place to Clinton
Avenue
Montgomery
Avenue [Added
10-11-1995 by
Ord. No. MC
3025]
West 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday,
inclusive, school days
From Hopkins
Place to Clinton
Avenue
Montrose
Terrace
North 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
Entire length
§ 620-95 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-95
1:982
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Montrose
Terrace
South 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Thursday
Entire length
Mt. Vernon
Avenue
East 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
Entire length
Mt. Vernon
Avenue
West 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Thursday
Entire length
Mt. View Place North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Mt. View Place South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Munn Avenue East 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Munn Avenue West 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Myrtle Avenue East 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Monday
From Springfield
Avenue to
Western Parkway
Myrtle Avenue West 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Thursday
From Springfield
Avenue to
Western Parkway
Myrtle Avenue
[Added
10-29-1996 by
Res. No. DP
96-1029-22]
West 7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.,
school days only
From University
Place to Delmar
Place
Naden Avenue East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Naden Avenue West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Nelson Place North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Nelson Place North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Thursday
From the dead
end west for 35
feet
Nelson Place South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Monday
From the dead
end west for 35
feet
Nelson Place South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
§ 620-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-95
1:983
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Nesbit Terrace East 5:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m.,
Tuesday
From Glorieux
Street to
Chancellor
Avenue
Nesbit Terrace East 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Wednesday
From Chancellor
Avenue to
Springfield
Avenue
Nesbit Terrace East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Wednesday
From Mill Road
to Glorieux
Street
Nesbit Terrace West 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Friday
From Chancellor
Avenue to
Springfield
Avenue
Nesbit Terrace West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Friday
From Mill Road
to Chancellor
Avenue
New Street Both 5:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m.,
Tuesday
Entire length
Newton Place East From first to 15th of
month
From the dead
end south for 35
feet
Newton Place East From 16th to end of
month
Entire length
Newton Place West From first to 15th of
month
Entire length
Newton Place West From 16th to end of
month
From the dead
end south for 35
feet
Nineteenth
Avenue
North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Monday
From Grove
Street to the
Newark line
Nineteenth
Avenue
North 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Thursday
From Grove
Street to Eastern
Parkway
Nineteenth
Avenue
South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Thursday
From Grove
Street to the
Newark line
Nineteenth
Avenue
South 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
From Grove
Street to Eastern
Parkway
§ 620-95 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-95
1:984
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Normandy Place North 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
Entire length
Normandy Place South 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Thursday
Entire length
North Maple
Avenue
East 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Monday
Entire length
North Maple
Avenue
West 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Norwood Avenue East 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
From Chancellor
Avenue to
Rosehill Place
Norwood Avenue North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Thursday
From Renee
Place to
Chancellor
Avenue
Norwood Avenue South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Monday
From Renee
Place to
Chancellor
Avenue
Norwood Avenue West 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Thursday
From Chancellor
Avenue to
Rosehill Place
Nye Avenue Both 5:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m.,
Tuesday
From Coit Street
to the Newark
line
Nye Avenue Both 5:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m.,
Tuesday
From New
Street to
Springfield
Avenue
Nye Avenue North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Monday
From New
Street to Coit
Street
Nye Avenue South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Thursday
From New
Street to Coit
Street
Oak Avenue East 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
From the dead
end north for 35
feet
Oak Avenue East 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Thursday
Entire length
Oak Avenue West 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
Entire length
§ 620-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-95
1:985
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Oak Avenue West 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Thursday
From the dead
end north for 35
feet
Oakland Street North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Oakland Street South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Oak Place East 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Wednesday
From the dead
end north for 35
feet
Oak Place East 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Friday
Entire length
Oak Place West 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Wednesday
Entire length
Oak Place West 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Friday
From the dead
end north for 35
feet
Olsen Place Both 5:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m.,
Tuesday
Entire length
Olsen Place
[Added
5-19-1990 by
Res. No. DP
90-0515-4]
North 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday,
inclusive
Entire length
Olympic Terrace East 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Olympic Terrace West 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Orange Avenue East 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Wednesday
From Clinton
Avenue to Lenox
Avenue
Orange Avenue East 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Wednesday
From Springfield
Avenue to
Clinton Avenue
Orange Avenue West 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Friday
From Clinton
Avenue to Lenox
Avenue
Orange Avenue West 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Friday
From Springfield
Avenue to
Clinton Avenue
Orange Place North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
§ 620-95 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-95
1:986
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Orange Place South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Orchard Place North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Orchard Place South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Osborne Place North 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
From Chancellor
Avenue to
Berkshire Place
Osborne Place North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Thursday
From Paine
Avenue to
Chancellor
Avenue
Osborne Place South 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Thursday
From Chancellor
Avenue to
Berkshire Place
Osborne Place South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Monday
From Chancellor
Avenue to Paine
Avenue
Paine Avenue North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Paine Avenue South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Park Place Both 5:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m.,
Tuesday
From Glorieux
Street to
Chancellor
Avenue
Park Place East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Wednesday
From Hardgrove
Terrace to
Glorieux Street
Park Place West 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Wednesday
From Chancellor
Avenue to
Springfield
Avenue
Park Place West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Friday
From Hardgrove
Terrace to
Glorieux Street
Petzinger Street
(Irvington
Avenue) [Added
2-8-2005 by
Ord. No. MC
3285]
South 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday
Entire length
§ 620-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-95
1:987
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Philip Place North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Philip Place South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Pine Place East 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Friday
Entire length
Pine Place West 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Wednesday
Entire length
Prospect Avenue East 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Wednesday
From Springfield
Avenue to
Stuyvesant
Avenue
Prospect Avenue East 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Friday
From Park Place
to Stuyvesant
Avenue
Prospect Avenue West 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Friday
From Springfield
Avenue to
Stuyvesant
Avenue
Prospect Avenue West 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Wednesday
From Park Place
to Stuyvesant
Avenue
Quabeck Avenue East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Quabeck Avenue West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Renee Place North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Renee Place South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Rich Street North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Rich Street North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Friday
From the dead
end east for 35
feet
Rich Street South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Wednesday
From the dead
end east for 35
feet
Rich Street South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Ridgewood
Avenue
East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
§ 620-95 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-95
1:988
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Ridgewood
Avenue
West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Robert Place East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Robert Place West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Rodwell Avenue North 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
Entire length
Rodwell Avenue South 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Thursday
Entire length
Roosevelt
Terrace
North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Roosevelt
Terrace
South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Rosehill Place North 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
Entire length
Rosehill Place North 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Thursday
From the dead
end west for 35
feet
Rosehill Place South 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
From the dead
end west for 35
feet
Rosehill Place South 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Thursday
Entire length
Rutgers Street East 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Thursday
Entire length
Rutgers Street West 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
Entire length
Ruth Street North 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Monday
From the dead
end east for 35
feet
Ruth Street North 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Ruth Street South 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Ruth Street South 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Thursday
From the dead
end east for 35
feet
Sager Place North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
§ 620-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-95
1:989
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Sager Place South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
St. Paul's Drive North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
St. Paul's Drive South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Sanford Avenue
[Added
10-11-1989 by
Ord. No. MC
2889; amended
6-14-2005 by
Ord. No. MC
3295]
East 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.,
Tuesday
Entire length
Sanford Avenue
[Added
10-11-1989 by
Ord. No. MC
2889; amended
6-14-2005 by
Ord. No. MC
3295]
West 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Sanford Terrace South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Selvage Street Both 5:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m.,
Tuesday
Entire length
Seventeenth
Avenue
North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Seventeenth
Avenue
South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Sharon Avenue East 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Sharon Avenue West 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Shaw Avenue Both 5:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m.,
Tuesday
Entire length
Sheridan Street East 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
From Chancellor
Avenue to
Berkshire Place
Sheridan Street East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Monday
From Paine
Avenue to
Chancellor
Avenue
§ 620-95 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-95
1:990
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Sheridan Street West 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Thursday
From Chancellor
Avenue to
Berkshire Place
Sheridan Street West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Thursday
From Paine
Avenue to
Chancellor
Avenue
Sherman Place East 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Wednesday
Entire length
Sherman Place West 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Friday
Entire length
Silkman Place North 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Silkman Place South 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Sixteenth
Avenue
North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Thursday
From Grove
Street to the
Newark line
Sixteenth
Avenue
North 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Thursday
From Grove
Street to Eastern
Parkway
Sixteenth
Avenue
South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Monday
From Grove
Street to the
Newark line
Sixteenth
Avenue
South 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
From Grove
Street to Eastern
Parkway
Smalley Terrace North 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
Entire length
Smalley Terrace South 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Thursday
Entire length
Smith Street East 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Wednesday
From Clinton
Avenue to
Orange Place
Smith Street East 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Friday
From Springfield
Avenue to
Clinton Avenue
Smith Street West 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Friday
From Clinton
Avenue to
Orange Place
§ 620-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-95
1:991
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Smith Street West 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Wednesday
From Springfield
Avenue to
Clinton Avenue
South Durand
Place
North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Wednesday
From the dead
end east for 35
feet
South Durand
Place
North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Friday
Entire length
South Durand
Place
South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
South Durand
Place
South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Friday
From the dead
end east for 35
feet
South Twentieth
Street
Both 5:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m.,
Tuesday
Entire length
South Twenty-
First Street
Both 5:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m.,
Tuesday
Entire length
South Twenty-
First Street
[Added
1-15-2008 by
Ord. No. MC
3369]
Both 3:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., all
days
From 50 feet
south of Nye
Avenue to the
cul-de-sac
Springfield
Avenue [Added
10-11-1989 by
Ord. No. MC
2889; amended
6-14-2005 by
Ord. No. MC
3295]
North 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.,
Tuesday
Entire length
Springfield
Avenue [Added
10-11-1989 by
Ord. No. MC
2889; amended
6-14-2005 by
Ord. No. MC
3295]
South 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Standard Place East 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Standard Place West 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
§ 620-95 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-95
1:992
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Stanley Street North 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Monday
From the dead
end east for 35
feet
Stanley Street North 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Stanley Street South 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Stanley Street South 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Thursday
From the dead
end east for 35
feet
Stewart Avenue East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Stewart Avenue West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Stockman Place East 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Stockman Place West 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Stratford Place North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Stratford Place South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Stuyvesant
Avenue [Added
10-11-1989 by
Ord. No. MC
2889; amended
6-14-2005 by
Ord. No. MC
3295]
East 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.,
Tuesday
Entire length
Stuyvesant
Avenue [Added
10-11-1989 by
Ord. No. MC
2889; amended
6-14-2005 by
Ord. No. MC
3295]
West 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Sunset Terrace East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Sunset Terrace East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Friday
From the dead
end west for 35
feet
§ 620-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-95
1:993
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Sunset Terrace West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Wednesday
From the dead
end west for 35
feet
Sunset Terrace West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Taft Street North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Taft Street South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Temple Place North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Temple Place South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Thirty-Eighth
Street
East 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Thirty-Eighth
Street
West 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Thirty-Ninth
Street
North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Wednesday
From the dead
end east for 35
feet
Thirty-Ninth
Street
North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Thirty-Ninth
Street
South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Thirty-Ninth
Street
South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Friday
From the dead
end east for 35
feet
Tichenor Terrace North 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Thursday
Entire length
Tichenor Terrace South 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
Entire length
Tiffany Place North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Tiffany Place South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Tremont Street North 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Friday
Entire length
Tremont Street South 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Wednesday
Entire length
Tremont Terrace North 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
Entire length
§ 620-95 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-95
1:994
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Tremont Terrace South 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Thursday
Entire length
Twentieth
Avenue
North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Twentieth
Avenue
South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Twentieth Street West 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Twenty-First
Street
East 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Monday
From Springfield
Avenue to the
Newark line
Twenty-First
Street
East 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Thursday
From Clinton
Avenue to
Springfield
Avenue
Twenty-First
Street
West 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Monday
From Clinton
Avenue to
Springfield
Avenue
Twenty-First
Street
West 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Thursday
From Springfield
Avenue to the
Newark line
Twenty-First
Street [Added
3-23-1999 by
Res. No. DP
99-0323-4;
repealed
8-12-1999 by
Res. No. DP
99-0812-8]
Twenty-Second
Street
East 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Twenty-Second
Street
West 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Union Avenue Both 5:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m.,
Tuesday
From Nye
Avenue to
Clinton Avenue
Union Avenue East 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Monday
From Nye
Avenue to the
dead end
§ 620-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-95
1:995
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Union Avenue East 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.,
4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday
From West
Denman Place to
Lyons Avenue
Union Avenue West 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Thursday
From Nye
Avenue to the
dead end
Union Place North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Union Place South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Friday
Entire length
University Place North 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Monday
From Myrtle
Avenue to
Columbia
Avenue
University Place North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Monday
From Columbia
Avenue to the
Newark line
University Place
[Amended
10-23-1990 by
Res. No. DP
90-1023-18]
South 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday,
inclusive
From Columbia
Avenue to Myrtle
Avenue
University Place South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Thursday
From Columbia
Avenue to the
Newark line
Vailsburg
Terrace
North 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Vailsburg
Terrace
South 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Vermont Avenue East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Vermont Avenue West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Victor Place East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Victor Place West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Vine Avenue East 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
Entire length
Vine Avenue West 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Thursday
Entire length
§ 620-95 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-95
1:996
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Voorhees Street Both 5:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m.,
Tuesday
Entire length
Wagner Place North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Wagner Place South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Walker Avenue North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Walker Avenue South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Walter Place North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Walter Place South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Washington
Avenue
East 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Thursday
From Springfield
Avenue to
Madison Avenue
Washington
Avenue
West 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Monday
From Springfield
Avenue to
Madison Avenue
Weber Place North 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Wednesday
Entire length
Weber Place South 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Friday
Entire length
Webster Street East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Webster Street West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Welland Avenue East 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Thursday
Entire length
Welland Avenue West 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Monday
Entire length
West Allen
Street
North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
West Allen
Street
North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Friday
From the dead
end west for 35
feet
West Allen
Street
South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Wednesday
From the dead
end west for 35
feet
§ 620-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-95
1:997
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
West Allen
Street
South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Friday
Entire length
West Avon
Avenue
North 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
West Avon
Avenue
South 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
West Denman
Place
East 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Monday
From the dead
end north for 35
feet
West Denman
Place
East 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
West Denman
Place
West 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Monday
Entire length
West Denman
Place
West 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Thursday
From the dead
end north for 35
feet
Western Parkway East 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Western Parkway West 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Westervelt Place North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Westervelt Place South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
West Grove
Terrace
North 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
West Grove
Terrace
South 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
West Nineteenth
Avenue
North 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
West Nineteenth
Avenue
South 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
West Rich Street North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
West Rich Street North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Friday
From the dead
end west for 35
feet
West Rich Street South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Wednesday
From the dead
end west for 35
feet
§ 620-95 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-95
1:998
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
West Rich Street South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Friday
Entire length
West Stratford
Place
East 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Monday
From the dead
end west for 35
feet
West Stratford
Place
East 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
West Stratford
Place
West 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Monday
Entire length
West Stratford
Place
West 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Thursday
From the dead
end west for 35
feet
West Tremont
Terrace
North 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
West Tremont
Terrace
South 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
William S. Bull
Street
[Amended
11-23-1993 by
Ord. No. MC
2984]
East 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Wednesday
Entire length
William S. Bull
Street
[Amended
11-23-1993 by
Ord. No. MC
2984]
West 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Friday
Entire length
Wills Place North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Wills Place South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Wilson Place North 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Friday
Entire length
Wilson Place South 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.,
Wednesday
Entire length
Wolf Place North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Wolf Place South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
Woodlawn Place North 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Monday
Entire length
§ 620-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-95
1:999
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Woodlawn Place South 12:00 noon to 2:00 p.m.,
Thursday
Entire length
Woolsey Street Both 5:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m.,
Tuesday
Entire length
Yale Avenue East 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Wednesday
Entire length
Yale Avenue West 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon,
Friday
Entire length
§ 620-96. Schedule III: No Stopping or Standing.
In accordance with the provisions of § 620-13, no person shall stop or stand
a vehicle between the times specified upon any of the following described
streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Ball Street [Added
6-30-1992 by Ord.
No. MC 2950;
amended
11-24-1992 by
Ord. No. MC 2964]
East 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m., Monday -
Friday
Lyons Avenue to
Stratford Place
Banta Place South 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m., Monday -
Friday
Entire length
Chancellor Avenue
[Repealed
3-23-1993 by Ord.
No. MC 2976]
Chancellor Avenue
[Repealed
1-14-1992 by Ord.
No. MC 2938]
Cleremont Avenue
[Added 6-30-1992
by Ord. No. MC
2950; amended
11-24-1992 by
Ord. No. MC 2964]
East 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m., Monday -
Friday
Welland Avenue
north for 253 feet
Clinton Avenue North 4:00 p.m. to 6:00
p.m., Monday -
Friday
Entire length
Clinton Avenue South 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m., Monday -
Friday
Entire length
§ 620-95 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-96
1:1000
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Eighteenth Avenue North 4:00 p.m. to 6:00
p.m., Monday -
Friday
Entire length
Eighteenth Avenue South 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m., Monday -
Friday
Entire length
Grove Street East 4:00 p.m. to 6:00
p.m., Monday -
Friday
Entire length
Lyons Avenue
[Amended
9-11-1990 by Res.
No. MC
90-0911-89]
North 4:00 p.m. to 6:00
p.m., Monday -
Friday
From the Newark
line to Stuyvesant
Avenue
Lyons Avenue
[Amended
9-11-1990 by Res.
No. MC
90-0911-89]
South 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m., Monday -
Friday
From the Newark
line to Stuyvesant
Avenue
Madison Avenue South 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m., Monday -
Friday
From Stuyvesant
Avenue to
Washington Avenue
Mill Road North 4:00 p.m. to 6:00
p.m., Monday -
Friday
From Union Place to
Stuyvesant Avenue
Mill Road South 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m., Monday -
Friday
From Stuyvesant
Avenue to Union
Place
Orange Avenue
[Added 12-15-1992
by Ord. No. MC
2965]
Both All From the north
curbline of Clinton
Avenue to a point
115 feet northerly
therefrom
Springfield Avenue
[Repealed
11-22-1983 by
Ord. No. MC 2718]
Springfield Avenue South 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m., Monday -
Friday
Entire length
Stuyvesant Avenue East 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m., Monday -
Friday
Entire length
§ 620-96 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-96
1:1001
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Stuyvesant Avenue West 4:00 p.m. to 6:00
p.m., Monday -
Friday
Entire length
Twentieth Street East 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday -
Friday
From Nye Avenue
south for 450 feet
§ 620-97. Schedule IV: Parking Time Limited.
In accordance with the provisions of § 620-14, no person shall park a vehicle
for longer than the time limit shown upon any of the following streets or
parts of streets:
Name of Street Side
Time Limit/
Hours Location
Augusta Street East 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From Clinton
Avenue to Nye
Avenue
Chancellor Avenue Both 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
Entire length
Civic Square Both 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From Springfield
Avenue to Clinton
Avenue
Civic Square
[Added 1-12-1988
by Ord. No. MC
2845]
East 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 12:00 midnight,
except Sunday
Entire length, except
that area designated
for diagonal parking
Civic Square
[Added 1-12-1988
by Ord. No. MC
2845]
East 9 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 5:00 p.m.,
except Saturday,
Sunday and legal
holidays
Diagonal parking
area dedicated for
employee parking
Civic Square
[Added 1-12-1988
by Ord. No. MC
2845]
West 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 12:00 midnight,
except Sunday
Immediately in front
of the Municipal
Building
Civic Square
[Added 1-12-1988
by Ord. No. MC
2845]
West 3 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 12:00 midnight,
except Sunday
Entire length, except
immediately in front
of the Municipal
Building
Clinton Avenue Both 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
Entire length
§ 620-96 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-97
1:1002
Name of Street Side
Time Limit/
Hours Location
Coit Street Both 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From Clinton
Avenue to Nye
Avenue
Coit Street East 20 minutes; 8:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From 60 feet south
of Nye Avenue south
Coit Street East 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From Nye Avenue to
Lyons Avenue
Coit Street West 30 minutes; 8:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From Ens Place to
Paine Avenue
Cummings Street Both 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From 35 feet north
of Clinton Avenue
north for 590 feet
Drakes Lane Both 30 minutes; 8:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
Entire length
Eighteenth Avenue Both 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From Myrtle Avenue
westerly to the
Newark line
Eighteenth Avenue North 20 minutes; 8:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From 42 feet east of
Isabella Avenue east
for 62 feet
Eighteenth Avenue South 20 minutes; 8:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From 90 feet east of
Twenty-Second
Street east for 64
feet
Ellis Avenue Both 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From Springfield
Avenue to Clinton
Avenue
Elmwood Avenue North 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From Springfield
Avenue to the
Maplewood line
Florence Avenue West 10 minutes; 8:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From 35 feet south
of Clinton Avenue
south for 82 feet
Fortieth Street Both 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From Wagner Place
to Chancellor
Avenue
§ 620-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-97
1:1003
Name of Street Side
Time Limit/
Hours Location
Fortieth Street East 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From Chancellor
Avenue to Boyden
Avenue
Forty-First Street Both 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
Entire length
Forty-Second Street Both 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
Entire length
Forty-Third Street Both 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
Entire length
Grace Street Both 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From Clinton
Avenue to May
Street
Grove Street East 10 minutes; 8:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From 35 feet north
of Arvene Terrace
south for 35 feet
Grove Street East 10 minutes; 8:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From 35 feet north
of Sixteenth Avenue
to 35 feet south of
Roosevelt Terrace
Grove Street East 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From Springfield
Avenue to Lyons
Avenue
Harding Terrace Both 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
Entire length
Harrison Place Both 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From Springfield
Avenue to Clinton
Avenue
Hopkins Place Both 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From Grove Street
to the Newark line
Howard Street Both 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From Clinton
Avenue to May
Street
Kuna Terrace Both 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From Berkshire
Place to Chancellor
Avenue
§ 620-97 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-97
1:1004
Name of Street Side
Time Limit/
Hours Location
Lentz Place Both 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
Entire length
Leslie Place Both 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
Entire length
Linden Avenue Both 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From 325 feet north
of Clinton Avenue to
Bell Street
Lyons Avenue North 10 minutes; 8:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From 35 feet east of
Lincoln Place east
for 179 feet
Lyons Avenue North 10 minutes; 8:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From 35 feet west of
Union Avenue west
for 55 feet
Lyons Avenue North 30 minutes; 8:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From 35 feet west of
Ball Street west for
115 feet
Lyons Avenue North 30 minutes; 8:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From Woolsey Street
to Cordier Street
Lyons Avenue South 10 minutes; 8:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From 40 feet east of
Lincoln Place east
for 90 feet
Madison Avenue Both 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From Ellis Avenue to
Montgomery Avenue
Madison Avenue North 10 minutes; 8:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From Lenox Avenue
east for 90 feet
Maple Avenue Both 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From Springfield
Avenue to Nye
Avenue
Mill Road North 10 minutes; 8:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From 35 feet west of
Nesbit Terrace west
for 68 feet
Mill Road South 30 minutes; 8:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From Nesbit Terrace
to Stuyvesant
Avenue
Montgomery Avenue Both 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From Clinton
Avenue to the
Newark line
§ 620-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-97
1:1005
Name of Street Side
Time Limit/
Hours Location
Myrtle Avenue
[Amended
11-23-1993 by
Ord. No. MC 2984]
Both 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From 525 feet north
of Springfield
Avenue to Fred W.
Petzinger Street
Myrtle Avenue West 10 minutes; 8:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From 35 feet north
of Grove Terrace to
35 feet south of
Western Parkway
Nye Avenue North 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From New Street to
Nesbit Terrace
Nye Avenue [Added
11-29-1994 by
Ord. No. MC 3009]
North 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From New Street to
Lincoln Place
Nye Avenue North 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From South Twenty-
First Street to Ball
Street
Olympic Terrace Both 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
Entire length
Orange Avenue Both 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From Clinton
Avenue to Orange
Place
Orange Avenue Both 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From Springfield
Avenue to Clinton
Avenue
Sanford Avenue Both 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From Springfield
Avenue to Elmwood
Avenue
Sharon Avenue
[Repealed
11-10-1994 by
Ord. No. MC 3007]
Sixteenth Avenue Both 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From Grove Street
to the Newark line
Smith Street East 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From Springfield
Avenue to Orange
Place
South Twenty-First
Street
East 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From Clinton
Avenue to Nye
Avenue
§ 620-97 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-97
1:1006
Name of Street Side
Time Limit/
Hours Location
Springfield Avenue Both 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
Entire length, except
as otherwise
restricted
Springfield Avenue North 10 minutes; 8:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From 71 feet east of
Civic Square east for
6 feet
Springfield Avenue North 10 minutes; 8:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From 74 feet east of
Stuyvesant Avenue
east for 43 feet
Springfield Avenue South 15 minutes; 9:00
a.m. to 4:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From 238 feet east
of Thirty-Eighth
Street east for 41
feet
Stuyvesant Avenue Both 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
Entire length
Stuyvesant Avenue North 30 minutes; 8:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From Mill Road to
Fortieth Street
Twenty-First Street Both 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From Springfield
Avenue to Clinton
Avenue
Union Avenue East 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From Berkshire
Place to Paine
Avenue
Union Avenue East 2 hours; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From 200 feet south
of Nye Avenue south
for 550 feet
Washington Avenue West 1 hour; 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From 184 feet north
of Springfield
Avenue north for 78
feet
William S. Bull
Street [Amended
11-23-1993 by
Ord. No. MC 2984]
East 20 minutes; 8:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
except Sunday
From Springfield
Avenue to Tremont
Street
§ 620-98. Schedule V: Angle Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 620-15, no person shall park a vehicle
upon any of the following streets or parts of streets except at the angle
designated:
§ 620-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-98
1:1007
Name of Street Side
Angle
(degrees) Location
Civic Square
[Added 1-12-1988
by Ord. No. MC
2845]
East 60 From 256 feet south of
intersection with Clinton
Avenue to 589 feet south
of Clinton Avenue
Civic Square West 90 Immediately in front of
the Municipal Building
§ 620-99. Schedule VA: Parking Restricted for Residents. [Added
9-25-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3178]
In accordance with the provisions of § 620-17, no person, except a resident
of the street indicated, displaying a parking permit provided by the
Township of Irvington, shall park a vehicle between the hours listed below
upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Argyle Terrace
[Added 10-14-2015
by Ord. No. MC
3555; amended
12-15-2015 by
Ord. No. MC 3556;
repealed
8-15-2017 by Ord.
No. MC 3615]
Bell Street [Added
7-8-2019 by Ord.
No. MC 3701 ]
Both 24 hours/All Entire length
Denman Place
[Added 10-11-2017
by Ord. No. MC
3621]
Both 6:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m./All
Entire length
Feiner Place [Added
12-29-2015 by
Ord. No. MC 3561]
Both 7:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m./All
Between Hardgrove
Terrace and Glorieux
Street
Glorieux Street
[Added 10-14-2015
by Ord. No. MC
3555; amended
12-29-2015 by
Ord. No. MC 3561]
Both 24 hours/All Between Krotik Place
and Stuyvesant Avenue
§ 620-98 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-99
1:1008
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Howard Street
[Added11-8-2018
by Ord. No. MC
3672]
Both 6:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m./All
From Clinton Avenue
to Nye Avenue
Kuna Terrace
[Added 12-9-2019
by Ord. No. MC
3716358]
6:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m./All
From Chancellor
Avenue to Berkshire
Place
Laurel Avenue Both 6:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m./All
Between Florence
Avenue and Franklin
Terrace
Liberty Street
[Added 10-11-2017
by Ord. No. MC
3622]
Both 7:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m./All
Entire length
Madison Avenue
[Added 11-8-2018
by Ord. No. MC
3670]
Both 4:30 p.m. to
6:30 a.m./All
From Myrtle Avenue to
Linden Avenue
Maple Avenue
[Added 9-10-2013
by Ord. No. MC
3500]
Both 8:00 p.m. and
8:00 a.m./All
Between Springfield
Avenue and Clinton
Avenue
McAllister Place
[Added 9-9-2003
by Ord. No. MC
3234]
Both 6:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m./All
Entire length
Myrtle Avenue
[Added 9-24-2002
by Ord. No. MC
3202; amended
5-17-2016 by Ord.
No. MC 3571]
Both 6:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m./All
From Springfield
Avenue to Madison
Avenue
Myrtle Avenue
[Added 9-24-2002
by Ord. No. MC
3202; amended
5-17-2016 by Ord.
No. MC 3571359]
Both 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m./All
From Springfield
Avenue to Madison
Avenue
358. Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 1-1-2020.
359. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. MC 3571 provided that all other parking on Myrtle Avenue,
from Springfield Avenue to Madison Avenue, is limited to two hours.
§ 620-99 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-99
1:1009
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Nesbit Terrace
[Added 12-29-2015
by Ord. No. MC
3559]
Both 10:00 p.m. to
8:00 a.m./All
Between Chancellor
Avenue and Prospect
Street
Newton Place
[Added 1-29-2002
by Ord. No. MC
3187]
Both 6:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m./All
Entire length
Nye Avenue [Added
6-23-2015 by Ord.
No. MC 3540]
Both 24 hours Between Union Avenue
and Lincoln Place
Olympic Terrace
[Added 11-8-2018
by Ord. No. MC
3671]
Both 8:00 p.m. to
8:00 a.m./All
Entire length
Smith Street
[Added 6-23-2015
by Ord. No. MC
3540]
Both 24 hours Between Springfield
Avenue and Clinton
Avenue
Washington Avenue
[Added 6-24-2003
by Ord. No. MC
3224; amended
5-10-2005 by Ord.
No. MC 3288]
Both 6:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m./All
Between Madison
Avenue and Springfield
Avenue
Welland Avenue
[Added 1-26-2010
by Ord. No. MC
3417]
Both 6:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Between Coit Street
and Normandy Place
West Rich Street
[Added 9-23-2003
by Ord. No. MC
3237]
Both 6:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m./All
Entire length
§ 620-100. Schedule VI: Trucks Over Certain Weight Excluded.
In accordance with the provisions of § 620-20, trucks over the specified
gross weight are hereby excluded from the following described streets or
parts of streets, except for the pickup and delivery of materials on such
streets:
§ 620-99 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-100
1:1010
Name of Street
Prohibited
Weight
(tons) Limits
Eberhardt Place 4 From Western Parkway to Myrtle
Avenue
Ellery Avenue 4 From Clinton Avenue to Laurel
Avenue
Forty-Second Street 6 From Springfield Avenue to
Chancellor Avenue
Glorieux Street 6 From Krotik Place to Stuyvesant
Avenue
Harrison Place 4 From Clinton Avenue to
Springfield Avenue
Hoffman Place
[Added 7-13-2004
by Ord. No. MC
3267; amended
10-13-2004 by
Ord. No. MC 3276]
4 Entire length (pickup and
delivery of materials outside of
Irvington is not excluded)
Laventhal Avenue
[Added 3-9-2010
by Ord. No. MC
3419]
8 Entire length
Lincoln Place 6 From Nye Avenue to Chancellor
Avenue
Madison Avenue
Bridge at the
Elizabeth River
[Added 9-29-1992
by Ord. No. MC
2959]
10 Entire length
Maple Avenue
[Added 1-24-1995
by Ord. No. MC
3012]
4 From Springfield Avenue to May
Street
Montgomery Avenue 4 From Clinton Avenue to Madison
Avenue
Naden Avenue
[Added 3-9-2010
by Ord. No. MC
3419]
8 Entire length
Nesbit Terrace 6 From Nye Avenue to Mill Road
§ 620-100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-100
1:1011
Name of Street
Prohibited
Weight
(tons) Limits
Osborne Place 6 From Chancellor Avenue to
Berkshire Place
Paine Avenue
[Added 3-23-1999
by Ord. No. MC
3111]
4 From Union Avenue to Chestnut
Street (all times)
Park Place 6 From Nye Avenue to Hardgrove
Terrace
Philip Place 6 From Chancellor Avenue to Paine
Avenue
Twentieth Street 4 From Fourteenth Avenue to
Sixteenth Avenue
Twenty-First Street 4 From Fourteenth Avenue to
Sixteenth Avenue
Union Avenue
[Added 3-23-1999
by Ord. No. MC
3111; amended
11-9-1999 by Ord.
No. MC 3132]
4 From North Union Avenue to
Chancellor Avenue (all times)
Walker Avenue 6 From Stuyvesant Avenue to the
Union line
Washington Avenue 6 From Madison Avenue to
Springfield Avenue
West Nineteenth
Avenue
4 From Western Parkway to Myrtle
Avenue
§ 620-101. Schedule VII: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 620-21, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way streets in the
direction indicated:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Adams Street West From Orange Avenue to Lenox
Avenue
Allen Street East From Orange Avenue to Lenox
Avenue
Argyle Terrace West From Grove Street to Eastern
Parkway
§ 620-100 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-101
1:1012
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Arvene Terrace West From Grove Street to Eastern
Parkway
Avon Avenue East From Linden Avenue to Western
Parkway
Bachman Place West From Orange Avenue to Lenox
Avenue
Bamford Place East From Orange Avenue to Lenox
Avenue
Becker Terrace North From Springfield Avenue to
Elmwood Avenue
Breckenridge
Terrace
West From Grove Street to Eastern
Parkway
Brookside Avenue North From Springfield Avenue to
Woodlawn Place
Bross Place East From Thirty-Eighth Street to
Durand Place
Campfield Street North From Chancellor Avenue to
Union Avenue
Carolina Avenue North Including its east and west
branches, from Orange Avenue to
the Newark line
Carolina Avenue
(east branch)
North From Orange Avenue to Newark
line
Carolina Avenue
(west branch)
South From Delmar Place to Orange
Avenue
Chapman Place North From Springfield Avenue to
Laurel Avenue
Civic Square West North From Tremont Street to Clinton
Avenue
Cleremont Avenue North From Union Avenue to Mt.
Vernon Avenue
Columbia Avenue North From Delmar Place to the
Newark line
Coolidge Street South From Harding Terrace to
Stuyvesant Avenue
Cottage Place East From Hillside Terrace to
Stuyvesant Avenue
Delmar Place West From Myrtle Avenue to Carolina
Avenue
§ 620-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-101
1:1013
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Durand Place North From Edmund Place to
Springfield Avenue
Eastern Parkway North Entire length
Ellery Avenue South From Laurel Avenue to the
Newark line
Ellis Avenue South From Eighteenth Avenue to
Twentieth Avenue
Elmwood Avenue West From Springfield Avenue to
Sanford Avenue
Elmwood Terrace
[Added 8-24-1982
by Ord. No. MC
2662]
North From Springfield Avenue to
Laurel Avenue
Florence Avenue North From Clinton Avenue to the
Newark line
Forty-First Street South From Springfield Avenue to
Chancellor Avenue
Forty-Second Street North From Chancellor Avenue to
Springfield Avenue
Franklin Terrace North From Springfield Avenue to
Frederick Terrace
Frederick Terrace South From Franklin Terrace to
Springfield Avenue
Fred W. Petzinger
Street [Amended
11-23-1993 by
Ord. No. MC 2984]
West From Myrtle Avenue to Linden
Avenue
Glorieux Street
[Added 5-23-2017
by Ord. No. MC
3606]
West From Nesbit Terrace to
Stuyvesant Avenue
Grace Street North Entire length
Grant Place North From Springfield Avenue to
Clinton Avenue
Grove Terrace East From Grove Street to Eastern
Parkway
Harding Terrace
[Added 7-14-1981
by Ord. No. MC
2633]
West From Stuyvesant Avenue to
Fortieth Street
§ 620-101 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-101
1:1014
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Headley Terrace North From Springfield Avenue to
Elmwood Avenue
Highland Terrace East From Grove Street to Eastern
Parkway
Howard Street South Entire length
Isabella Avenue South From Fuller Place to the Newark
line
Kuna Terrace
[Amended
9-13-2005 by Ord.
No. MC 3300]
South Entire length
Lenox Avenue
[Added 9-17-1981
by Ord. No. MC
2638]
South From Madison Avenue to Oakland
Street
Lenox Avenue
[Added 4-22-2008
by Ord. No. MC
3378]
North From Madison Avenue to Orange
Avenue
Lincoln Place South From Nye Avenue to Chancellor
Avenue
Maple Avenue South From Springfield Avenue to May
Street
Marshall Street West From Grove Street to North
Maple Avenue
Melrose Avenue South From Eighteenth Avenue to
Fuller Place
Montrose Terrace West From Grove Street to Eastern
Parkway
Mountainview Place West From Stuyvesant Avenue to
Hillside Terrace
Munn Avenue South From University Place to the
Newark line
Myrtle Avenue North From Western Parkway to the
Newark line
Nesbit Terrace North From Chancellor Avenue to
Springfield Avenue
Nineteenth Avenue West From Grove Street to Eastern
Parkway
North Maple Avenue South From Marshall Street to
Springfield Avenue
§ 620-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-101
1:1015
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Norwood Avenue North From Rosehill Place to
Chancellor Avenue
Oakland Street
[Added 9-17-1981
by Ord. No. MC
2638]
East From Lenox Avenue to Orange
Avenue
Olympic Terrace East From Fortieth Street to
Stuyvesant Avenue
Orange Avenue360 South From Clinton Avenue to
Springfield Avenue
Prospect Avenue East From Forty-Second Street to
Springfield Avenue
Roosevelt Terrace East From Grove Street to Twenty-
First Street
Rutgers Street South From Chancellor Avenue to
Union Avenue
St. Paul's Drive West From Nesbit Terrace to
Stuyvesant Avenue
Sharon Avenue
[Added 11-10-1994
by Ord. No. MC
3007]
South From Springfield Avenue to
Clinton Avenue
Sherman Place South From Elmwood Avenue to Clinton
Avenue
Smalley Terrace West From Grove Street to Eastern
Parkway
Smith Street North From Springfield Avenue to
Clinton Avenue
Standard Place South From Nelson Place to Twentieth
Avenue
Stockman Place North From Myrtle Avenue to West
Grove Terrace
Thirty-Eighth Street South From Springfield Avenue to
Wagner Place
Tichenor Terrace East From Grove Street to Eastern
Parkway
Tremont Terrace East From Grove Street to Eastern
Parkway
360. Editor's Note: One-way traffic on a portion of Park Place, which previously followed, was
deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 620-101 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-101
1:1016
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Twentieth Street North From Sixteenth Avenue to
Fourteenth Avenue
Twenty-First Street North From Fourteenth Avenue to the
Irvington-Newark line
Twenty-First Street South From Springfield Avenue to Nye
Avenue
Twenty-First-Street South From Nelson Place to Eighteenth
Avenue
Twenty-First Street South From Twentieth Avenue to
Eighteenth Avenue
Twenty-Second
Street
North From Seventeenth Avenue to
Sixteenth Avenue
Twenty-Second
Street
North From Springfield Avenue to
Eighteenth Avenue
Union Avenue North From Nye Avenue to Springfield
Avenue
University Place East From Carolina Avenue to Myrtle
Avenue
Valisburg Terrace East From the Newark line to Myrtle
Avenue
Vermont Avenue North From Fuller Place to the Newark
line
Vermont Avenue
[Added 12-9-1986
by Ord. No. MC
2820]
South From Madison Avenue to Fuller
Place
Washington Avenue South From Madison Avenue to
Springfield Avenue
Western Parkway South Entire length
Wills Place East From Orange Avenue to Melrose
Avenue
Wilson Place South From Lyons Avenue to Wagner
Place
Woodlawn Place West From Linden Avenue to Western
Parkway
§ 620-102. Schedule VIII: One-Way Traffic at Parking Plazas.
In accordance with the provisions of § 620-22, the following described areas
are hereby designated as one-way traffic areas in the direction indicated:
§ 620-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-102
1:1017
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Parking Plaza No. 5,
Washington Avenue
Lot
North From entrance on Clinton Avenue
in west bay, adjacent to Public-
Service Bus Terminal, to
Springfield Avenue exit
Parking Plaza No. 5,
Washington Avenue
Lot
South From entrance on Springfield
Avenue in east bay, adjacent to
Washington Avenue, to Clinton
Avenue exit
§ 620-103. Schedule IX: Through Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 620-23, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop
signs shall be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting
the through street except where yield signs are provided for in the
designations.
Name of Street Limits
Bross Place [Added 12-18-2012
by Ord. No. MC 3477]
From 38th Street to Stuyvesant
Avenue
Clinton Avenue [Added
4-14-1987 by Ord. No. MC
2826]
From Grove Street to Springfield
Avenue
Clinton Avenue [Amended
4-14-1987 by Ord. No. MC
2826]
From Twentieth Street to Grove Street
Eastern Parkway Entire length
Eighteenth Avenue Entire length
Florence Avenue From Springfield Avenue to Clinton
Avenue
Lincoln Place [Added 3-29-2011
by Ord. No. MC 3436]
From Springfield Avenue to Lyons
Avenue
Madison Avenue From Washington Avenue-Western
Parkway to Stuyvesant Avenue
Mill Road [Repealed 4-14-1987
by Ord. No. MC 2826]
Nye Avenue [Repealed
3-29-2011 by Ord. No. MC
3436]
Nye Avenue [Added 3-29-2011
by Ord. No. MC 3436]
From Lincoln Place southerly to the
Newark border
§ 620-102 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-103
1:1018
Name of Street Limits
Union Avenue-Mill Road [Added
4-14-1987 by Ord. No. MC
2826]
From Chancellor Avenue to Lyons
Avenue
Union Avenue-Mill Road [Added
4-14-1987 by Ord. No. MC
2826]
From Lyons Avenue to Springfield
Avenue
Union Avenue-Mill Road
[Amended 4-14-1987 by Ord.
No. MC 2826]
From Stuyvesant Avenue to Chancellor
Avenue
Western Parkway Entire length
§ 620-104. Schedule X: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 620-24, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections:
Intersection Stop Sign On
Augusta Street and May Street May Street
Augusta Street and Stratford
Place
Stratford Place
Ball Street and May Street May Street
Ball Street and Stratford Place Stratford Place
Brookside Avenue and West Avon
Avenue
West Avon Avenue
Buffington Street and South
Twentieth Street
South Twentieth Street
Campfield Street and Berkshire
Place
Berkshire Place
Campfield Street, Berkshire Place
and Sheridan Street
East approach of Berkshire Place
facing westbound traffic
Carolina Avenue (east branch)
Carolina Avenue (southbound) and
Orange Avenue [Added
3-10-1992 by Ord. No. MC
2943]
Carolina Avenue
Carolina Avenue (west branch)
Chester Avenue and Fern Avenue Fern Avenue
Chester Avenue and Welland
Avenue
Welland Avenue
Cleremont Avenue and Mt. Vernon
Avenue
Mt. Vernon Avenue
Delmar Place and Isabella Avenue Isabella Avenue
§ 620-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-104
1:1019
Intersection Stop Sign On
Durant Place and Bross Place Bross Place
Eighteenth Avenue and Munn
Avenue
Munn Avenue
Ellery Avenue and Laurel Avenue
[Added 5-26-1987 by Res. No.
DP 87-0526-10]
Ellery Avenue
Ellis Avenue and Hopkins Place Hopkins Place
Ellis Avenue and Twentieth
Avenue
Twentieth Avenue
Elmwood Avenue and Chapman
Place
Chapman Place
Elmwood Avenue and Elmwood
Terrace
Elmwood Terrace
Elmwood Avenue and Franklin
Terrace
Franklin Terrace
Elmwood Avenue and Sherman
Place
Sherman Place
Fifteenth Avenue and Twenty-First
Street
Twenty-First Street
Florence Avenue and Laurel
Avenue [Added 4-14-1987 by
Ord. No. MC 2826; amended
9-27-2011 by Ord. No. 3451]
The near right side of all approaches
Florence Avenue and Tiffany Place
[Added 4-14-1987 by Ord. No.
MC 2826]
Tiffany Place
Fortieth Street and Prospect
Avenue [Amended 4-24-2012 by
Ord. No. MC 3462]
Prospect Avenue and Fortieth Street
(Note: This is a designated multi-way
stop intersection.)
Fortieth Street and Wagner Place
[Added 1-28-2014 by Ord. No.
MC 3507]
Wagner Place
Franklin Terrace and Tiffany Place
[Added 12-11-1990 by Ord. No.
MC 2916]
Tiffany Place
Fuller Place and Isabella Avenue
[Added 12-11-1990 by Ord. No.
MC 2916]
Isabella Avenue
Fuller Place and Linden Avenue
[Amended 9-27-2005 by Ord.
No. MC 3304]
The near right side of all approaches
Fuller Place and Vermont Avenue Vermont Avenue
§ 620-104 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-104
1:1020
Intersection Stop Sign On
Grove Terrace and Munn Avenue Munn Avenue
Hargrove Terrace and Krotik
Place [Added 4-14-1987 by Ord.
No. MC 2826]
Krotik Place
Harper Avenue and Nesbit
Terrace [Added 4-26-2011 by
Ord. No. MC 3437; amended
4-24-2012 by Ord. No. MC
3462]
Nesbit Terrace and Harper Avenue
(Note: This is a designated multi-way
stop intersection.)
Harrison Place and Hopkins Place Hopkins Place
Hoffman Place and Webster Street Webster Street
Isabella Avenue and Delmar Place Delmar Place
Laurel Avenue and Franklin
Terrace [Added 9-27-2005 by
Ord. No. MC 3302]
Franklin Terrace
Laurel Avenue and Grant Place Grant Place
Laurel Avenue and Sherman Place Sherman Place
Lincoln Place and Yale Avenue
[Amended 7-9-1996 by Ord.
No. MC 3040]
The near right side of all approaches
Linden Avenue at Columbia
Avenue and Delmar Place
Delmar Place
Linden Avenue and Fuller Place Fuller Place
Melrose Avenue and Fuller Place
[Added 5-12-1987 by Res. No.
DP 0512-9]
Melrose Avenue
Montgomery Avenue and Hopkins
Place
Hopkins Place
Montgomery Avenue and Madison
Avenue
Madison Avenue
Mountainview Place and Hillside
Terrace
Hillside Terrace
Mt. Vernon Avenue and Berkshire
Place
Berkshire Place
Mt. Vernon Avenue and Chester
Avenue
Chester Avenue
Mt. Vernon Avenue and Cleremont
Avenue
Cleremont Avenue
Mt. Vernon Avenue and Melville
Place
Melville Place
§ 620-104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-104
1:1021
Intersection Stop Sign On
Mt. Vernon Avenue and Rosehill
Place
Rosehill Place
Munn Avenue and West Grove
Terrace [Added 4-11-1995 by
Ord. No. MC 3016]
The near right side of all approaches
Myrtle Avenue and Fuller Place Fuller Place
Myrtle Avenue and University
Place
University Place
Myrtle Avenue and West Avon
Avenue
West Avon Avenue
Myrtle Avenue and West Grove
Terrace
West Grove Terrace
Myrtle Avenue and Woodlawn
Place
Woodlawn Place
Nesbit Terrace and Glorieux
Street
Glorieux Street
Nesbit Terrace and Harper
Avenue [Amended 4-24-2012 by
Ord. No. MC 3462]
Nesbit Terrace and Harper Avenue
(Note: This is a designated multi-way
stop intersection.)
Nesbit Terrace and Prospect
Avenue
Prospect Avenue
Nesbit Terrace and Yale Avenue
[Amended 4-27-1993 by Ord.
No. MC 2977]
The near right side of all approaches
Nineteenth Avenue and Ellis
Avenue
Ellis Avenue
Nineteenth Avenue and Twenty-
First Street
Twenty-First Street
Nineteenth Avenue and Twenty-
Second Street
Twenty-Second Street
Normandy Place and Welland
Avenue [Added 4-24-2012 by
Ord. No. MC 3462; amended
11-13-2013 by Ord. No. MC
3503]
The near right side of all approaches
(Note: This is a designated multi-way
stop intersection.)
Norwood Avenue and Berkshire
Place
Berkshire Place
Norwood Avenue and Melville
Place
Melville Place
Nye Avenue and Lincoln Place
[Amended 3-29-2011 by Ord.
No. MC 3436]
Nye Avenue
§ 620-104 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-104
1:1022
Intersection Stop Sign On
Oak Avenue and Fifteenth Avenue
[Added 7-14-1987 by Res. No.
DP 0714-15]
Oak Avenue
Oak Avenue and Rodwell Avenue
[Added 8-11-1987 by Res. No.
DP 87-0811-18]
Rodwell Avenue
Orange Avenue and Fuller Place Fuller Place
Orange Avenue and Orange Place Orange Place
Park Place and Glorieux Street Glorieux Street
Park Place and Yale Avenue Yale Avenue
Prospect Avenue and Fortieth
Street [Added 6-29-2010 by
Ord. No. MC 3423; amended
4-24-2012 by Ord. No. MC
3462]
Prospect Avenue and Fortieth Street
(Note: This is a designated multi-way
stop intersection.)
Prospect Avenue and Forty-First
Street
Forty-First Street
Prospect Avenue and Forty-
Second Street
Forty-Second Street
Prospect Avenue and Thirty-
Eighth Street
Thirty-Eighth Street
Rosehill Place and Norwood
Avenue
Norwood Avenue
Seventeenth Avenue and
Twentieth Street
Twentieth Street
Sixteenth Avenue and Twenty-
First Street
Twenty-First Street
Stockman Place and West Grove
Terrace [Added 3-10-1992 by
Ord. No. MC 2943]
Stockman Place
Thirty-Eighth Street and Wagner
Place
Wagner Place
Tiffany Place and Headley Terrace
[Added 2-24-1987 by Res. No.
DP 87-0224-3]
Headley Terrace
Twenty-First Street and Hopkins
Place
Hopkins Place
Twenty-First Street and Madison
Avenue
Madison Avenue
Twenty-First Street and
Seventeenth Avenue
Seventeenth Avenue
§ 620-104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-104
1:1023
Intersection Stop Sign On
Twenty-Second Street and
Seventeenth Avenue [Added
10-16-1996 by Ord. No. MC
3044]
Seventeenth Avenue
University Place and Carolina
Avenue
Carolina Avenue
University Place and Isabella
Avenue
Isabella Avenue
University Place and Melrose
Avenue
Melrose Avenue
University Place and Munn
Avenue
Munn Avenue
University Place and Vermont
Avenue
Vermont Avenue
Vermont Avenue and Delmar Place Delmar Place
Wagner Place and Thirty-Eighth
Street
Thirty-Eighth Street
Welland Avenue and Normandy
Place [Added 4-24-2012 by Ord.
No. MC 3462; amended
11-13-2013 by Ord. No. MC
3503]
The near right side of all approaches
(Note: This is a designated multi-way
stop intersection.)
West Allen Street and Hillside
Terrace
Hillside Terrace
Western Parkway and Myrtle
Avenue
Myrtle Avenue
William S. Bull Street [Amended
11-23-1993 by Ord. No. MC
2984]
Tremont Street
Wilson Place and Bross Place Bross Place
Wolf Place and Naden Avenue Naden Avenue
Wolf Place and Quabeck Avenue Quabeck Avenue
Woodlawn Place and Brookside
Avenue
Brookside Avenue
§ 620-105. Schedule XI: Yield Intersections. [Amended 4-14-1987 by
Ord. No. MC 2826361]
In accordance with the provisions of § 620-25, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as yield intersections and yield signs
shall be installed as follows:
361. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 620-104 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-105
1:1024
Intersection Yield Sign On
(Reserved)
§ 620-106. Schedule XII: Loading Zones.362
In accordance with the provisions of § 620-26, the following described
locations are hereby designated as loading zones:
Name of Street Side Location Days/Time
Chancellor Avenue
[Added 11-9-2006
by Ord. No. MC
3330]
North Beginning 25 feet
east from the apex of
the corner of
Chancellor Avenue
and Campfield Street
and continuing
easterly 40 feet
therefrom
Monday through
Friday/7:00 a.m.
to 5:30 p.m.
§ 620-107. Schedule XIII: Taxi Stands. [Amended 3-15-2005 by Ord.
No. MC 3286; 11-8-2012 by Ord. No. MC 3474]
In accordance with the provisions of § 620-27, the following described
locations are hereby designated as taxi stands:
Name of Street Side Location
18th Avenue
[Repealed
8-11-2015 by Ord.
No. MC 3546]
Chancellor Avenue South Between Rutgers Street and Krotik
Place; from 300 feet west of Rutgers
Street for 44 feet (3 cabs)
Clinton Avenue North From 40 feet west of the west lane of
the Municipal Bus Terminal west for
40 feet (2 cabs)
Krotik Place West From 30 feet south of Chancellor
Avenue south for 70 feet (4 cabs)
Myrtle Avenue
[Added 4-5-2016
by Ord. No. MC
3565]
West From 160 feet from the intersection of
Springfield Avenue, for a distance of
approximately 90 feet (4 cabs
maximum)
Nye Avenue South From 35 feet east of Stuyvesant
Avenue east for 22 feet (4 cabs)
362. Editor's Note: See also Art. XXIII, Loading Zone on Linden Avenue, and Art. XXVI,
Procedure to Establish Commercial Loading Zones, of this chapter.
§ 620-105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-107
1:1025
Name of Street Side Location
Springfield Avenue North From 70 feet west of Grove Street
west for 22 feet (3 cabs)
Springfield Avenue
(Municipal Bus
Terminal)
South From 125 feet east of Clinton Avenue
east for 40 feet (2 cabs)
Springfield Avenue South From 125 feet west of Union Avenue
west for 22 feet
§ 620-108. Schedule XIV: Bus Stops. [Amended 10-26-1993 by Res.
No. MC 93-1026-119; 5-5-1998 by Res. No. DP 98-0505-16;
6-23-1998 by Res. No. DP 98-0623-20; 4-27-1999 by Res. No. MC
99-0427-35; 2-27-2001 by Res. No. DP 01-0227-3; 11-13-2002 by
Res. No. DP 02-1113-26; 1-28-2003 by Res. No. DP 03-0128-1;
3-25-2003 by Ord. No. MC 3215]
In accordance with the provisions of § 620-28, the following described
locations are hereby designated as bus stops and vehicles parking or
standing are prohibited.
A. Along Chancellor Avenue, eastbound on the southerly side thereof at:
(1) 43rd Street (far side), beginning at the prolongation of the easterly
curbline of 43rd Street and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(2) Krotik Place (mid-block), beginning 100 feet west of the westerly
curbline of Krotik Place and extending 135 feet westerly therefrom.
(Remove five parking spaces.)
(3) Union Avenue (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline of
Union Avenue and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
(4) Green Terrace (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline of
Green Terrace and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
(5) Chestnut Avenue (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline of
Chestnut Avenue and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
(6) Coit Street (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline of Coit
Street and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.363
(7) Between Woolsey Street and Cordier Street (mid-block), beginning
100 feet east of the easterly curbline of Woolsey Street and
extending 135 feet easterly therefrom (before rail tracks at utility
pole #60992 IN). [Added 2-15-2017 by Res. No. DP 17-0215-4]
B. Along Chancellor Avenue, westbound on the northerly side thereof at:
363. Editor's Note: Former § 192-105A(7), regarding Cordier Street, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 2-15-2017 by Res. No. DP 17-0215-4.
§ 620-107 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-108
1:1026
(1) Cordier Street (near side), beginning at the northerly side of
Chancellor Avenue starting at the easterly side of the driveway of
the corner property (northeast corner) and extending 105 feet
therefrom.
(2) Coit Street (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline of Coit
Street and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(3) Union Avenue (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
Union Avenue and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(4) Essex Street (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline of Essex
Street and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(5) Park Place (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline of Park
Place and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(6) Stuyvesant Avenue (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline
of Stuyvesant Avenue and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(7) 42nd Street (far side), beginning at the westerly curbline of 42nd
Street and extending 100 feet westerly therefrom.
(8) Campfield Street (mid-block), beginning 150 feet east of the
easterly curb of Campfield Street and extending 135 feet easterly
therefrom (between two driveways). [Added 6-10-2003 by Res.
No. 03-0610-21]
C. Along Clinton Avenue, eastbound on the southerly side thereof at:
(1) Sanford Avenue (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline of
Sanford Avenue and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
(2) Sherman Place (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline of
Sherman Place and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
(3) Stuyvesant Street (near side), beginning at westerly curbline of
Stuyvesant Street and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
(4) Civic Square (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline of Civic
Square and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
(5) New Street (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline of New
Street and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
(6) Howard Street (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline of
Howard Street and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
(7) Coit Street (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline of Coit
Street and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom. [Amended
6-23-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3404]
(8) 21st Street (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline of 21st
Street and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
§ 620-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-108
1:1027
(9) 20th Street (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline of 20th
Street and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
D. Along Clinton Avenue, westbound on the northerly side thereof at:
(1) Montgomery Street (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline
of Montgomery Street and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(2) South 21st Street (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
South 21st Street and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(3) Ellis Avenue (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline of Ellis
Avenue and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(4) Grove Street (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
Grove Street and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(5) Bruen Avenue (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
Bruen Avenue and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(6) Sharon Avenue (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
Sharon Avenue and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(7) Orange Avenue (mid-block), beginning 134 feet east of the easterly
curbline of Orange Avenue and extending 135 feet easterly
therefrom.
(8) Civic Square (far side), beginning at the prolongation of the
westerly curbline of Civic Square and extending 100 feet westerly
therefrom.
(9) Stuyvesant Avenue (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline
of Stuyvesant Avenue and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(10) Hillside Avenue (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
Hillside Avenue and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(11) Sanford Avenue (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
Sanford Avenue and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(12) Ellery Avenue (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
Ellery Avenue and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(13) Florence Avenue (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
Florence Avenue and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
E. Along Coit Street, northbound on the easterly side therefor at:
(1) Between Chancellor Avenue and Renee Place (mid-block),
beginning 180 feet south of the southerly curbline of Chancellor
Avenue and extending 135 feet southerly therefrom. [Amended
9-12-2006 by Res. No. DP 06-0912-25]
F. Along Coit Street, southbound on the westerly side thereof at:
§ 620-108 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-108
1:1028
(1) Melville Place (near side), beginning at the northerly curbline of
Melville Place and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(2) Renee Place (near side), beginning at the northerly curbline of
Renee Place and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(3) Ens Place (near side), beginning at the northerly curbline of Ens
Place and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(4) Lyons Avenue (mid block), beginning 205 feet south of the south
curbline of Lyons Avenue and extending 135 feet southerly
therefrom. [Added 6-10-2003 by Res. No. 03-0610-21]
G. Along Eastern Parkway, northbound on the easterly side there thereof
at:
(1) North Maple Avenue (near side), beginning at the southerly
curbline of North Maple Avenue extending 105 feet southerly
therefrom.
(2) Berkeley Terrace (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Berkeley Terrace and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(3) Argyle Terrace (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Argyle Terrace and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(Remove three parking spaces.)
(4) 18th Avenue (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
18th Avenue and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(5) Tichenor terrace (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Tichenor Terrace and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(Remove three parking spaces.)
(6) Grove Terrace (far side), beginning of the northerly curbline of
Grove Terrace and extending 100 feet northerly therefrom.
(Remove three parking spaces.)
(7) 16th Avenue (near side), beginning at the northerly curbline of
16th Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom. (Remove
two parking spaces.)
(8) 15th Avenue (far side), beginning at the northerly curbline of 15th
Avenue and extending 100 feet northerly therefrom. (Remove two
parking spaces.)
H. Along Western Parkway, southbound on the westerly side thereof at:
(1) 18th Avenue (near side), beginning at the northerly curbline of
18th Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom. (Remove
three parking spaces.)
§ 620-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-108
1:1029
(2) Delmar Place (near side), beginning at the northerly curbline of
Delmar Place and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom. (Remove
three parking spaces.)
(3) Woodlawn Place (near side), beginning at the northerly curbline of
Woodlawn Place and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(Remove three parking spaces.)
I. Along Ens Place, eastbound on the southerly side thereof at:
(1) Coit Street (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline of Coit
Street and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
J. Along Fuller Place, eastbound on the southerly side thereof at:
(1) Vermont Avenue (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline of
Vermont Avenue and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
(2) Linden Avenue (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline of
Linden Avenue and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
K. Along Fuller Place, westbound on the northerly side thereof at:
(1) Linden Avenue (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
Linden Avenue and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom. (Remove
three parking spaces.) (Install time ID.)
(2) Vermont Avenue (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
Vermont Avenue and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(Remove three parking spaces.) (Install time ID.)
(3) Orange Avenue (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
Orange Avenue and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(Remove three parking spaces.) (Install time ID.)
L. Along Grove Street, northbound on the easterly side thereof at:
(1) Olson Place (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Olson Place and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(2) Herpers Street (near side), beginning at the prolongation of
southerly curbline of Herpers Street and extending 105 feet
southerly therefrom.
(3) Nye Avenue (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline of Nye
Avenue and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(4) Clinton Avenue (near side), beginning at southerly curbline of
Clinton Avenue and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(5) Springfield Avenue (near side), beginning at southerly curbline of
Springfield Avenue and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(6) Marshall Street (near side), beginning at southerly curbline of
Marshall Street and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
§ 620-108 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-108
1:1030
(7) Berkeley Terrace (near side), beginning at southerly curbline of
Berkeley Terrace and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(8) 19th Avenue (near side), beginning at southerly curbline of 19th
Avenue and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(9) 18th Avenue (near side), beginning at southerly curbline of 18th
Avenue and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(10) 17th Avenue (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
17th Avenue and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(11) 16th Avenue (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
16th Avenue and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(12) 15th Avenue (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
15th Avenue and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(13) 14th Avenue (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
14th Avenue and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
M. Along Grove Street, southbound on the westerly side thereof at:
(1) 14th Avenue (near side), beginning at the northerly curbline of
14th Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(2) 15th Avenue (near side), beginning at the northerly curbline of
15th Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(3) 16th Avenue (near side), beginning at the northerly curbline of
16th Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(4) Tichenor Terrace (near side), beginning at the northerly curbline of
Tichenor Terrace and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(5) 18th Avenue (near side), beginning at the northerly curbline of
18th Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(6) 19th Avenue (near side), beginning at the northerly curbline of
19th Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(7) Berkeley Terrace (near side), beginning at the northerly curbline of
Berkeley Terrace and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(8) Marshall Street (near side), beginning at the northerly curbline of
Marshall Street and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(9) Springfield Avenue (near side), beginning at the northerly curbline
Springfield Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(10) Clinton Avenue (near side), beginning at the northerly curbline
Clinton Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(11) Nye Avenue (near side), beginning at the northerly curbline Nye
Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
§ 620-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-108
1:1031
(12) Herpers Street (near side), beginning at northerly curbline
Herpers Street extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(13) Olson Place (near side), beginning at the prolongation of the
northerly curbline of Olson Place and extending 105 feet northerly
therefrom.
(14) Arverne Terrace (far side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Arverne Terrace and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom.
[Added 12-14-2004 by Ord. No. MC 3280; amended
9-12-2006 by Res. No. DP 06-0912-25]
N. Along Lenox Avenue, northbound on the westerly side thereof at:
(1) Allen Street (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Allen Street and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(2) Bamford Place (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Bamford Place and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(3) Orange Avenue (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Orange Avenue and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
O. Along Lenox Avenue, southbound on the easterly side thereof at:
(1) Orange Avenue (far side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Orange Avenue and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(Remove three parking spaces.) (Install time ID.)
(2) Bamford Place (near side), beginning at the prolongation of the
northerly curbline of Bamford Place and extending 105 feet
northerly therefrom. (Remove three parking spaces.) (Install time
ID.)
(3) Allen Street (far side), beginning at the prolongation of the
southerly curbline of Allen Street and extending 100 feet southerly
therefrom. (Remove three parking spaces.) (Install time ID.)
P. Along Lyons Avenue, eastbound on the southerly side thereof at:
(1) Coit Street (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline of Coit
Street and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
(2) Cordier Street (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline of
Cordier Street and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
Q. Along Lyons Avenue, westbound on the northerly side thereof at:
(1) Cordier Street (mid-block), beginning 126 feet east of the
prolongation of the easterly curbline of Cordier Street and
extending 135 feet easterly therefrom.
(2) Coit Street (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline of Coit
Street and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
§ 620-108 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-108
1:1032
(3) Grove Street (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
Grove Street and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
R. Along Myrtle Avenue, northbound on the easterly side thereof at:
(1) Woodlawn Place (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Woodlawn Place and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(Remove three parking spaces.) (Install time ID.)
(2) West 19th Avenue (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline
of West 19th Avenue and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(Remove three parking spaces.) (Install time ID.)
S. Along Myrtle Avenue, southbound on the westerly side thereof at:
(1) University Place (near side), beginning at the northerly curbline of
University Place and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(Remove one parking space.) (Install time ID.)
(2) Woodlawn Place (far side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Woodlawn Place and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom.
(Remove three parking spaces.) (Install time ID.)
T. Along New Street, northbound on the easterly side thereof at:
(1) Springfield Avenue (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline
of Springfield Avenue and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(2) Springfield Avenue (far side), beginning at the northerly curbline of
Springfield Avenue and extending 100 feet northerly therefrom.
U. Along New Street, southbound on the westerly side thereof at:
(1) Springfield Avenue (near side), beginning at the northerly curbline
of Springfield Avenue and extending 100 feet northerly therefrom.
V. Along North Maple Avenue, southbound on the westerly side thereof at:
(1) Springfield Avenue (near side), beginning the northerly curbline of
Springfield Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(Remove two parking spaces.)
W. Along Nye Avenue, eastbound on the southerly side thereof at:
(1) Lincoln Place (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline of
Lincoln Place and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
(2) New Street (mid-block), beginning 55 feet west of the westerly
curbline of New Street and extending 135 feet westerly therefrom.
X. Along Orange Avenue, northbound on the easterly side thereof at:
(1) Carolina Avenue (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Carolina Avenue and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(Remove three parking spaces.)
§ 620-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-108
1:1033
Y. Along Springfield Avenue, eastbound on the southerly side thereof at:
(1) 42nd Street (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline of 42nd
Street and extending 105 feet westerly.
(2) 38th Street (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline of 38th
Street and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
(3) Sanford Avenue (near side), beginning at the prolongation of the
westerly curbline of Sanford Avenue and extending 105 feet
westerly therefrom. (Remove two parking meters 269, 271.)
(4) Stuyvesant Avenue (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline
of Stuyvesant Avenue and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
(Remove one parking meter 205.)
(5) Lincoln Place (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline of
Lincoln Place and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom. (Remove
three parking meters 163, 165, 167.)
(6) New Street (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline of New
Street and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
(7) Union Avenue (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline of
Union Avenue and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
(8) Irvington Bus Terminal exit (near side), beginning at the westerly
curb of the bus terminal exit and extending 115 feet westerly
therefrom.
(9) Bruen Avenue (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline of
Bruen Avenue and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom. (Remove
two parking meters 87, 89.)
(10) Grove Street (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline of
Grove Street and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
(11) Harrison Place (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline of
Harrison Place and extending westerly therefrom.
(12) Ellis Avenue (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline of Ellis
Avenue and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom. (Remove two
parking meters 36, 37.)
(13) Avon Avenue (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline of Avon
Avenue and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
(14) Maple Avenue (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline of
Maple Avenue and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
Z. Along Springfield Avenue, westbound on the northerly side thereof at:
§ 620-108 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-108
1:1034
(1) South 21st Street (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
21st Street and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom. (Remove
two parking meters with no heads.)
(2) Grove Street (mid-block), beginning 336 feet east of the easterly
curbline of Grove Street and extending 100 feet easterly therefrom.
(3) North Maple Avenue (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline
of North Maple Avenue and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(Remove three parking meters 72, 74, 76.)
(4) Bruen Avenue (far side), beginning at prolongation the westerly
curbline of Bruen Avenue and extending 100 feet westerly
therefrom.
(5) Myrtle Avenue (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
Myrtle Avenue and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(6) New Street (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline of New
Street and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(7) Civic Square (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline of Civic
Square and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(8) Stuyvesant Avenue (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline
of Stuyvesant Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
[Amended 6-28-2011 by Ord. No. MC 3446]
(9) Elmwood Avenue (far side), beginning at the westerly curbline
Elmwood Avenue and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
(10) Florence Avenue (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline
Florence Avenue and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(11) Frederick Terrace (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
Frederick Terrace and extending 105 feet easterly on Springfield
Avenue therefrom. [Added 6-10-2003 by Res. No. DP
03-0610-21]
AA. Along Stuyvesant Avenue, northbound on the easterly side thereof at:
(1) Beechwood Place (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Beechwood Place and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(2) Stuyvesant Avenue (far side), beginning at the northerly curbline of
Stuyvesant Avenue and extending 100 feet northerly therefrom.
(3) Mill Road (far side), beginning at the northerly curbline of Mill
Road and extending 190 feet northerly therefrom.
(4) Harper Avenue (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Harper Street and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom.
§ 620-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-108
1:1035
(5) Sunset Terrace (far side), beginning at the northerly curbline of
Sunset Terrace and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(Remove 4 parking spaces.)
(6) Chancellor Avenue (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline
of Chancellor Avenue and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(7) Prospect Avenue (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Prospect Avenue and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(8) Yale Avenue (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline of Yale
Avenue and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(9) Lyons Avenue (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Lyons Avenue and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(10) Nye Avenue (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline of Nye
Avenue and extending 135 feet southerly therefrom.
(11) Liberty Street (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Liberty Street and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(12) Madison Avenue (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Madison Avenue and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
BB. Along Stuyvesant Avenue, southbound on the westerly side thereof at:
(1) Mountainview Place (far side), beginning at the southerly curbline
of Mountainview Place and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom.
(2) Clinton Avenue (mid-block), beginning 116 feet north of the
northerly curbline of Clinton Avenue and extending 135 feet
northerly therefrom.
(3) Springfield Avenue (far side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Springfield Avenue and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(Remove one parking space.)
(4) Lyons Avenue (near side), beginning at the northerly curbline of
Lyons Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(Remove one parking space.)
(5) Wagner Avenue (near side), beginning at the northerly curbline of
Wagner Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(6) Prospect Avenue (near side), beginning at the northerly curbline of
Prospect Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(Remove two parking spaces.)
(7) Chancellor Avenue (far side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Chancellor Avenue and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom.
(Remove one parking space.)
§ 620-108 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-108
1:1036
(8) Harding Terrace (near side), beginning at the northerly curbline of
Harding Terrace and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(9) Harper Avenue (near side), beginning at the prolongation of the
northerly curbline of Harper Avenue and extending 105 feet
northerly therefrom. (Remove two parking spaces.)
(10) Mill Road (mid-block), beginning 87 feet north of the prolongation
of the northerly curbline of Mill Road and extending 105 feet
northerly therefrom.
(11) Boyden Avenue (mid-block), beginning 70 feet south of the
southerly curbline of Boyden Avenue and extending 135 feet
southerly therefrom.
(12) Berkeley Street (near side), beginning at the northerly curbline of
Berkeley Street and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
CC. Along Union Avenue, northbound on the easterly side thereof at:
(1) Campfield Street (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Campfield Street and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(2) Cleremont Avenue (far side), beginning at the northerly curbline of
Claremont Avenue and extending 100 feet northerly therefrom.
(3) Garden State Parkway exit ramp (mid-block), beginning 90 feet
south of the southerly curbline of the Garden State Parkway exit
ramp and extending 135 feet southerly therefrom.
DD. Along Union Avenue, southbound on the westerly side thereof at:
(1) Garden State Parkway exit ramp (far side), beginning at the
prolongation of the southerly curbline of Garden State Parkway exit
ramp and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(2) Lyons Avenue (near side), beginning at the northerly curbline of
Lyons Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(3) Yale Avenue (far side), beginning at the southerly curbline of Yale
Avenue and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom.
(4) Lehigh Place (far side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Lehigh Place and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom (in front
of Irvington Police South Ward Mini Precinct). [Added 12-9-2014
by Res. No. DP 14-1209-48364]
EE. Along 16th Avenue, eastbound on the southerly side at: [Added
12-14-2004 by Ord. No. MC 3280]
364. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed original § 192-105DD(4), regarding a bus stop
at Union Avenue and Chancellor Avenue.
§ 620-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-108
1:1037
(1) 22nd Street (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline of 22nd
Street and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
FF. Along 16th Avenue, westbound on the northerly side at: [Added
12-14-2004 by Ord. No. MC 3280]
(1) 22nd Street (far side), beginning at the westerly curbline of 21st
Street and extending 100 feet westerly therefrom.
GG. Along 18th Avenue, eastbound on the southerly side thereof at:
(1) Vermont Avenue (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline of
Vermont Avenue extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
(2) Isabella Avenue (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline of
Isabella Avenue and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
(3) Columbia Avenue (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline of
Columbia Avenue and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
(4) Munn Avenue (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline of
Munn Avenue and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
(5) Myrtle Avenue (far side), beginning at easterly curbline of Myrtle
Avenue and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(6) Eastern Parkway (far side), beginning at easterly curbline of
Eastern Parkway and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(7) Grove Street (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline on
Grove Street and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
(8) 22nd Street (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline of 22nd
Street and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
HH. Along 18th Avenue, westbound on the northerly side thereof at:
(1) 22nd Street (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline of 22nd
Street and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(2) Grove Street (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
Grove Street and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(3) Eastern Parkway (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
Eastern Avenue and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(4) Myrtle Avenue (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
Myrtle Avenue and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(5) Munn Avenue (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
Munn Avenue and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(6) Columbia Avenue (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
Columbia Avenue and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
§ 620-108 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-108
1:1038
§ 620-109. Schedule XV: U-Turn Prohibitions.
In accordance with the provisions of § 620-30, no person shall make a Uturn
at any of the following locations:
Name of Street Location
Clinton Avenue From the Newark line to the Maplewood
line
Springfield Avenue From the Newark line to the Maplewood
line
(7) Isabella Avenue (near side), beginning at westerly curbline of
eastern Parkway and extending 100 feet westerly therefrom.
(8) Vermont Avenue (near side), beginning at easterly curbline of
Vermont Avenue and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
II. Along South 20th Street, northbound on the easterly side thereof at:
(1) Beverly Street (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Beverly Street and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
JJ. Along South 20th Street, southbound on the westerly side thereof at:
(1) Hawthorne Avenue (mid-block), beginning 64 feet north of the
prolongation of the northerly curbline of Hawthorne Avenue and
extending 135 feet northerly therefrom.
KK. Along 40th Street, northbound on the easterly side thereof at:
(1) Stuyvesant Avenue (far side), beginning at the northerly curbline of
Stuyvesant Avenue and extending 140 feet northerly therefrom.
(2) Harding Terrace (mid-block), beginning 165 feet south of the
southerly curbline of Harding Terrace and extending 135 feet
southerly therefrom.
LL. Along 40th Street, southbound on the westerly side thereof at:
[Amended 9-12-2006 by Res. No. DP 06-0912-26; 2-26-2008 by
Res. No. DP 08-0226-6; 3-25-2008 by Res. No. DP 08-0325-11]
(1) At the intersection of Lentz Place.
(2) Harding Terrace (near side), beginning at the northerly
prolongation of Harding Terrace and extending 105 feet northerly
therefrom (at ambulatory care facility).365
365. Editor's Note: Additional bus stops were added to this section by Ord. No. MC 3390,
adopted 2-10-2009, which were subsequently repealed 6-23-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3402;
and by Ord. No. MC 3402, adopted 6-23-2009, and by Ord. No. MC 3409, adopted
11-10-2009, which were subsequently repealed 1-26-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3418.
§ 620-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-110
1:1039
§ 620-110. Schedule XVI: Prohibited Turns at Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 620-31, no person shall make a turn
of the kind designated below at any of the following locations:
Intersection
(Location) Prohibited Turn(s) Hours/Days
Clinton Avenue into
Springfield Avenue
All —
Clinton Avenue into Union
Avenue
All —
Coit Street into Lyons Avenue Left (northbound
only)
—
Durand Place and Springfield
Avenue [Added 1-29-2008
by Ord. No. MC 3371]
Left —
Florence Avenue into
Springfield Avenue
Left —
Fortieth Street into
Springfield Avenue
Left —
Forty-Third Street into
Springfield Avenue
Left —
Garden State Parkway Exit
143B into Union Avenue
Left 4:00 p.m. to 6:00
p.m./Monday - Friday
Myrtle Avenue into
Springfield Avenue
Right —
New Street into Springfield
Avenue
Left —
Parking Plaza No. 5,
Washington Avenue Lot exit
into Clinton Avenue
Left —
Parking Plaza No. 5,
Washington Avenue Lot exit
into Springfield Avenue
Left —
Springfield Avenue into
Clinton Avenue
All —
Springfield Avenue into
Myrtle Street
Left —
Springfield Avenue into New
Street
Left —
Springfield Avenue into Union
Avenue
All —
§ 620-110 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-110
1:1040
Intersection
(Location) Prohibited Turn(s) Hours/Days
Union Avenue into Clinton
Avenue
Left —
Union Avenue into Springfield
Avenue
Left —
Union Avenue into Springfield
Avenue
Right —
§ 620-111. Schedule XVII: Prohibited Right Turns on Red Signal.
In accordance with the provisions of § 620-32, no person shall make a right
turn when facing a steady red signal (stop indication) at any of the following
locations:
Location
Direction/
Prohibited Right
Turn Hours/Days
Augusta Street and Nye
Avenue
All —
Ball Street and Clinton
Avenue
All —
Ball Street and Nye Avenue All —
Coit Street and Clinton
Avenue
All —
Coit Street and Nye Avenue All —
Eighteenth Avenue and
Eastern Parkway
All —
Eighteenth Avenue and
Myrtle Avenue
All —
Eighteenth Avenue and
Western Parkway
All —
Florence Avenue and
Elmwood Avenue
All —
Madison Avenue and Eastern
Parkway
All —
Madison Avenue and Linden
Avenue
All —
Madison Avenue and Myrtle
Avenue
All —
Madison Avenue and Orange
Avenue
All —
§ 620-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-111
1:1041
Location
Direction/
Prohibited Right
Turn Hours/Days
Madison Avenue and Western
Parkway
All —
Nye Avenue and Union
Avenue
All —
Orange Avenue and Clinton
Avenue [Added 8-13-1996
by Ord. No. MC 3042;
amended 12-26-1996 by
Ord. No. MC 3053]
From southbound on
Orange Avenue to
westbound on
Clinton Avenue (CR
665)
Monday through
Friday, between 7:00
a.m. and 4:00 p.m.,
school days only
Paine Avenue and Union
Avenue
All —
Parkway Exit 143B and Union
Avenue
All —
Stuyvesant Avenue and
Madison Avenue [Added
1-9-1990 by Ord. No. MC
2898]
All Monday through
Friday, between 7:00
a.m. and 5:00 p.m.,
school days
Yale Avenue and Union
Avenue
All —
§ 620-112. Schedule XVIII: Lane Reservations.
In accordance with the provisions of § 620-33, all vehicles shall move as
described below:
Intersection
(Location) Lane Reserved Purpose
Clinton Avenue and Orange
Avenue [Added 12-29-1992
by Ord. No. MC 2969]
Southbound right
lane of Orange
Avenue
Right turns only
Lyons Avenue and Ball Street
with Cleremont Avenue
[Added 2-23-1993 by Ord.
No. MC 2974]
Northbound left lane
of Cleremont Avenue
Left turns and
through traffic only
Lyons Avenue and Ball Street
with Cleremont Avenue
[Added 2-23-1993 by
2-23-1993 by Ord. No. MC
2974]
Northbound right
lane of Cleremont
Avenue
Right turns only
§ 620-111 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-113
1:1042
§ 620-113. Schedule XIX: Snow Emergency No-Parking Areas.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 620-34, no person shall park a vehicle upon
either side of any of the streets or parts of streets thereof listed below,
whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers the
street or highway:
Name of Street Side Location
Chancellor Avenue Both Entire length
Clinton Avenue Both From Irvington Center to the
Maplewood line
Clinton Avenue [Added
4-14-1981 by Ord. No.
MC 2624]
South From Springfield Avenue to
Newark City line
Coit Street West From Lyons Avenue to Nye
Avenue
Columbia Avenue East From Delmar Place to Eighteenth
Avenue
Ellis Avenue West From Eighteenth Avenue to
Springfield Avenue
Grove Street Both Entire length
Harrison Place West From Clinton Avenue to
Springfield Avenue
Headley Terrace East From Springfield Avenue to
Franklin Terrace
Lincoln Place West From Lyons Avenue to Chancellor
Avenue
Linden Avenue East From Clinton Avenue to Delmar
Place
Lyons Avenue Both Entire length
Nesbit Terrace West From Chancellor Avenue to Nye
Avenue
Park Place [Amended
4-14-1981 by Ord. No.
MC 2624]
East From Chancellor Avenue to Lyons
Avenue
Sanford Avenue Both Entire length
Springfield Avenue Both Entire length
Stuyvesant Avenue Both Entire length
Twenty-First Street
[Amended 4-14-1981
by Ord. No. MC 2624]
West From Fourteenth Avenue to
Eighteenth Avenue
§ 620-113 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-114
1:1043
§ 620-114. Schedule XX: Speed Limits.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 620-38, speed limits are hereby established
upon the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Mt. Vernon Avenue
[Added 11-29-1994 by
Ord. No. MC 3010366]
15 From Union Avenue to Chancellor
Avenue, from 7:00 a.m. to 9:30
p.m. and 2:30 p.m. to 4:30 p.m.,
school days when children are
present
Sanford Avenue [Added
4-25-2006 by Ord. No.
MC 3318]
25 From Clinton Avenue to
Springfield Avenue
Union Avenue [Added
11-12-1986 by Ord.
No. MC 2817]
25 Between the Irvington-Hillside
corporate line and Springfield
Avenue except for a 20-mile-perhour
speed limit when passing
through the Union Avenue School
Zone during recess when the
presence of children is clearly
visible from the roadway or while
children are going to or leaving
from school during opening or
closing hours
§ 620-115. Schedule XXI: Traffic Control Signals.
Pursuant to § 620-40, traffic control signals shall be installed at the
following described intersections:
Intersections
Clinton Avenue and Coit Street at Harrison Place
Coit Street and Nye Avenue [Repealed 4-14-1987 by Ord. No. MC
2826]
Union Avenue and Yale Avenue - Mt. Vernon Avenue [Repealed
4-14-1987 by Ord. No. MC 2826]
§ 620-116. Schedule XXII: No-Passing Zones.
Pursuant to § 620-42, no-passing zones are hereby established and shall be
maintained upon the following described streets or parts thereof:
366. Editor's Note: By letter of 6-16-1995, the Bureau of Traffic Engineering and Safety
Programs determined that this ordinance ". . . cannot be approved as it is not state policy
to establish a school zone with a 15-mph speed limit."
§ 620-114 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-116
1:1044
Name of Street Sketch Dated Sketch Number
(Reserved)
§ 620-117. Schedule XXIII: Off-Street and Metered Permits for
Businesses. [Amended 10-27-1981 by Ord. No. MC 2643; 8-13-1991
by Ord. No. MC 2928; 1-9-1996 by Ord. No. MC 3030; 9-26-2000 by
Ord. No. MC 3157; 1-27-2004 by Ord. No. MC 3251; 1-29-2013 by
Ord. No. MC 3482; 6-23-2015 by Ord. No. MC 3540]
§ 620-118. (Reserved)367
A. Business District is any street and/or area containing parking meters.
B. Pursuant to the provisions of § 620-70A, off-street parking permits for
parking upon municipally operated parking plazas are described as
follows:
Name of Lot Number of Permits Rate
Nye Avenue Garage 20 $20/month
Plaza No. 3, Civic Square 35 $20/month
Plaza No. 4, Lehigh Place 39 $20/month
Plaza No. 5, Washington
Avenue
40 $20/month
Plaza No. 6, Orange
Avenue
35 $20/month
Plaza No. 7, Union
Avenue
20 $20/month
* Special exemption for Irvington residents who reside in a Business
District (See § 620-99).
367. Editor's Note: Original § 192-114.1, Schedule XXIV: Cruising, added 7-11-2000 by Ord. No.
MC 3152 and amended 9-26-2000 by Ord. No. MC 3156, was deleted 3-13-2018 by Ord. No.
MC 3635.
§ 620-116 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-118
1:1045

ARTICLE XX
Handicapped Parking Spaces in Residential Areas
[Added 11-27-1984 by Ord. No. MC 2755]
§ 620-119. Authorization to establish spaces. [Amended 1-12-2016
by Ord. No. MC 3562]
The Director of Public Safety is hereby authorized and directed to establish
restrictive parking spaces in front of residences occupied by handicapped
persons, provided that:
§ 620-120. Issuance of permit. [Amended 1-12-2016 by Ord. No. MC
3562]
The Director of Public Safety shall issue a permit to identify the
handicapped person's vehicle and the location wherein it is to be parked.
Such permits shall only be issued to persons who can prove ownership
and operation of the motor vehicle and residency at the location specified
therein. The permit shall meet the requirements of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.7.
§ 620-121. Permit fee for handicapped parking space.
The fee for such permit shall be $75.
§ 620-122. Posting of signs; permit. [Amended 5-16-2006 by Res.
No. DP 06-0516-11]
When a restricted parking space is established, the Township shall cause
the same to be posted with an appropriate sign upon which there shall
be written the words "Parking for Disabled Resident Only." An Irvington
Police-provided identification number shall also be included. The Irvington
Police shall issue a permit to a resident who qualifies for a restrictive
parking space under § 620-119 that includes the identification number that
is assigned to the posted sign.
A. Such persons are holders of current drivers' licenses issued by the
State of New Jersey.
B. Such persons have been issued special vehicle identification cards by
the Division of Motor Vehicles pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
39:4-205.
C. The motor vehicles to be parked in such spaces are equipped with such
special attachments and devices as the New Jersey State Director of the
Division of Motor Vehicles may deem necessary to provide for the safe
operation thereof by such persons.
D. Such parking is not otherwise prohibited and such restricted space will
not interfere with the normal flow of traffic.
§ 620-119 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-123
1:1047
§ 620-123. Parking restricted. [Amended 5-16-2006 by Res. No. DP
06-0516-11]
Upon the posting of the sign provided for in § 620-122 hereof, no person
shall park or cause to be parked any vehicle for which a valid permit with
the matching identification number has not been issued and which does not
have such permit properly displayed as provided herein.
§ 620-124. Spaces established. [Added 11-12-1986 by Res. No. DP
86-1112-17; last amended 10-28-2019 by Res. No. DP 19-1028-32]
The following locations are hereby established as restricted parking spaces
for handicapped residents:
Location of Restricted Parking Space
14th Avenue
386 14th Avenue
445 14th Avenue
15th Avenue
705 15th Avenue
18th Avenue
708 18th Avenue
712 18th Avenue
740 18th Avenue
19th Avenue
132 19th Avenue, 2nd floor
S. 20th Street
551 S. 20th Street
21st Street
97 21st Street
S. 21st Street
504 S. 21st Street
22nd Street
208 22nd Street
38th Street
56 38th Street
39th Street
18 39th Street
52 39th Street
58 39th Street
40th Street
§ 620-123 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-124
1:1048
Location of Restricted Parking Space
60 40th Street
87 40th Street
240 40th Street
246 40th Street
41st Street
68 41st Street
42nd Street
15 42nd Street
35 42nd Street
36 42nd Street
43rd Street
14 43rd Street
Adams Street
40 Adams Street
50 Adams Street
Allen Street
46 Allen Street
Argyle Terrace
18 Argyle Terrace
Augusta Street
60 Augusta Street
Avon Avenue
519 Avon Avenue
Berkeley Terrace
2 Berkeley Terrace
Berkshire Place
21 Berkshire Place
44 Berkshire Place, first floor
48 Berkshire Place, second floor
68 Berkshire Place
Breckenridge Terrace
50 Breckenridge Terrace
51 Breckenridge Terrace
Brookside Avenue
125 Brookside Avenue
160 Brookside Avenue
§ 620-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-124
1:1049
Location of Restricted Parking Space
Bross Place
16 Bross Place
57 Bross Place
Bruen Avenue
38 Bruen Avenue
Campfield Street
52 Campfield Street
58 Campfield Street
94 Campfield Street
Carolina Avenue
141 Carolina Avenue (University Place side)
189 Carolina Avenue
Chapman Place
2 Chapman Place
2 Chapman Place, #30
Chester Avenue
58 Chester Avenue
Chestnut Avenue
71 Chestnut Avenue
119 Chestnut Avenue
127 Chestnut Avenue (sign to be posted across from 117 Chestnut
Avenue)
Clinton Avenue
1133 Clinton Avenue
1311 Clinton Avenue
Coit Street
38 Coit Street
51 Coit Street
53 Coit Street
57 Coit Street
61 Coit Street
65 Coit Street
Columbia Avenue
267 Columbia Avenue
Coolidge Street
71 Coolidge Street
§ 620-124 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-124
1:1050
Location of Restricted Parking Space
75 Coolidge Street
83 Coolidge Street
119 Coolidge Street
Cummings Street
19 Cummings Street
61 Cummings Street
64 Cummings Street
87 Cummings Street
96 Cummings Street
97 Cummings Street
109 Cummings Street
118 Cummings Street
Dupont Place
10 Dupont Place
Durand Place
56 Durand Place
59 Durand Place
Eastern Parkway
166-68 Eastern Parkway
Ellery Avenue
67 Ellery Avenue
85 Ellery Avenue
87 Ellery Avenue
Ellis Avenue
18 Ellis Avenue
98 Ellis Avenue
225 Ellis Avenue
255 Ellis Avenue
Elmwood Avenue
38 Elmwood Avenue
Elmwood Terrace
3 Elmwood Terrace
35 Elmwood Terrace, Apt. 1
Feiner Place
3 Feiner Place
5 Feiner Place
§ 620-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-124
1:1051
Location of Restricted Parking Space
20 Feiner Place
32 Feiner Place
Fern Avenue
31 Fern Avenue
Fleetwood Place
25 Fleetwood Place
Florence Avenue
49 Florence Avenue
Franklin Terrace
24 Franklin Terrace
34 Franklin Terrace
Frederick Terrace
13 Frederick Terrace
19 Frederick Terrace
Fuller Place
74 Fuller Place
90 Fuller Place
Garwood Place
10 Garwood Place
Grace Street
14 Grace Street
16 Grace Street
Grant Place
30 Grant Place
36 Grant Place
37 Grant Place
40 Grant Place
Grove Street
935 Grove Street
1082 Grove Street
Harper Avenue
65 Harper Avenue
69 Harper Avenue
83 Harper Avenue
169 Harper Avenue
Harrison Place
§ 620-124 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-124
1:1052
Location of Restricted Parking Space
54 Harrison Place, second floor
Herpers Street
12 Herpers Street
Highland Terrace
9 Highland Terrace
32 Highland Terrace
34 Highland Terrace
128 Hillside Terrace
137 Hillside Terrace
151 Hillside Terrace
176 Hillside Terrace
Hopkins Place
46 Hopkins Place
95 Hopkins Place
97 Hopkins Place
Howard Street
14 Howard Street
77 Howard Street
97 Howard Street
103 Howard Street
Isabella Avenue
185 Isabella Avenue
261 Isabella Avenue
278 Isabella Avenue
311 Isabella Avenue
387 Isabella Avenue
Kuna Terrace
12 Kuna Terrace
22 Kuna Terrace
Lafayette Place
10 Lafayette Place
18 Lafayette Place
20 Lafayette Place
Laurel Avenue
9 Laurel Avenue
12 Laurel Avenue
§ 620-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-124
1:1053
Location of Restricted Parking Space
Laventhal Avenue
12 Laventhal Avenue
43 Laventhal Avenue
46 Laventhal Avenue
61 Laventhal Avenue
63 Laventhal Avenue
Lenox Avenue
43 Lenox Avenue
55 Lenox Avenue
85 Lenox Avenue
133 Lenox Avenue
Liberty Street
6 Liberty Street
18 Liberty Street
Lincoln Place
73 Lincoln Place
115 Lincoln Place
138 Lincoln Place
140 Lincoln Place
217 Lincoln Place
255 Lincoln Place
269 Lincoln Place
Linden Avenue
59 Linden Avenue
76 Linden Avenue
116 Linden Avenue
125 Linden Avenue
Lyons Avenue
630 Lyons Avenue, Apt. 4
Madison Avenue
114 Madison Avenue
Maple Avenue
16 Maple Avenue
24 Maple Avenue
40 Maple Avenue
62 Maple Avenue
§ 620-124 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-124
1:1054
Location of Restricted Parking Space
74 Maple Avenue
133 Maple Avenue
Maple Place
22 Maple Place
27 Maple Place
Martin Place
31 Martin Place
41 Martin Place
McAllister Place
9 McAllister Place
Melrose Avenue
72 Melrose Avenue
135 Melrose Avenue
150 Melrose Avenue
Melville Place
30 Melville Place
Mill Road
62 Mill Road
88 Mill Road
Montrose Avenue
27 Montrose Avenue
Montrose Terrace
14-16 Montrose Terrace
18 Montrose Terrace
50 Montrose Terrace
Munn Avenue
169 Munn Avenue
194 Munn Avenue
240 Munn Avenue
Myrtle Avenue
28-30 Myrtle Avenue
52 Myrtle Avenue
61 Myrtle Avenue
104 Myrtle Avenue
133 1/2 Myrtle Avenue
178 Myrtle Avenue
§ 620-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-124
1:1055
Location of Restricted Parking Space
211 Myrtle Avenue
241 Myrtle Avenue
309 Myrtle Avenue
362 Myrtle Avenue
Nesbit Terrace
72-74 Nesbit Terrace
189 Nesbit Terrace
209 Nesbit Terrace
272 Nesbit Terrace
Newton Place
40 Newton Place
65 Newton Place
Norwood Avenue
41 Norwood Avenue
49 Norwood Avenue
79 Norwood Avenue
Nye Avenue
623 Nye Avenue
Oak Avenue
59 Oak Avenue
Olympic Terrace
27 Olympic Terrace
51 Olympic Terrace
53 Olympic Terrace
Orange Avenue
23 Orange Avenue
25 Orange Avenue
83 Orange Avenue
137 Orange Avenue
Osborne Place
15 Osborne Place
56 Osborne Place
Paine Avenue
7 Paine Avenue
13 Paine Avenue
21 Paine Avenue
§ 620-124 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-124
1:1056
Location of Restricted Parking Space
131 Paine Avenue
Park Place
72-74 Park Place
100 Park Place
105 Park Place
142 Park Place
188 Park Place
247 Park Place
Philip Place
51 Philip Place
Prospect Avenue
86 Prospect Avenue
104 Prospect Avenue
159 Prospect Avenue, Apt. 2
Quabeck Avenue
80 Quabeck Avenue
Rich Street
26 Rich Street
Robert Place
28-30 Robert Place
Rosehill Place
97 Rosehill Place
99 Rosehill Place
110 Rosehill Place
Rutgers Street
10 Rutgers Street
57 Rutgers Street
65 Rutgers Street
Sager Place
19 Sager Place
Sanford Avenue
1012 Sanford Avenue
Sanford Terrace
25 Sanford Terrace
Sheridan Street
71 Sheridan Street
§ 620-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-124
1:1057
Location of Restricted Parking Space
Sherman Place
15 Sherman Place
20 Sherman Place
54 Sherman Place
Silkman Place
14 Silkman Place
South Durand Avenue
107 South Durand Avenue
Stockman Place
18 Stockman Place
20 Stockman Place
Stuyvesant Avenue
471 Stuyvesant Avenue
473 Stuyvesant Avenue
879 Stuyvesant Avenue
Sunset Terrace
24 Sunset Terrace
Temple Place
33 Temple Place
Union Avenue
352 Union Avenue
Union Place
4 Union Place
Vermont Avenue
200 Vermont Avenue
262 Vermont Avenue
296 Vermont Avenue
320 Vermont Avenue
Vine Avenue
28 Vine Avenue
Wagner Place
87 Wagner Place
Walker Avenue
1815 Walker Avenue
1817 Walker Avenue
Washington Avenue
§ 620-124 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-124
1:1058
Location of Restricted Parking Space
112 Washington Avenue
114 Washington Avenue
Welland Avenue
28 Welland Avenue
36 Welland Avenue
West Allen Street
106 West Allen Street
Western Parkway
23 Western Parkway, 1st Floor
West Rich Street
86 West Rich Street
Wilson Place
36 Wilson Place
71 Wilson Place
97 Wilson Place
Yale Avenue
35 Yale Avenue
36 Yale Avenue
§ 620-125. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-13-2018 by Ord.
No. MC 3635]
Any person parking a motor vehicle in a restricted parking space without
a special vehicle identification card shall be liable to a fine of $250 for the
first offense and, for subsequent offenses, a fine of at least $250 and up to
90 days' community service on such terms and in such form as the court
shall deem appropriate, or any combination thereof.
§ 620-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-125
1:1059

ARTICLE XXI
Handicapped Parking Areas
[Added 11-27-1984 by Ord. No. MC 2756]
§ 620-126. Areas established.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.5, the following locations
are hereby designated as restricted parking spaces for use by persons
who have been issued special identification cards by the Division of Motor
Vehicles pursuant to the provisions of Section 2 of P.L. 1949, c. 280 (N.J.S.A.
39:4-205), when using a motor vehicle on which is displayed a certificate
for which a special vehicle identification card has been issued, pursuant to
Section 3 of said law (N.J.S.A. 39:4-206):
Name of Street Side Location
38th Street [Added
5-6-2008 by Ord. No.
MC 3380]
North Starting from a point 32 feet south
from the apex of the northwest
corner of Springfield Avenue and
38th Street and continuing south
from said point to a point 24 feet
south thereof
Civic Square West Beginning at a point measured
along the curb 417 feet south of
the southerly curbline of Clinton
Avenue and extending from said
point to a point 24 feet south
thereof
Civic Square West
Employee Parking Lot
[Added 4-24-2007 by
Ord. No. MC 3345]
Southerly
lot, north
side
Specifically in the area of the
entrance to the Juvenile Aid
Bureau (2 spaces)
§ 620-126 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-126
1:1061

ARTICLE XXII
Parking in Housing Complexes
[Added 7-12-1994 by Ord. No. MC 3000]368
§ 620-127. Obstructing common areas prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle in a manner so
as to impede or obstruct access to or passage through the common area
designated for vehicular use in any parking lot of any housing complex in
the Township of Irvington with 20 or more units.
§ 620-128. Notification of police; towing of vehicle.
Violation of § 620-127 of this article will entitle any property owner or
manager to notify the police, and the motor vehicle in question will be towed
at the owner's expense.
§ 620-129. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMON AREAS — That portion of a parking lot which is not designated
with painted markings outlining the actual spaces for the parking of motor
vehicles and that area through which vehicles must traverse in order to
reach the parking spaces.
368. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 604, Towing, Art. III, Vehicles Parked Illegally at Apartment
Complexes.
§ 620-127 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-129
1:1063

ARTICLE XXIII
Loading Zone on Linden Avenue369
[Added 9-24-1996 by Ord. No. MC 3043]
§ 620-130. Loading zone designated; parking permit required.
The area on the west side of Linden Avenue presently occupied by Meters
3, 5 and 7 is hereby designated as a loading zone and shall be regulated
and administered by Jewish Federation Towers. No one shall stop or stand
without a permit from Jewish Federation Towers. Violators shall be towed.
§ 620-131. Signage.
Signs shall be placed at the start and at the end of this zone of sufficient
size to inform anyone who stops or stands that he or she needs a permit to
park and that he or she will be towed if he or she parks or stands.
§ 620-132. Yearly fee paid by Jewish Federation Towers.
Jewish Federation Towers shall pay the Township $1,200 per year, due
annually, to offset the Township's lost revenue.
369. Editor's Note: See also Art. XXVI, Procedure to Establish Commercial Loading Zones, of
this chapter.
§ 620-130 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-132
1:1065

ARTICLE XXIV
Safety Work Zone for Construction
[Added 5-7-2002 by Ord. No. MC 3193]
§ 620-133. Adoption of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices for Streets and Highways.
§ 620-134. Preconstruction meetings. [Amended 10-14-2015 by
Ord. No. MC 3553]
It shall be the responsibility of the person, contractor, or in the case of
public utility, as required under the public utility agreement, wishing to
conduct work on, under or above the roadway to contact the Traffic Division
of the Irvington Public Safety Department in order to arrange a
preconstruction meeting at least three business days in advance of any
construction in order to submit plans for the safe movement of traffic
and pedestrians during such period of construction work. Any person,
contractor or utility who fails to comply with this section three business
days prior to the start of such work or whose plans are not approved by the
Traffic Division of the Irvington Public Safety Department is in violation of
this article.
§ 620-135. Hazardous conditions. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No.
MC 3553]
The person, contractor or utility shall provide the Public Safety Department
with at least two emergency contact phone numbers to be called in case of
emergency problems at the construction or maintenance site. The contact
numbers are to be supplied prior to the start of any work. If for any reason
the emergency contact person does not respond to the call from the Public
A. The Council hereby finds and declares that problems of traffic control
occur when traffic must be moved through or around street
construction, maintenance operations and utility work, above and
below ground, which requires blocking the roadway and obstructing
the normal flow of traffic; also that such obstructions are or can become
dangerous when not properly controlled. In order to better promote the
public health, safety, peace and welfare, it is necessary to establish
controls and regulations directed to the safety and expeditious
movement of traffic through construction and maintenance zones and
to provide safety for the work force performing these operations.
B. The Township of Irvington in the County of Essex in the State of New
Jersey does hereby adopt the current Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices, hereafter known as the "MUTCD," except as hereby
supplemented and amended, as it controls and regulates whenever
construction maintenance operation utility work obstructs the normal
flow of traffic. Any person, contractor or utility that fails to comply with
the provisions of the MUTCD while performing such work is in violation
of this article.
§ 620-133 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-135
1:1067
Safety Department to correct such hazardous conditions, a reasonable fee
for such emergency services by the Township shall be charged to the
person, contractor or utility for such conditions, and the site will be shut
down until such conditions are alleviated.
§ 620-136. Road closings and detours. [Amended 10-14-2015 by
Ord. No. MC 3553]
Road closings and/or detours shall not be permitted unless approved by the
Irvington Public Safety Department.
§ 620-137. Traffic directors (police officers). [Amended 10-14-2015
by Ord. No. MC 3553]
Traffic directors (police officers) shall be posted at all construction or
maintenance sites when determined by the Irvington Public Safety
Department that they are necessary to provide for the safety and
expeditious movement of traffic. Traffic directors shall be visible at all times
when posted at construction or maintenance sites except where otherwise
required by the nature of the construction or maintenance site.
§ 620-138. Authority to stop work. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord.
No. MC 3553]
The Irvington Public Safety Department shall have the authority to stop
work, including the removal of equipment and vehicles, stored materials
within the street right-of-way, backfilling of open excavations and/or other
related work, in order to abate any nuisance and/or safety hazard or for any
violation of this article.
§ 620-139. Site preparation.
§ 620-140. Emergency repair work.
A. It is to be expressly understood that no materials, vehicles or
equipment are to be placed in the roadway or sidewalk area until all
construction signs, lights, devices and pavement markings are
installed.
B. At the conclusion of each day's work, the work area shall be left in a
safe and orderly fashion. In the event that the work area is not left in a
safe and orderly fashion, the Township shall contact the person,
contractor or utility to remedy the condition. In the event that the
person, contractor or utility fails to promptly respond, the Township
reserves the right to remedy the condition at the cost and expense of
the person, contractor or utility.
A. In case of emergency repair work where construction maintenance
operations or emergency utility work must be performed that will
obstruct, interfere or detour traffic on any roadway in the Township, the
person, contractor or utility performing such operation shall notify the
§ 620-135 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-140
1:1068
§ 620-141. Hours of operation. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No.
MC 3553; 1-12-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3562]
There shall be no construction, maintenance operation or utility work on
any roadway in the Township before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m.
This time limit may be adjusted to permit work prior to 9:00 a.m. or after
4:00 p.m. by the officer in charge of the Traffic Bureau of the Irvington
Public Safety Department or the Director of Public Safety or his designee. If
it is determined that the construction or maintenance operations if started
prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. would substantially delay traffic or
cause a safety or health hazard, the work shall then be permitted only
between 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
§ 620-142. Violations and penalties.370
Any person, contractor or utility who commits a violation of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter
1, Article III, Penalties, of the Township Code.
Irvington Public Safety Department of such emergency operations. The
person, contractor or utility shall disclose the nature of the emergency
and the location and hours of operation. [Amended 10-14-2015 by
Ord. No. MC 3553]
B. All emergency construction and maintenance operations shall be
performed with full regard to safety and to keep traffic interference to
an absolute minimum. During such emergency repair work, the person,
contractor or utility shall comply with the provisions of the MUTCD
while performing such emergency repair work.
370. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 620-140 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-142
1:1069

ARTICLE XXV
Pocket Bikes
[Added 1-11-2005 by Ord. No. MC 3284]
§ 620-143. Pocket bikes prohibited in certain areas.
No person shall drive a pocket bike on any public street, road, highway or
property in the Township of Irvington.
§ 620-144. Violations and penalties.371
Any person found violating § 620-143 above shall cause the following to
occur: the pocket bike may be subject to confiscation by the local
authorities, and the person subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter 1,
Article III, Penalties, of the Township Code.
§ 620-145. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
POCKET BIKE — Any vehicle powered by two-stroke gas engines or electric
motors that can be recharged by plugging them into wall sockets.
Furthermore, they can be scaled-down motorcycle-type vehicles which fail
to meet certain safety regulations such as headlight height from the ground,
taillights, brake lights, etc.
371. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 620-143 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-145
1:1071

ARTICLE XXVI
Procedure to Establish Commercial Loading Zones
[Added 5-9-2017 by Ord. No. MC 3604; amended 9-12-2017 by Ord.
No. MC 3617]
§ 620-146. Recommendation of Township Engineer.
The Township Engineer may recommend to the Municipal Council the
establishment of a curb loading zone upon the special request of any
applicant when, on the basis of a site inspection conducted by the Township
Engineer, it is determined that such curb loading zone is necessary and
justified by traffic conditions at the proposed location. The days and hours
for use of the curb loading zone will be recommended to the Municipal
Council by the Township Engineer based upon the needs of the applicant
and the current parking restrictions.
§ 620-147. Application for curb loading zone permit; fees.
A. Any property owner and/or tenant shall be eligible to apply for a curb
loading zone on an application form provided by the Township
Engineer. The following information shall be printed on the application
and supplied by the applicant to the Township: applicant name;
company/business name; address; telephone number; location of the
property; indication of access to driveway, loading dock, garage or
parking lot; indication of type of vehicles making deliveries; indication
of proposed days and hours of deliveries; and a signed and dated
declaration by the applicant that he/she has not willingly or knowingly
made a false statement or given information which they know to be
false.
B. Any applicant who requests a curb loading zone that is not in a metered
parking area shall make written application to the Township Engineer.
The Township Engineer shall make a recommendation to the Municipal
Council, and the Municipal Council shall approve the application by a
majority vote. After approval of such application by the Municipal
Council and a payment of $150 by check or money order for each 20
linear feet of curb parking space or fraction thereof to the Township, a
permit for such curb loading zone shall be issued subject to the
provisions of § 620-146 above. The permit shall contain such conditions
as the Township Engineer may prescribe and shall be valid for a period
one year from issuance. Thereafter, the permit shall be reissued
annually upon payment of a renewal fee of $150 by check or money
order for each 20 linear feet of curb parking space or fraction thereof.
The permit for such curb loading zone shall be transferable only to a
purchaser of the property or the successor, assignee or subtenant of
any tenant to whom the permit was originally issued.
C. Any applicant who requests a curb loading zone in a metered parking
area shall make written application to the Township Engineer. The
Township Engineer shall make a recommendation to the Municipal
§ 620-146 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-147
1:1073
Council, and the Municipal Council shall approve the application by
a majority vote. After approval of such application by the Municipal
Council and a payment of $400 by check or money order for each
metered parking space or fraction thereof included in the curb loading
zone, a permit for such curb loading zone shall be issued subject to the
provisions of § 620-146 above. The permit shall contain such conditions
as the Township Engineer may prescribe and shall be valid for one year
from issuance. The permit will be reissued annually upon payment of a
renewal fee of $400 by check or money order for each metered parking
space or fraction thereof. The permit for such curb loading zone shall
be transferable only to a purchaser of the property or the successor,
assignee or subtenant of any tenant to whom the permit was originally
issued.
D. Any applicant who requests a curb loading zone which is not in a
metered parking area and is located in the Irvington Center area
bounded on Springfield Avenue shall make written application to the
Township Engineer. The Township Engineer shall make a
recommendation to the Municipal Council, and the Municipal Council
shall approve the application by a majority vote. After approval of such
application by the Municipal Council and a payment of $250 by check or
money order to the Township for each 20 feet of curb parking space or
fraction thereof, a permit for such curb loading zone shall be issued
subject to the provisions of § 620-146 above. The permit shall contain
such conditions as the Township Engineer may prescribe and shall be
valid for one year. The permit will be reissued annually upon payment of
a renewal fee of $250 by check or money order for each 20 feet of curb
parking space or fraction thereof. The permit for such curb loading
zone shall be transferable only to a purchaser of the property or the
successor, assignee or subtenant of any tenant to whom the permit was
originally issued.
E. Any person/business who requests a curb loading zone in a parking
metered area and located in the Irvington Center area on Springfield
Avenue shall make written application to the Township Engineer. The
Township Engineer shall make a recommendation to the Municipal
Council, and the Municipal Council shall approve the application by a
majority vote. After approval of such application by the Municipal
Council and a payment of $600 by check or money order to the
Township for each metered parking space or fraction thereof included
in the curb loading, a permit for such curb loading zone may be issued
subject to the provisions of § 620-146 above. The permit shall contain
such conditions as the Township Engineer may prescribe and shall be
valid for one year from issuance. The permit will be reissued annually
upon payment of a renewal fee of $600 by check or money order for
each metered parking space or fraction thereof. The permit for such
curb loading zone shall be transferable only to a purchaser of the
property or the successor, assignee or subtenant of any tenant to whom
the permit was originally issued.
§ 620-147 IRVINGTON CODE § 620-148
1:1074
§ 620-148. Parking time limited.
Vehicles loading, unloading, delivering or picking up freight or materials
shall be permitted to park in loading zones not to exceed one hour, and
vehicles shall not be left unattended.
§ 620-149. Removal of loading zone.
With the consent of Council, the Township Engineer may terminate any curb
loading zone permit and remove the signs erected if payment of the annual
fee shall be 30 days in arrears, or whenever public convenience or necessity
warrants such action; provided that 30 days' notice for such intended action
shall be given to the person/business to whom the permit has been issued.
§ 620-150. Government buildings, schools and hospitals.
No fee shall be required for the designation of a curb loading zone at any
government building, school or hospital.
§ 620-151. Approval of project.
For a curb loading zone involving new construction, the approval of the
loading zone is contingent upon Planning/Zoning Board approval of the
project being constructed. Planning/Zoning Board approval shall not be
required for previously existing improvements on a property.
§ 620-148 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 620-151
1:1075
Chapter 632
VIDEO STORES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing procedure — See Ch. 290, Art. I. Obscene materials — See Ch. 409.
§ 632-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISPLAY — In addition to the storage, exhibition and shelving of videos
and films, the posting, showing or revealing to any person of any case,
carton, box, bag or other wrapping in which a film and/or videocassette
is packaged or contained and any poster, sign, advertisement, photograph,
book, catalogues or document of any kind describing the contents of such
film or video.
SEXUALLY EXPLICIT — The depiction of specific sexual activities or specific
anatomical areas, as follows:
VIDEO STORE — Any store which sells or rents films or videocassettes,
provided that the rental or sale of such films or videocassettes constitutes
more than 25% of the gross sales at that location.
§ 632-2. License required.
It shall be unlawful to display, offer or sell, advertise, sell or rent any film
or videocassette for a fee or otherwise in any retail commercial premises
without having first secured a license as provided herein. Said license shall
be for a specific premises and shall not be transferable. All licenses issued
under this chapter shall expire on December 31 following the date when
issued, without regard to the time of year when issued, and the fee as fixed
Specified anatomical areas:
Less than completely opaquely covered human genitals; pubic
region.
(1)
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
(2)
A.
Specified sexual activities:
(1) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
(2) Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks or female breasts.
(3)
B.
§ 620-151 IRVINGTON CODE § 632-2
1:1076
in § 632-5 of this chapter shall be the license fee for said time, whether it is
for all or part of such license year.
§ 632-3. License application; contents; accompanying data;
renewal.
§ 632-4. Prohibited acts.
A. Any person desiring a license to operate a video business shall submit a
license application to the Division of Licensing.
B. The application shall state:
(1) The name and address of the owners of the property.
(2) The name and address of the licensee, if other than the owner of
the property.
(3) The type of merchandise that will be sold or rented at the video
business.
(4) A diagram of the premises showing the interior layout of the
premises and describing the mode of operation and the methods of
compliance with this chapter.
(5) Whether or not X-rated or sexually explicit videos or films will be
displayed, rented or sold.
C. The knowing misstatement of any material fact or omission of any
required information from the license application shall result in denial
of issuance of such license or revocation of the license.
A. No employee under the age of 18 shall be permitted to handle
transactions in which an X-rated or sexually explicit film or
videocassette is displayed, shown, sold or rented to any person.
B. No person under the age of 18 shall be displayed, sold, shown or rented
any such X-rated or sexually explicit film or videocassette.
C. It shall be unlawful to sell or rent or display for sale or rent any film or
videocassette which is rated X or which is sexually explicit, unless the
following requirements are met:
(1) Such films and videocassettes and/or the display covers containing
pictures or descriptions of said films or cassettes shall be
segregated in a separate area not accessible to minors and shall
have posted conspicuously nearby the following words in clear
block letters of not less than two inches each:
ADULTS ONLY
NO ONE ADMITTED
UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE
§ 632-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 632-4
1:1077
§ 632-5. Fee. [Amended 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. MC 3027;
12-14-1999 by Ord. No. MC 3134; 8-14-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3176;
10-12-2005 by Ord. No. MC 3306; 12-29-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3413]
The annual fee for a video store license shall be $58.
§ 632-6. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 639
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Swimming pools — See Ch. 571.
(2) The operator of said business shall be responsible for prohibiting
minors from entering said area and that said area is adequately
secured from casual observation by minors and the general public.
(3) No film rated R, PG, PG-13 or G by the Motion Picture Rating Board
shall be considered to be sexually explicit for the purposes of this
chapter.
A. Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of a violation of any terms
of this chapter shall be subject to the penalty set forth in Chapter 1,
Article III, Penalties, of the Township Code.372
B. In determining whether any person or entity has violated this chapter,
the standards and defenses set forth in N.J.S.A. 33:1-77, respecting the
sale of alcoholic beverages to a minor, shall apply as if the same applied
to the display, handling, showing, giving, sale or rental of such X-rated
or sexually explicit films or videos as defined herein.
372. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 632-4 IRVINGTON CODE § 632-6
1:1078
ARTICLE I
Water Emergency
[Adopted 9-28-1993 by Ord. No. MC 2981 (Ch. 195, Art. I, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ 639-1. Declaration of water emergency.
Whenever the Municipal Council shall be satisfied and finds that a water
emergency exists in the Township of Irvington, it may adopt a resolution
declaring that a water emergency exists. Such resolution shall be adopted
by the Municipal Council at any regular, special, adjourned or emergency
public meeting of the Municipal Council. Such resolution shall identify that
part of the Township affected by the water emergency, which may include
the entire municipality and shall specify which of the water use regulations
contained in § 639-2 of this article is being imposed as well as exemptions
as may be authorized. Such resolution shall be effective immediately upon
publication according to law and shall continue in effect for 90 days, unless
extended or repealed as set forth in § 639-3 of this article. For the purpose
of this section, a water emergency shall exist for any of the following
reasons:
§ 639-2. Water use restrictions.
Upon adoption by the Municipal Council of a resolution declaring that a
water emergency exists in the Township of Irvington in accordance with
§ 639-1 of this article, all citizens shall be urged to observe voluntary indoor
conservation measures, and any of the following water use restrictions shall
be imposed and shall be applicable to all residents and tenants, including
those with private wells, except where a bona fide health emergency exists
and to exempt businesses, as specified during the water emergency:
A. The public utility providing water service to all or a portion of the
Township has adopted water use restrictions and has notified the
municipality, the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities and the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, as well as any other
state, county or local agency entitled to notice, and such restrictions
are not overruled or declared invalid by any state, county or local
agency or court having the jurisdiction and power to do so.
B. The Municipal Council is otherwise satisfied that a water emergency
exists in the municipality.
A. The complete ban and prohibition of outside water usage, including the
watering of lawns and plants, the filling of pools and washing of cars;
B. Outside water usage on alternate days allowing outside usage by
persons or businesses having even house or box numbers on even days
and those having odd on odd days, with outside water usage being
completely banned and prohibited on the 31st of any month during the
water emergency; or
§ 639-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 639-2
1:1079
§ 639-3. Duration of restrictions.
The resolution of the Municipal Council required by § 639-1 of this article
shall, in addition to complying with § 639-1, provide a period of time during
which the water use restrictions imposed shall be applicable and which
shall be no longer than reasonably necessary to abate the water emergency
under the circumstance considering the nature and extent of the water
emergency. At the expiration of the time period specified in the resolution,
the water use restriction shall lapse and be inapplicable and unenforceable.
If the Municipal Council shall be satisfied that the water emergency has
been abated prior to the expiration of the time period specified in the
resolution, it shall adopt a resolution declaring the water emergency ended
and the water use restrictions inapplicable. If, at the expiration of the time
period specified in the resolution, the Municipal Council shall be satisfied
that the water emergency continues to exists, it may adopt a resolution in
accordance with the requirements of this article continuing the water use
restrictions.
§ 639-4. Enforcement.
The water use restrictions imposed pursuant to this article shall be enforced
during a water emergency by the local authorized official(s). Whenever a
local authorized official shall find a violation of the water use restrictions,
such authorized official shall give the violator a written warning and explain
the penalties for a second and third offense as provided by § 639-5 of this
article. The local authorized official shall keep such records as may be
reasonable and necessary for the purpose of determining the persons and
businesses who have been warned upon a first or any subsequent offense.
The local authorized official is hereby empowered to write summonses for
the violation of the water use restrictions imposed pursuant to this article.
§ 639-5. Violations and penalties.
After a first offense of § 639-4, Enforcement, any person or business who
thereafter violates the water use restrictions imposed pursuant to this
article shall be fined or imprisoned in accordance with this section. For
a second offense, the fine imposed shall be a minimum of $100 up to a
maximum of $500 or imprisonment for 10 days, or both. For a third and
subsequent offense, the fine imposed shall be $1,000 or imprisonment for
30 days, or both.
C. Any other water use restriction specified by the governing body in the
resolution required by § 639-1 of this article which is reasonable under
the circumstances considering the nature and extent water emergency.
Any water restriction imposed pursuant to this section shall be limited
in application to that portion of the municipality, which may include the
entire municipality, identified as being affected by water emergency in
the resolution of the governing body adopted in accordance with
§ 639-1 of this article.
§ 639-2 IRVINGTON CODE § 639-5
1:1080
Chapter 650
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Escrow fees for redevelopment and
foreclosure matters — See Ch. 282.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 365.
Subdivision and site plan review — See Ch.
560.
§ 639-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 639-5
1:1081

ARTICLE I
Title
§ 650-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Revised Zoning
Ordinance of the Township of Irvington, New Jersey."
§ 650-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-1
1:1083

ARTICLE II
Purpose
§ 650-2. Construal of provisions; purpose.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the
public health, safety, morals and general welfare. Among other purposes,
the provisions of this chapter are intended to provide for adequate light,
air and convenience of access; to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure
safety from fire and other dangers; to avoid undue concentration of
population by regulating and limiting the use of land and the height and
bulk of buildings wherever erected; to limit and determine the size of yards,
courts and other open spaces; to regulate the density of population; and
to conserve the value of property and encourage the most appropriate use
of land throughout the Township of Irvington; and such other purposes as
more particularly set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-2 et seq., as amended.
§ 650-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-2
1:1085

ARTICLE III
Word Usage and Definitions
§ 650-3. Word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, all words used in the present tense include
the future tense; all words in the plural number include the singular
number, unless the natural construction of the word indicates otherwise;
the word "shall" is mandatory and directory; and the word "used" includes
"designated, intended or arranged to be used."
§ 650-4. Definitions.
Certain words and terms in this chapter are to be interpreted as defined
below:
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A subordinate building or
structure, the purpose of which is customarily incidental to that of the
principal use or building and on the same lot. Where an accessory building
is attached to the side or front of a principal building by a wall or roof,
such accessory building shall be considered part of the main building for
the purpose of determining the required dimensions of yards, but if it
is attached completely to the rear of the principal building, it may be
considered an "accessory building" for determining required yard
dimensions.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment which
provides dancers, strippers, or other forms of entertainment of a sexual or
erotic nature, whether as a principal activity or as an accessory activity to
another use. Adult entertainment establishments include theaters or other
facilities used for presenting cinematic or video material of a primarily
sexual or erotic nature.
ADULT-ORIENTED STORE — Any bookstore, video store, or other
establishment having as a portion of its stock-in-trade, books, magazines,
periodicals, videos, novelties, or amusements of a primarily sexual or erotic
nature.
AISLE or PARKING AISLE — The travel lanes by which vehicles enter and
exit parking spaces.
ALTERATION — As applied to a building or a structure, any change in the
supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams,
girders and interior partitions, as well as any change in doors and windows
or any addition to or diminution of a building.
AMUSEMENT ARCADE — An establishment utilized wholly or in part for
the accommodation of six or more amusement games or devices.
AMUSEMENT GAME OR DEVICE — Any piece of equipment which is
maintained or operated for the amusement, patronage, or recreation of the
public, including but not limited to pinball and video games.
§ 650-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-4
1:1087
ANTENNA — Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on
a tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiate
or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio
frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals
or other communication signals.
APARTMENT — An independent, self-contained dwelling unit with its own
sleeping, sanitary, and cooking facilities in a building containing two or
more such dwelling units or more than one use.
AUTOMOBILE DEALERSHIP — An establishment selling or leasing
automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, any other type of motor vehicle, or
trailers that can be attach to a motor vehicle, whether new or used.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR OR BODY SHOP — An establishment engaged in the
repair, service, or maintenance of any motor vehicle or trailer and/or the
repair or painting of the vehicle/trailer body.
AUTOMOBILE WASH — An establishment used for the washing of any
motor vehicle or trailer, whether by hand or by automated or mechanical
equipment.
BACKHAUL NETWORK — The lines that connect a provider's towers/cell
sites to one or more cellular telephone switching offices, and/or longdistance
providers, or the public switched telephone network.
BANK — A business establishment authorized to perform financial
transactions such as receiving and lending money, but not including checkcashing
establishments or pawnbrokers.
BAR or TAVERN — An establishment used for the sale of liquor, where all
consumption is conducted on the premises.
BASEMENT — A story partly underground and having more than 1/2 of
its height above the average level of the finished grade at the front of the
building.
BIG BOX CENTER — Any shopping center having one or more retail
establishments selling merchandise in bulk quantities and where at least
one such retail establishment has a gross floor area of 50,000 square feet
or more.
BILLBOARD — A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity,
service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than upon
the same lot.
BINGO HALL — An establishment able to accommodate large assemblages
of people for the purpose of playing bingo or similar games, but not
including organized gambling.
BOARDINGHOUSE — Any house, building, or structure which contains
two or more units of dwelling space arranged or intended for single room
occupancy wherein meals, personal services, or other services are provided
to residents, including any residential hotel.
§ 650-4 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-4
1:1088
BODY ART SHOPS — An establishment providing as a service the
decoration or embellishment of the human body including, but not limited
to, tattoo parlors and piercing parlors.
BUFFER STRIP — An area consisting of densely planted trees and shrubs
or solid fencing or a combination thereof, which provides both a visual and
acoustical barrier between adjacent properties.
BUILDING — Any combination of materials to form a construction adapted
to permanent, temporary or continuous occupation and having a roof.
BUILDING AREA — The aggregate of the areas of all enclosed and roofed
spaces of the principal building and all accessory buildings. Such areas
shall be computed by using exterior building dimensions measured on a
horizontal plane at ground level.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical dimension measured from the average
elevation of the finished lot grade at the front of the building to the highest
point of the ceiling of the top story in the case of a flat roof, to the deckline
of a mansard roof and to the average height between the plate and ridge of
a gable, hip or gambrel roof.
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The official designated as the Building Inspector
and/or Construction Official of the Township of Irvington.
BUILDING LINE — A line formed by the intersection of a horizontal plane
at average grade level and a vertical plane that coincides with the exterior
surface of the building; the vertical plane will coincide with the most
projected surface. All yard requirements are measured to the building line.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A structure in which is conducted the principal
use of the site on which it is situated. In any residential district, any
dwelling shall be deemed to be a principal building on the zoned lot on
which it is located.
CAFE — A restaurant which is small in size, which may have a limited menu
of food and/or drinks, or which may serve primarily coffee or coffee-based
drinks.
CELLAR — A story wholly or partly above curb level, having 1/2 or more of
its floor-to-ceiling height below the average level of the adjoining ground.
No cellar or portion thereof shall be used as a dwelling unit.
CEMETERY — Any site used for burying or storing human remains.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A certificate issued by the Building
Inspector upon completion of construction, alteration or change in
occupancy of a building.
CHECK-CASHING ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment primarily
engaged in the business of cashing checks but not offering the full range of
financial services normally associated with a bank.
CHILD-CARE CENTER — Any residence or facility which is maintained for
the care, development or supervision of six or more children under 13 years
§ 650-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-4
1:1089
of age who attend for less than 24 hours a day, not including the resident's
own children if the center is located in a home.
CHURCH — A building or group of buildings, including customary
accessory buildings, designed for public worship, and including chapels,
congregations, cathedrals, temples and similar designations, as well as
parish houses, convents and such accessory uses.
CLINIC — A medical office or center where patients are treated by
specialist physicians.
CURB LEVEL — The officially established grade of the curb in front of the
midpoint of the lot.
DANCE HALL — An establishment able to accommodate large assemblages
of people for the purpose of dancing, whether to the sound of recorded
music or live performers.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by
drains, grading or other means, and includes control of runoff to minimize
erosion or sedimentation during and after construction, preservation of
water supplies and prevention or alleviation of flooding.
DRIVE-THROUGH WINDOW — A facility attached to a retail store,
restaurant, bank, or other similar establishment where customers or clients
can make a purchase, pick up products, or complete transactions while
seated in their automobiles.
DRIVEWAY — Any area devoted exclusively to providing vehicle access to
off-street parking or garage facilities.
DRY-CLEANING PLANT — Any establishment in which clothing is dry
cleaned on the premises. Such an establishment may or may not include
customer drop-off and pickup facilities.
DRY-CLEANING SHOP — A retail establishment used primarily for the
purpose of dropping off or picking up clothing by customers for dry-cleaning
purposes. No dry cleaning is conducted on the premises, but clothing is sent
for dry-cleaning purposes to a dry-cleaning plant.
DWELLING — Any building or portion thereof designated or used
exclusively as the residence or sleeping place of one or more persons,
except mobile homes and as otherwise provided herein.
DWELLING, GARDEN APARTMENT — A single structure containing more
than five but not more than 20 individual units designed and erected
within a structure of not more than three stories in height as an integrated
development with singleness of use and operation and which utilizes such
common facilities as pedestrian walks, parking and garage areas, open
space or recreation areas and utility and sanitary systems.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — A detached building designated for or
occupied exclusively by one household and containing not more than one
dwelling unit.
§ 650-4 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-4
1:1090
DWELLING, THREE- AND FOUR-FAMILY — Single structure containing
dwelling units for three and four households, respectively, each dwelling
unit being completely separate from the others and having at least one
private entrance from the outside.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A detached or semidetached building having
not more than two individual dwelling units which are entirely separated
by vertical walls or horizontal floors, unpierced except for entryways or
stairwells.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms, including cooking facilities and
sanitary facilities, in a dwelling structure designated as a unit for occupancy
by not more than one family for living and sleeping purposes.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance, by public utilities or governmental agencies, of underground
or overhead gas, electrical, steam, water, cable television or sewerage
transmission or distribution systems, including buildings, poles, wires,
mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call
boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and other similar equipment and accessories
in connection therewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of
adequate service by such public utilities or governmental agencies or for
the public health, safety or general welfare.
FAA — Federal Aviation Administration.
FAMILY — Two or more persons related by blood or marriage living
together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling.
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — A private residence in which the resident
provides child-care services for a fee to no less than three children and no
more than five children under 13 years of age at any one time for no less
than 15 hours per week, not including the resident's own children.
FCC — Federal Communications Commission.
FENCE — An artificially constructed barrier of wood, masonry, stone, wire,
metal or any manufactured material or combination of materials erected for
the enclosure of yard areas.
FIDUCIARY INSTITUTION — A business establishment providing financial
services similar to that of a bank and which may serve as a repository for
savings or brokerage accounts.
FLOOR AREA — The floor area of a building is the sum of the gross area
of each floor of the building, excluding mechanical space, cellar space, floor
space in open balconies, elevators or stair bulkheads and, in most zoning
districts, floor space used for accessory parking that is located less than 23
feet above curb level.[Added 1-15-2008 by Ord. No. MC 3366]
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — The principal bulk regulation controlling the
size of buildings. FAR is the ratio of total building floor area to the area of its
zoning lot. Each zoning district has a FAR control which, when multiplied by
the lot area of the zoning lot, produces the maximum amount of floor area
allowable in a building on the zoning lot. For example, on a 10,000 square
§ 650-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-4
1:1091
foot zoning lot in a district with a maximum FAR of 1.0, the floor area of a
building cannot exceed 10,000 square feet.[Added 1-15-2008 by Ord. No.
MC 3366]
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A building used as an accessory to the main building
which provides for the storage of motor vehicles and in which no
occupation, business or service for profit is conducted.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — Any garage, other than a private garage, available to
the public and operated for gain.
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION — An establishment primarily used for the
retail dispensing of vehicular fuel and oil to motor vehicles and the
incidental or routine servicing thereof, but not including repair or body
work.
GROCERY STORE — A retail establishment primarily selling foodstuffs,
cooking ingredients, and related household goods, where the vast majority
of the food for sale is not ready for immediate consumption, and where
consumption is primarily conducted off-premises.
GROSS HABITABLE FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas
of the floors or floor of a building which are enclosed and usable for human
occupancy. Said areas shall be measured between the inside face of exterior
walls or from the center line of walls separating two dwelling units. Said
areas shall not include areas below the average level of adjoining garage
space or accessory building space.
GROUP HOME — A residence for mentally disabled persons or persons
belonging to other special needs populations, who live in a group setting
with shared facilities and common areas. The group home may provide
residents with meals, medical care, personal care, counseling services,
transportation, and/or protective supervision.
HOME OCCUPATION — An accessory use of a service character customarily
conducted within a dwelling only by residents thereof, which is clearly
secondary to the use of the dwelling for living purposes and does not
change the character thereof or cause any exterior evidence of such use,
but excluding the operation of a beauty parlor, barbershop, convalescent
or nursing home, tourist home, boardinghouse, rooming house, kennel or
stable, auto repair or body shop, insurance or real estate agency, massage
parlor or similar establishment.
HOME PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The office of a member of a recognized
profession when conducted on the residential property where the
professional resides and where the primary use of the property is for living
purposes. Such recognized professions include, but shall not be limited to,
medicine, dentistry, law, architecture, engineering, and accounting.
HOSPITAL — An institution which maintains and operates organized
facilities and services for the diagnosis, treatment, or care of persons
suffering from illness, injury, or deformity and/or obstetrics, and in which
all diagnosis, treatment, and care is administered by or performed under
§ 650-4 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-4
1:1092
the direction of persons licensed to practice medicine in the State of New
Jersey.
HOTEL — A building which contains 20 or more rooms used, rented or hired
out to be occupied for sleeping purposes by guests and where only a general
kitchen and dining room are provided within the building or as an accessory
building.
HOUSEHOLD — One or more persons who live together in a single dwelling
unit, share general housekeeping tasks and expenses, and use in common
all living, kitchen, and bathroom facilities.
INDOOR RECREATION FACILITY — An enclosed structure wherein
recreational games, such as handball, paddleball, tennis and skating, are
conducted or automatic amusement devices are played.
INDUSTRY, HEAVY — An establishment engaged in the transformation
of raw natural materials into any secondary products by means of any
industrial processes which does not meet the definition of "light industry."
INDUSTRY, LIGHT — An establishment engaged in the transformation of
raw natural materials into any secondary products by means of any
industrial processes that do not emit odor, noise, smoke, dust, particulate
matter, radiation, gas, vibration, glare, or heat, perceptible beyond the
boundaries of the premises on which the establishment is located.
JUNKYARD — Any area and/or structure used or intended to be used for the
business of selling, buying, storing or trading in used or discarded metal,
glass, paper, cordage or any used or disabled fixtures, furniture, vehicles or
equipment of any kind.
LABORATORY — An establishment or part thereof equipped and used for
experimental study, testing, or analysis in a field of science.
LAUNDRY, SELF-SERVICE — A business premises equipped with individual
clothes-washing machines for the use of retail customers, exclusive of
laundry facilities provided as an accessory use in a residential structure.
LIVE ENTERTAINMENT — Any form of entertainment which is performed
in person before an attending audience.
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space or berth used for the loading or
unloading of cargo, products, or materials from vehicles.
LOT — A piece or parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a
principal building or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings or
utilized for a principal use and uses accessory or incidental to the operation
thereof, together with such open spaces as required by this chapter, and
having frontage on a public street.
LOT AREA — An area of land which is determined by the limits of the lot
lines bounding that area and expressed in terms of square feet or acres.
Any portion of a lot included in a street right-of-way shall not be included in
calculating "lot area."
§ 650-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-4
1:1093
LOT, CORNER — A parcel of land at the junction of and fronting on two or
more intersecting streets.
LOT COVERAGE — That percentage of the lot area which may be devoted
to building area.
LOT DEPTH — A mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines, measured at right angles to the street at two equidistant points on the
front lot lines and in the general direction of said lot lines.
LOT FRONTAGE — A lot line or portion thereof which is coexistent with
a street line. In the case of a corner lot, the smaller of the two lot lines
coexistent with street lines shall be considered as the "frontage."
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured
at right angles to its depth and at a point which constitutes the rear line of
the required front yard space.
MANUFACTURING — The treatment or processing of raw materials and the
production of articles or finished products from raw or prepared materials
by giving them new forms and qualities.
MIXED-USE BUILDING — A building in a commercial district used partly
for residential use and partly for community facility or commercial use.
A building that contains any combination of uses is often referred to as
a mixed-use building. When a building contains more than one use, the
maximum FAR permitted on the zoning lot is the highest FAR allowed for
any of the uses, provided that the FAR for each use does not exceed the
maximum FAR permitted for that use. In a CBD District, for example, where
the maximum commercial FAR is 2.0 and the maximum residential FAR is 7,
the total permitted FAR for a mixed residential/commercial building would
be 7, of which no more than 2.0 FAR may be applied to the commercial
space.[Added 1-15-2008 by Ord. No. MC 3366]
MOTEL — A building containing rooms or suites of rooms designed and
intended to be used as overnight sleeping accommodations for transient
guests, which building has a public lobby and full-time management and
which may contain ancillary services and facilities, such as restaurants,
shops, meeting rooms and convention facilities.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING — A building, the size, dimension or
location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment
of this chapter but which fails to conform to the requirements of the
zoning district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area, dimension or location of which
was lawful prior to adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter but
which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it
is located by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity which was lawful prior to the
adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter but which fails to conform
to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reason of
such adoption, revision or amendment.
§ 650-4 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-4
1:1094
OCCUPANCY — The specific purpose for which land or a building is used,
designated or maintained.
OFFICE, BUSINESS OR PROFESSIONAL — A room or group of rooms
used for conducting the practice of a business or profession and generally
furnished with desks, tables, files, file storage areas, computers,
telephones, and other related furniture and electronic devices, but not
including warehouse or industrial space.
OPEN SPACE — An unoccupied space open to the sky, whether or not on the
same lot with a principal and/or accessory building.
OVERLAY DISTRICT — A district superimposed upon another district which
supersedes, modifies or supplements the underlying regulations. Limitedheight
districts and commercial overlay districts are examples of overlay
districts.[Added 1-15-2008 by Ord. No. MC 3366]
OUTDOOR STORAGE — The keeping of any goods, merchandise,
equipment, or other material outside any fully enclosed structure in the
same place continuously for a period of more than 24 hours.
PACKAGED LIQUOR STORE — An establishment used primarily for the sale
of liquor, where all consumption is conducted off-premises.
PARKING SPACE — An off-street space of less than 15% slope used for
the parking of a motor vehicle, which shall measure not less than 10 feet
wide and 20 feet long, exclusive of passageways and driveways appurtenant
thereto and giving access thereto.
PAWNBROKER — An establishment in which the proprietor lends money on
the security of personal property pledged in his or her keeping.
PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment engaged in
providing services involving the care of a person or his or her personal
goods or apparel, including but not limited to self-service laundries, barber
and beauty shops, tailor shops, and shoe repair shops.
PHILANTHROPIC OR ELEEMOSYNARY USES — A private or public
organization whose purpose is to provide a public or charitable service or
carry on a trade or business on a not-for-profit basis.
PIERCING PARLOR — An establishment providing as a service the puncture
of the human skin or human body parts and the insertion of decorative
objects, such as earrings.
PLACE OF WORSHIP — A building, part of a building, or group of buildings,
designed and set up for public worship, including churches, chapels,
meeting halls, cathedrals, temples mosques, and similar designations. A
place of worship includes parish houses, convents, Sunday school
classrooms, rectories, and other such customary accessory uses and
buildings, but does not include parochial schools, day-care centers,
homeless shelters, or soup kitchens.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the Township of Irvington.
§ 650-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-4
1:1095
PLAZA — An open area adjacent to a building and accessible to the public. It
must generally be at the level of the sidewalk it adjoins and be unobstructed
to the sky except for seating and other permitted obstructions. In certain
high-density zoning districts, a floor area bonus is available for provision of
a residential or urban plaza.[Added 1-15-2008 by Ord. No. MC 3366]
PREEXISTING TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS and PREEXISTING
ANTENNAS — Any tower or antenna for which a building permit or
conditional use permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date
of this section, including permitted towers or antennas that have not yet
been constructed so long as such approval is current and not expired.
PROFESSION — A vocation or occupation requiring advanced education,
training, and intellectual skill, such as medicine, psychology, architecture,
accounting, law, and similar fields.
PROFESSIONAL — A person engaged in a profession.
QUASI-PUBLIC BUILDINGS AND RECREATION FACILITIES — Buildings
and recreational facilities operated for the exclusive use of nonprofit
organizations, sporting or social clubs, or neighborhood or community
associations. Such facilities include, but shall not be limited to, clubhouses,
outdoor playing fields or courts, indoor recreational facilities, playgrounds,
swimming pools, tennis courts, meeting halls, and banquet facilities.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT — The practice of scientific
experimentation for the purpose of developing prototype products,
machines, chemicals, medicines, or techniques, but not for the purpose of
mass production.
RESIDENTIAL LOFT — A residential space in an apartment building
generally 1,200 square feet to 1,800 square feet consisting of one room
segmented into various living spaces such as a sleeping area, kitchen,
entertainment area, etc.[Added 1-15-2008 by Ord. No. MC 3366]
RESTAURANT — An establishment, however designated, at which food is
sold for consumption on the premises to patrons seated within an enclosed
building. A snack bar at a public or community playground, playfield, park
or swimming pool operated solely for the agency or group operating the
recreational facilities and for the convenience of patrons of the facility shall
not be deemed to be a "restaurant."
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment engaged in the selling of
goods and merchandise to the general public, including automobile parts
and supplies but not including automobile service.
ROOMING HOUSE — A boardinghouse where no meals, personal services,
or other services are provided to the residents.
RESIDENTIAL PLAZA — An open area for public use adjacent to a
predominantly residential building.
A.
URBAN PLAZA — An open area for public use adjacent to a
nonresidential or predominantly nonresidential building.
B.
§ 650-4 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-4
1:1096
SHOP — An establishment where goods or services are offered for sale.
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of retail establishments planned,
constructed, and managed as a single entity, where customer parking is
provided on site, where loading areas are separated from customer entry
points, and where there is a unified architectural style.
SIDEWALK CAFE — A portion of an eating or drinking place that is located
on a public sidewalk. Sidewalk cafe regulations are administered by the
Township of Irvington Department of Health.[Added 1-15-2008 by Ord.
No. MC 3366; amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. MC 3407; 7-1-2014 by
Ord. No. MC 3511]
SIGN — Any device, structure or object for visual communication that is
used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of
others, but not including any flag, badge or insignia of any public, quasipublic,
civic, charitable or religious group.
SIGN AREA — The area defined by the frame or edge of a sign. When there
is no geometric frame or edge of the sign, the area shall be defined by a
projected, enclosed, four-sided (straight sides) geometric shape which most
closely outlines said sign.
SIGN, BUSINESS — A sign which directs attention to a business or
profession conducted or to a commodity, service or entertainment sold or
offered upon the premises where such sign is located or to which it is
affixed.
STORE — A retail establishment.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the upper floor or roof next above.
STREET — A public thoroughfare which has been dedicated or deeded to
the public for public use and which has been improved in accordance with
municipal standards.
STREET LINE — The line determining the limit of the highway rights of the
public, either existing or contemplated.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below the
surface of a parcel of land.
ENCLOSED SIDEWALK CAFE — A sidewalk cafe that is contained
within a structure constructed predominantly of lightweight materials.
A.
UNENCLOSED SIDEWALK CAFE — Contains readily removable tables,
chairs or railings, with no overhead coverage other than umbrellas or a
retractable awning.
B.
SMALL SIDEWALK CAFE — An unenclosed sidewalk cafe containing no
more than a single row of tables and chairs adjacent to the street line.
C.
§ 650-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-4
1:1097
SWIMMING CLUB, PUBLIC — A public or privately owned pool open to
the general public on a membership basis and having dressing rooms,
recreational facilities and off-street parking areas.
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE — A private swimming pool associated with a
residential dwelling unit or units and located on an individual residential
lot.
TATTOO — A permanent, decorative design or mark on the human skin
created by puncturing the skin with a needle and injecting indelible colors.
TATTOO PARLOR — An establishment providing as a service the inscription
of tattoos on the human skin.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER — Any structure that is designed and
constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas
for telephone, radio and similar communication purposes, including selfsupporting
lattice towers, guyed towers, or monopole towers. The term
includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers,
common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower
structures, and the like. The term includes the structure and any support
thereto.
TOWNHOUSE — A residential building where there is front and rear access
to the outside, but where the side walls are adjoining other structures. A
townhouse is generally not more than three to four stories in height and
may be designed as a one-, two-, three-, or four-family dwelling. If there are
two or more dwelling units in the building, each unit typically occupies at
least one entire floor, with windows facing both the front and the rear yards.
TRAILER COACH — A vehicle used or so constructed as to permit it to
be used as a licensed conveyance upon the public streets or highways and
constructed in such a manner as will permit occupancy as a place of dayto-
day habitation for one or more persons. This term shall also include
automobile trailers, mobile homes and house trailers and trailer coaches,
excepting therefrom travel trailers and campers which are under eight feet
in width and under 20 feet in length and which are not used for purposes of
day-to-day habitation.
TRAILER COURT — Land and premises upon which two or more trailer
coaches occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes are located. This term
shall include trailer coach parks and courts.
TRUCK TERMINAL or BULK DISTRIBUTION TERMINAL — A site and/or
building where trucks load and unload cargo and freight and where the
cargo and freight may be broken down or aggregated into smaller or larger
loads for transfer to other vehicles or modes of transportation.
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building is designed,
arranged, occupied, maintained, used or intended to be used.
WAREHOUSE — An establishment used primarily for the storage of goods,
merchandise, cargo, and other materials and which may receive or
distribute such materials via truck or rail.
§ 650-4 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-4
1:1098
WHOLESALE SALES AND DISTRIBUTION — An establishment engaged in
the storage and selling of merchandise to retailers, businesses, or other
wholesalers, but excluding any establishment selling such materials to the
general public.
WORK-LIVE LOFT — A residential space in an apartment building generally
1,200 square feet to 1,800 square feet consisting of one room segmented
into various living and occupation spaces such as an area set aside for
a permitted occupation, a sleeping area, kitchen, entertainment area,
etc.[Added 1-15-2008 by Ord. No. MC 3366]
YARD, FRONT — An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the
principal building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between
the street line and the front line of the building projected to the side lines
of that lot. "Setback line" shall be synonymous with the rear limit of the
required front yard areas.
YARD, REAR — An open, unoccupied space extending across the full width
of the lot and lying between the rear line of the lot and the nearest line of
any building on the same lot. The depth of a rear yard shall be measured at
right angles to the rear line of the lot or, if the lot is not rectangular, then in
the general direction of its side building lines.
YARD, SIDE — An open, unoccupied space between the side lines of the lot
and the nearest line of the building and extending from the front yard to
the rear yard or, in the absence of either front or rear yards, to the nearest
street or rear lot line, as the case may be. The width of a side yard shall be
measured at right angles to the side line of the lot.
ZONING BOARD — The Zoning Board of Adjustment of the Township of
Irvington.
§ 650-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-4
1:1099

ARTICLE IV
Zoning Districts
§ 650-5. Districts established. [Amended 1-15-2008 by Ord. No. MC
3366; 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3425]
For the purpose of this chapter, the Township of Irvington is divided into the
following zone districts:
R-1L Single-Family Residential, Low-Density District
R-1 Single-Family Residential District
R-2 Two-Family Residential District
R-3 Four-Family Residential District
R-4 Garden Apartment District
R-5 High-Rise Apartment District
B-1 Neighborhood Business District
B-2 Shopping Center District
B-3 Limited Business District
B-4 General Business District
B-5 Big Box Center District
CBD Central Business District, Downtown Mixed Use
O-1 Residential-Character Office District
M-1 Special Industrial District
M-2 Light Industrial District
M-3 Heavy Industrial District
P-1 Parks District
P-2 Institutional District
§ 650-6. Zoning Map.
The boundaries of all zone districts shall be shown on a map attached to and
made part of this chapter and known as the "Zoning Map of the Township
of Irvington." Said map and all notations and references thereon are hereby
incorporated into and declared to be a part of this chapter.373
§ 650-7. Boundaries.
A. District boundary lines are intended to follow the center lines of the
streets, railroad rights-of-way, streams and lot or property lines as they
exist on plats of record at the time of the passage of this chapter, unless
such zone boundary lines are fixed by dimensions shown on the Zoning
Map.
373. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 650-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-7
1:1101
§ 650-8. Schedule of Area, Lot and Bulk Requirements.
The Schedule of Area, Lot and Bulk Requirements attached hereto is made a
part of this chapter.374 The regulations included in said schedule are hereby
established as minimum regulations of this chapter. Municipal facilities
deemed necessary and appropriate by the Municipal Council of the
Township of Irvington are hereby exempted from such area and bulk
requirements.
B. Where such boundaries are not fixed by dimensions but appear to
follow lot lines, if they do not scale more than 10 feet distant therefrom,
such lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries unless
specifically shown otherwise.
374. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Area, Yard and Height Requirements is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 650-7 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-8
1:1102
ARTICLE V
General Provisions
§ 650-9. Applicability.
§ 650-10. Modifications and exceptions.
A. No building shall hereinafter be erected and no existing building shall
be moved, structurally altered, rebuilt, added to or enlarged, nor shall
any land be used for any purpose other than those included among the
uses listed as permitted in each district by this chapter and meeting the
requirements set forth in the appended schedule.375
B. In no case shall any lot be permitted to have more than one primary use
and one accessory use.
C. No open space contiguous to any building shall be encroached upon or
reduced in any manner, except in conformity with the area and bulk
requirements, off-street parking requirements and all other regulations
designated in the schedule of this chapter for the zone district in which
such building or space is located. In the event of any such unlawful
encroachment or reduction, such building shall be deemed to be in
violation of this chapter, and any certificate of occupancy issued shall
be void.
A. Undersized lots of record. Any lot, as defined herein, which was legally
created as of October 14, 1971, that fails to comply with the minimum
lot size requirements of this chapter may be used for any use not
otherwise prohibited in said district in which it lies, provided that the
owner thereof owns no side-adjoining land which, if combined with the
subject lot, would result in a lot conforming to width, depth, and area
requirements, and further provided that the minimum side yard shall
not be less than three feet. In addition, on such lots, and
notwithstanding maximum building height in feet requirements of the
Schedule of Area, Yard and Height Requirements,376 the maximum
building height in stories shall be three, provided that the first story is
used for garage, half bathroom, laundry, utility, and/or recreation space
only, and is not used as a separate living unit. Furthermore, on such
lots, and notwithstanding accessibility and maneuverability
requirements of § 650-32H as well as off-street parking space
requirements of § 650-33, one of the spaces may be located in the front
yard. [Amended 8-10-2004 by Ord. No. MC 3269; 1-15-2008 by
Ord. No. MC 3366; 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3425]
B. Height. The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to silos,
church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes not used for human
375. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Area, Yard and Height Requirements is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
376. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Area, Yard and Height Requirements is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 650-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-10
1:1103
§ 650-11. Restrictions.
habitation, nor to chimneys, ventilators, skylights, water tanks and
necessary mechanical appurtenances usually carried above the roof
level. Such features, however, shall be erected only to such height as is
necessary to accomplish the purpose they are to serve. The provisions
of this chapter are not intended to prohibit the erection above the
building height limit of a parapet wall or cornice for ornament (and
without windows) extending above such height limit not more than five
feet.
C. Yards. Open fire escapes may project not more than five feet into any
side or rear yard in a residential zone. A paved terrace at ground level
shall not be considered in the determination of side or rear yard sizes or
lot coverage if such terrace is unroofed and without walls or other form
of enclosure. No paved terrace shall be permitted closer than five feet
to any side or rear property line.
D. Irregularly shaped lots. In the case of irregularly shaped lots, the
minimum lot width specified in the schedule may be measured at the
rear line of the required front yard, provided that in no case shall the lot
frontage measured at the street right-of-way line be less than 70% of
the minimum lot frontage as specified in the schedule.377
A. No yard or other open space provided about any building for the
purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be
considered to provide a yard or open space for any other building.
B. An accessory building attached to a principal building shall comply in
all respects with the yard requirements of this chapter for the principal
building. Detached accessory buildings shall be located to the rear of
the front building line of the principal building and, if located in the side
yard area, shall conform to side yard requirements of the schedule. In
rear yards, common accessory buildings may be constructed to straddle
the side lot between any two contiguous residential lots, in which case
the remaining side yard dimension shall not be less than the total
required for both accessory building side yards in that zone.
C. Every principal building shall be built upon a lot with frontage upon an
approved public street.
D. At the intersection of two or more streets, no hedge, fence or wall
(other than a single post or tree) which is higher than three feet above
the curb level, nor any obstruction to vision, shall be permitted in the
triangular area formed by the intersecting street lines and a line joining
each street line 10 feet distant from said intersection.
E. All yards facing on a public street shall be considered front yards.
Corner lots shall meet the minimum front yard requirements for the
377. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Area, Yard and Height Requirements is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 650-10 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-11
1:1104
respective zone for both streets for both principal and accessory
buildings.
F. Where a building lot fronts on a street which is proposed for right-ofway
widening, the required front yard area shall be measured from
such proposed right-of-way line.
G. No front yard shall be used for open storage or parking. All open
storage areas shall be screened from view of residential districts by
appropriate landscaping, which shall be maintained.
H. Business structures or uses shall not display goods for sale or place
coin-operated vending machines of any type on the sidewalk or in the
entranceway in the front of the structure in which business activity is
conducted.
I. Off-street parking shall be provided with all new construction in
accordance with Article VIII of this chapter. In the event of enlargement
or extensive alteration of any building, off-street parking shall be
provided in accordance with Article VIII to the extent possible.
J. Essential services and utilities shall be permitted as authorized and
regulated by law and other ordinances of the Township in any district. It
is the intent of this chapter to exempt such erection, construction,
alterations and maintenance from the application of this chapter.
K. Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by the
Municipal Council, the zone district shall be extended automatically to
the center of such vacated way.
L. For the purpose of regulating the locations of accessory buildings on
corner lots, all portions of a corner lot or a through lot which fronts on a
public street shall be subject to the front yard requirements of the zone
district in which said corner lot or through lot is located. No accessory
building shall be permitted in any required front yard.
M. No residential lot shall be less than 75 feet in depth.
N. Any use not specifically permitted in a zoning district established by
this chapter is hereby specifically prohibited in that district. The
following uses and activities shall be specifically prohibited in the
Township of Irvington:
(1) The keeping or raising of any animals other than domestic pets.
(2) Trailer courts, trailer coaches, campers, vans, mobile homes and
house trailers used as a dwelling and commercial activities related
to the outdoor storage or display of trailer coaches; provided,
however, that nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to prohibit
the placement on a lot of one trailer coach for the sole purpose of
providing temporary living accommodations for persons whose
dwelling unit located on said lot has been damaged by fire.
Placement of said trailer coach shall be by permit of the Township
§ 650-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-11
1:1105
Engineer, valid for 60 days and renewable for not more than two
additional thirty-day periods.
(3) The use of a building or premises in such a manner as to endanger
the health, morals, safety or welfare of the community.
(4) Any use which emits excessive and objectionable amounts of dust,
fumes, noise, odor, smoke, vibration, glare or waste products.378
(5) Junkyards, hazardous or toxic waste disposal or treatment
facilities, solid waste transfer stations and liquid gas or gasoline
storage tanks.
O. All exterior lighting shall be shielded, directed or buffered so that glare
or direct lighting or reflection will not be a nuisance to surrounding
properties.
P. No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or
manner that they may be transferred off the lot by natural causes or
forces, nor shall any substance be deposited which can contaminate an
underground aquifer or otherwise render such underground aquifer
undesirable as a source of water supply or recreation or which will
destroy aquatic life. All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or
dust or which constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible or
otherwise attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored indoors or
enclosed in appropriate containers adequate to eliminate such hazards.
Containers shall not be stored or placed in any front yard.
Q. The storage or manufacture of liquefied petroleum gases, hydrogen gas
or other material, whether in liquid or gaseous phase, which is
flammable or explosive when mixed with air in sufficient proportions or
which may be toxic or poisonous if inhaled by any person is prohibited
in all zoning districts; provided, however, that nothing in this subsection
shall be deemed to prohibit the use as fuel for domestic purposes of
liquefied petroleum gases when stored in cylinders constructed in
accordance with regulations of the Interstate Commerce Commission
and located on the exterior of the building supplied; and provided,
further, that the systems in connection with said cylinders are listed by
the Underwriters Laboratories. The existing storage and use of
anhydrous ammonia as of the effective date of this chapter may
continue.
R. Upon the effective date of this subsection, new "dollar stores" within
the boundaries of the Township of Irvington are hereby limited within a
one-thousand-foot radius of any existing "dollar store." [Added
6-14-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3576]
378. Editor's Note: Former § 197-11O(6) of the 1981 Revised Code, prohibiting restaurants in
any building containing one or more dwelling units, which previously followed this
subsection, was repealed 1-15-2008 by Ord. No. MC 3366.
§ 650-11 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-12
1:1106
§ 650-12. Recycling areas for multifamily developments.379
[Amended 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3425]
A. There shall be included in any new multifamily housing development
that requires subdivision or site plan approval an indoor or outdoor
recycling area for the collection and storage of residentially generated
recyclable materials. The dimensions of the recycling area shall be
sufficient to accommodate recycling bins or containers which are of
adequate size and number and which are consistent with anticipated
usage and with current methods of collection in the area in which the
project is located. The dimensions of the recycling area and the bins or
containers shall be determined in consultation with the Municipal
Recycling Coordinator and shall be consistent with the District
Recycling Plan adopted pursuant to Section 3 of P.L. 1987, c. 102
(N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13), and any applicable requirements of the
Municipal Master Plan adopted pursuant to Section 26 of P.L. 1987, c.
102.380
B. The recycling area shall be conveniently located for the residential
disposition of source-separated recyclable materials, preferably near,
but clearly separated from a refuse dumpster.
C. The recycling area shall be well lit and shall be safely and easily
accessible by recycling personnel and vehicles. Collection vehicles shall
be able to access the recycling area without interference from parked
cars or other obstacles. Reasonable measures shall be taken to protect
the recycling area, and the bins or containers placed therein, against
theft of recyclable materials, bins or containers.
D. The recycling area or the bins or containers placed therein shall be
designed so as to provide protection against adverse environmental
conditions which might render the collected materials unmarketable.
Any bins or containers which are used for collection of recyclable paper
or cardboard and which are located in an outdoor recycling area shall
be equipped with a lid or otherwise covered so as to keep the paper or
cardboard dry.
E. Signs clearly identifying the recycling area and the materials accepted
therein shall be posted adjacent to all points of access to the recycling
area. Individual bins or containers shall be equipped with signs
indicating the materials to be placed therein.
F. Landscaping and/or fencing shall be provided around any outdoor
recycling area and shall be developed in an aesthetically pleasing
manner.
379. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 535, Solid Waste and Recycling.
380. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28 et seq.
§ 650-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-12
1:1107

ARTICLE VI
Zoning District Use Regulations
§ 650-13. R-1L Single-Family Residential, Low-Density District.
A. Permitted uses in the R-1L District shall be as follows:
(1) One-family dwellings.
(2) Group homes.
(3) Parks and playgrounds.
(4) Municipal buildings and other governmental uses as deemed
necessary and approved by the Planning Board and Township
Council.
(5) Temporary buildings incidental to construction work, provided that
such buildings are removed upon completion or abandonment of
the construction work.
B. Permitted accessory buildings and structures in the R-1L District shall
be as follows:
(1) Public garages.
(2) Signs, subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(3) Storage buildings of 100 square feet or less in area.
(4) Animal shelters for domestic pets, provided that the building area
does not exceed 25 square feet.
(5) Off-street parking facilities as required by Article VIII.
(6) Essential utilities.
(7) Home occupations, subject to the provisions of Article IX.
(8) Family day-care homes, subject to the provisions of Article IX.
C. Uses permitted with a conditional use permit. The following may be
permitted in the R-1L District with a conditional use permit, subject to
the provisions of Article IX:
(1) Hospitals or philanthropic or eleemosynary uses.
(2) Public, parochial or private schools.
(3) Places of worship.
(4) Home professional offices.
(5) Public utility uses.
D. Uses not permitted in the R-1L District shall be as follows:
§ 650-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-13
1:1109
§ 650-14. R-1 Single-Family Residential District.
(1) Child-care centers.
E. Height, area and bulk requirements in the R-1L District shall be as
specified in the schedule attached hereto.381
A. Permitted uses in the R-1 District shall be as follows:
(1) One-family dwellings.
(2) Group homes.
(3) Parks and playgrounds.
(4) Municipal buildings and other governmental uses as deemed
necessary and approved by the Planning Board and Township
Council.
(5) Temporary buildings incidental to construction work, provided that
such buildings are removed upon completion or abandonment of
the construction work.
B. Permitted accessory buildings and structures in the R-1 District shall be
as follows:
(1) Public garages.
(2) Signs, subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(3) Storage buildings of 100 square feet or less in area.
(4) Animal shelters for domestic pets, provided that the building area
does not exceed 25 square feet.
(5) Off-street parking facilities as required by Article VIII.
(6) Essential utilities.
(7) Home occupations, subject to the provisions of Article IX.
(8) Family day-care homes, subject to the provisions of Article IX.
C. Uses permitted with a conditional use permit. The following may be
permitted in the R-1 District with a conditional use permit, subject to
the provisions of Article IX:
(1) Hospitals or philanthropic or eleemosynary uses.
(2) Public, parochial or private schools.
(3) Places of worship.
381. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Area, Yard and Height Requirements is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 650-13 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-14
1:1110
§ 650-15. R-2 Two-Family Residential District.
§ 650-16. R-3 Four-Family Residential District.
(4) Home professional offices.
(5) Public utility uses.
D. Uses not permitted in the R-1 District shall be as follows:
(1) Child-care centers.
E. Height, area and bulk requirements in the R-1 District shall be as
specified in the schedule attached hereto.382
A. Permitted uses in the R-2 District shall be as follows:
(1) One- and two-family dwellings.383
(2) Group homes.
(3) Parks and playgrounds.
(4) Municipal buildings and other governmental uses as deemed
necessary and approved by the Planning Board and the Municipal
Council.
(5) Temporary buildings as provided in § 650-14A(5).
B. Permitted accessory buildings and structures in the R-2 District shall be
as specified for the R-1 District in § 650-14B.
C. Uses permitted with a conditional use permit in the R-2 District shall be
as specified for the R-1 District in § 650-14C.
D. Uses not permitted in the R-2 District shall be as follows:
(1) Child-care centers.
E. Height, area and bulk requirements in the R-2 District shall be as
specified in the schedule attached hereto.384
A. Permitted uses in the R-3 District shall be as follows:
(1) One- and two-family dwellings.
(2) Three- and four-family dwellings, subject to the provisions of
Article IX.
382. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Area, Yard and Height Requirements is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
383. Editor's Note: Former § 197-15A(2) of the 1981 Revised Code, which previously followed
this subsection, permitting townhouses in the R-2 District, was repealed 1-15-2008 by
Ord. No. MC 3366.
384. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Area, Yard and Height Requirements is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 650-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-16
1:1111
§ 650-17. R-4 Garden Apartment District.
(3) Townhouses.
(4) Group homes.
(5) Parks and playgrounds.
(6) Municipal buildings and other governmental uses as deemed
necessary and approved by the Planning Board and Municipal
Council.
(7) Temporary buildings as provided in § 650-14A(5).
B. Permitted accessory buildings and structures in the R-3 District shall be
as specified for the R-1 District in § 650-14B.
C. Uses permitted with a conditional use permit. The following may be
permitted in the R-3 District with a conditional use permit, subject to
the provisions of Article IX:
(1) As specified for the R-1 District in § 650-14C.
(2) Quasi-public buildings and recreational facilities.
D. Uses not permitted in the R-3 District shall be as follows:
(1) Child-care centers.
E. Height, area and bulk requirements in the R-3 District shall be as
specified in the schedule attached hereto.385
A. Permitted uses in the R-4 District shall be as follows:
(1) One- and two-family dwellings.
(2) Three- and four-family dwellings, subject to the provisions of
Article IX.
(3) Townhouses.
(4) Group homes.
(5) Parks and playgrounds.
(6) Two- and three-story garden apartments, subject to the provisions
of Article IX.
(7) Municipal buildings and other governmental uses as deemed
necessary and approved by the Planning Board and Municipal
Council.
(8) Temporary buildings as provided in § 650-14A(5).
385. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Area, Yard and Height Requirements is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 650-16 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-17
1:1112
§ 650-18. R-5 High-Rise Apartment District.
B. Permitted accessory buildings and structures in the R-4 District shall be
as specified for the R-1 District in § 650-14B, but excepting animal
shelters.
C. Uses permitted with a conditional use permit. The following may be
permitted in the R-4 District with a conditional use permit, subject to
the provisions of Article IX:
(1) Hospitals or philanthropic or eleemosynary uses.
(2) Public, parochial or private schools.
(3) Places of worship.
(4) Public utility uses.
(5) Quasi-public buildings and recreational facilities.
D. Height, area and bulk requirements in the R-4 District shall be as
specified in the schedule attached hereto.386
A. Permitted uses in the R-5 High-Rise Apartment District shall be as
follows:
(1) Two- and three-story garden apartments, subject to the provisions
of Article IX.
(2) High-rise apartments, subject to the provisions of Article IX.
(3) Group homes.
(4) Parks and playgrounds.
(5) Municipal buildings and other governmental uses as deemed
necessary and approved by the Planning Board and Municipal
Council.
(6) Temporary buildings as provided in § 650-14A(5).
B. Permitted accessory buildings and structures in the R-5 District shall be
as follows:
(1) Off-street parking facilities as required by Article VIII, to include
public garages.
(2) Signs, subject to the provisions of Article VII.
(3) Storage buildings of 100 square feet or less in area.
(4) Essential utilities.
386. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Area, Yard and Height Requirements is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 650-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-18
1:1113
§ 650-19. B-1 Neighborhood Business District.
(5) Home occupations, subject to the provisions of Article IX.
C. Uses permitted with a conditional use permit in the R-5 District shall be
as specified for the R-4 District in § 650-17C.
D. Height, area and bulk requirements in the R-5 District shall be as
specified in the schedule attached hereto.387
A. Permitted uses in the B-1 District shall be as follows:
(1) Retail, office and personal service establishments. [Amended
1-15-2008 by Ord. No. MC 3366]
(a) Retail and personal service establishments, such as or similar
in nature to:
[1] Grocery stores.
[2] Drugstores.
[3] Meat, fish and poultry stores.
[4] Produce stores.
[5] Baked goods stores.
[6] Flower shops.
[7] Confectionery stores.
[8] Barber or beauty shops.
[9] Dry-cleaning shops, but not including dry-cleaning plants.
[10] Tailor shops.
[11] Self-service laundries, subject to the provisions of Article
IX.
[12] Shoe repair shops.
[13] Video rental establishments.
[14] Tattoo parlors, piercing parlors, and other body art shops.
[15] Financial services firms (without check-cashing services).
[Added 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3425]
[16] Bookstores. [Added 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3425]
387. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Area, Yard and Height Requirements is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 650-18 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-19
1:1114
[17] Haberdashery, apparel, and jewelry stores. [Added
8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3425]
[18] Personal and business service uses (photocopying,
Internet cafes, mail: bulk, express and regular). [Added
8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3425]
(b) Up to 50% of the building area may be devoted to the
processing, manufacture or storing of goods or products to be
retailed on the premises, provided that no such area shall front
on a public street at street level.
(2) Restaurants and cafes (sidewalk seating with a conditional use
permit, subject to the provisions of Article IX). [Amended
8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3425]
(3) Banks and fiduciary institutions.
(4) Municipal buildings and other governmental and/or public uses as
deemed necessary and approved by the Planning Board and
Municipal Council.
(5) Temporary buildings as provided in § 650-14A(5).
(6) Business and professional offices. [Added 1-15-2008 by Ord. No.
MC 3366 and 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3425]
(7) Residential dwelling units, provided that they are located above a
ground floor office or commercial use, and provided that they do
not front on a public street at street level, subject to the provisions
of Article IX. [Added 1-15-2008 by Ord. No. MC 3366]
B. Permitted accessory buildings and structures in the B-1 District shall be
as follows:
(1) Signs, subject to the provisions of Article VII.
(2) Off-street parking facilities and loading and unloading ramps in
accordance with the requirements of Article VIII.
C. Uses permitted with a conditional use permit. The following may be
permitted in the B-1 District with a conditional use permit, subject to
the provisions of Article IX:388
(1) Child-care centers.
(2) Public utilities.
(3) Hospitals or philanthropic or eleemosynary uses.
388. Editor's Note: Former § 197-19C(1) of the 1981 Revised Code, allowing certain business
and professional offices as a conditional use in the B-1 District, and § 197-19C(2),
allowing certain residential dwelling units as a conditional use in the B-1 District, which
were previously included in this subsection, were repealed 1-15-2008 by Ord. No. MC
3366.
§ 650-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-19
1:1115
§ 650-20. B-2 Shopping Center District.
(4) Quasi-public buildings and recreational facilities.
(5) Indoor recreational facilities.
(6) Check-cashing establishments. [Added 8-10-2010 by Ord. No.
MC 3425]
D. Height, area and bulk requirements in the B-1 District shall be as
specified in the schedule attached hereto.389
E. Uses not permitted in the B-1 District shall be as follows:
(1) Bingo halls.
(2) Billiard parlors or dance halls.
(3) Pawnbrokers.
(4) Any business conducted outside the confines of a building, with the
exception of outdoor seating associated with a restaurant or cafe.
(5) Clinics for the treatment of drug addiction.
(6) Drive-through windows.
(7) Bars and taverns.
(8) Packaged liquor stores.
(9) Gasoline service stations.
(10) Auto repair or body shops.
(11) Auto dealerships.
(12) Auto washes.
(13) Adult entertainment establishment.
(14) Adult-oriented store.390
(15) Live entertainment.
A. Permitted uses in the B-2 District shall be as follows:
(1) Retail, office and personal service establishments. [Amended
1-15-2008 by Ord. No. MC 3366]
389. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Area, Yard and Height Requirements is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
390. Editor's Note: Former § 197-19E(15) of the 1981 Revised Code, Check-cashing
establishments, which previously followed this subsection, was repealed 8-10-2010 by Ord.
No. MC 3425.
§ 650-19 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-20
1:1116
(a) Retail and personal service establishments, such as or similar
in nature to:
[1] Grocery stores.
[2] Drugstores.
[3] Produce stores.
[4] Meat, fish and poultry stores.
[5] Baked goods stores.
[6] Flower shops.
[7] Confectionery stores.
[8] Household supplies stores.
[9] Stationery supplies stores.
[10] Furniture and appliance stores.
[11] Hardware stores.
[12] Appliance and electronics repair establishments.
[13] Barber or beauty shops.
[14] Dry-cleaning shops, but not including dry-cleaning plants.
[15] Tailor shops.
[16] Self-service laundries, subject to the provisions of Article
IX.
[17] Shoe repair shops.
[18] Video rental establishments.
[19] Financial services firms (without check-cashing services).
[Added 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3425]
[20] Bookstores. [Added 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3425]
[21] Haberdashery, apparel, and jewelry stores. [Added
8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3425]
[22] Personal and business service uses (photocopying,
Internet cafes, mail: bulk, express and regular. [Added
8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3425]
(b) Up to 50% of the building area may be devoted to the
processing, manufacture or storing of goods or products to be
retailed on the premises, provided that no such area shall front
on a public street at street level.
§ 650-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-20
1:1117
(2) Restaurants and cafes (sidewalk seating with a conditional use
permit, subject to the provisions of Article IX). [Amended
8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3425]
(3) Banks and fiduciary institutions.
(4) Shopping centers, containing a combination of permitted retail and
personal service establishments, and/or restaurants and cafes, and/
or banks and fiduciary institutions.
(5) Public garages and parking lots, except within 75 feet of an R-1,
R-2, R-3 or R-4 Zone.
(6) Municipal buildings and other governmental and/or public uses as
deemed necessary and approved by the Planning Board and
Municipal Council.
(7) Temporary buildings as provided in § 650-14A(5).
(8) Business and professional offices. [Added 1-15-2008 by Ord. No.
MC 3366 and 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3425]
(9) Residential dwelling units, provided that they are located above a
ground floor office or commercial use, and provided that they do
not front on a public street at street level, subject to the provisions
of Article IX. [Added 1-15-2008 by Ord. No. MC 3366]
B. Permitted accessory buildings and structures in the B-2 District shall be
as specified for B-1 District in § 650-19B.
C. Uses permitted with a conditional use permit. The following may be
permitted in the B-2 District with a conditional use permit, subject to
the provisions of Article IX:
(1) Drive-through windows, as accessory uses to restaurants, banks,
drugstores, or other similar uses.391
(2) Public utilities.
(3) Hospitals or philanthropic or eleemosynary uses.
(4) Quasi-public buildings and recreational facilities.
(5) Indoor recreational facilities.
(6) Child-care centers.
(7) Tattoo parlors, piercing parlors, and other body art shops. [Added
1-15-2008 by Ord. No. MC 3366]
(8) Pawnbrokers. [Added 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3425]
391. Editor's Note: Former § 197-20C(2) of the 1981 Revised Code, Business and professional
offices, which previously followed this subsection, was repealed 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC
3425.
§ 650-20 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-20
1:1118
§ 650-21. B-3 Limited Business District.
D. Height, area and bulk requirements in the B-2 District shall be as
specified in the schedule attached hereto.392
E. Uses not permitted in the B-2 District shall be as follows:
(1) Clinics for the treatment of drug addiction.
(2) Bingo halls.
(3) Billiard parlors or dance halls.393
(4) Any business conducted outside the confines of a building, with the
exception of outdoor seating associated with a restaurant or cafe.
[Amended 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3425]
(5) Bars and taverns.
(6) Gasoline service stations.
(7) Packaged liquor stores.
(8) Auto repair or body shops.
(9) Auto dealerships.
(10) Auto washes.
(11) Adult entertainment establishment.
(12) Adult-oriented store.
(13) Check-cashing establishments.
(14) Live entertainment.
A. Permitted uses in the B-3 District shall be as follows:
(1) Retail, office and personal service establishments. [Amended
1-15-2008 by Ord. No. MC 3366]
(a) Retail and personal service establishments, such as or similar
in nature to:
[1] Drugstores.
[2] Household supplies stores.
[3] Stationery supplies stores.
[4] Furniture and appliance stores.
392. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Area, Yard and Height Requirements is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
393. Editor's Note: Former § 197-20E(5) of the 1981 Revised Code, Pawnbrokers, which
previously followed this subsection, was repealed 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3425.
§ 650-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-21
1:1119
[5] Hardware stores.
[6] Video rental establishments.
[7] Barber or beauty shops.
[8] Dry-cleaning shops, but not including dry-cleaning plants.
[9] Tailor shops. [Amended 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC
3425]
[10] Self-service laundries, subject to the provisions of Article
IX.
[11] Shoe repair shops. [Amended 8-10-2010 by Ord. No.
MC 3425]
[12] Business and professional offices.
[13] Residential dwelling units, provided that they are located
above a ground floor office or commercial use, and
provided that they do not front on a public street at street
level, subject to the provisions of Article IX.
[14] Financial services firms (without check-cashing services).
[Added 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3425]
[15] Bookstores. [Added 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3425]
[16] Fitness centers, spas, tanning salons. [Added 8-10-2010
by Ord. No. MC 3425]
[17] Career training centers. [Added 8-10-2010 by Ord. No.
MC 3425]
[18] Grocery stores. [Added 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC
3425]
[19] Haberdashery, apparel, and jewelry stores. [Added
8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3425]
[20] Personal and business service uses (photocopying,
Internet cafes, mail: bulk, express and regular. [Added
8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3425]
(b) Up to 50% of the building area may be devoted to the
processing, manufacture or storing of goods or products to be
retailed on the premises, provided that no such area shall front
on a public street at street level.
(2) Restaurants and cafes (sidewalk seating with a conditional use
permit, subject to the provisions of Article IX). [Amended
8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3425]
(3) Banks and fiduciary institutions.
§ 650-21 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-21
1:1120
(4) Public garages and parking lots, except within 75 feet of an R-1,
R-2, R-3 or R-4 Zone.
(5) Municipal buildings and other governmental and/or public uses as
deemed necessary and approved by the Planning Board and
Municipal Council.
(6) Temporary buildings as provided in § 650-14A(5).
(7) Business and professional offices. [Added 8-10-2010 by Ord. No.
MC 3425]
B. Permitted accessory buildings and structures in the B-3 District shall be
as specified for B-1 District in § 650-19B.
C. Uses permitted with a conditional use permit. The following may be
permitted in the B-3 District with a conditional use permit, subject to
the provisions of Article IX:
(1) Gasoline service stations.
(2) Drive-through windows, as accessory uses to restaurants, banks,
drugstores, or other similar uses.
(3) Public utilities.
(4) Child-care centers.
(5) Tattoo parlors, piercing parlors, and other body art shops. [Added
1-15-2008 by Ord. No. MC 3366]
(6) Charter schools. [Added 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3425]
(7) Pawnbrokers. [Added 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3425]
(8) Check-cashing establishments. [Added 8-10-2010 by Ord. No.
MC 3425]
D. Height, area and bulk requirements in the B-3 District shall be as
specified in the schedule attached hereto.394
E. Uses not permitted in the B-3 District shall be as follows:
(1) Clinics for the treatment of drug addiction.
(2) Bingo halls.
(3) Billiard parlors or dance halls.395
394. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Area, Yard and Height Requirements is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
395. Editor's Note: Former § 197-21E(4) of the 1981 Revised Code, Pawnbrokers, which
previously followed this subsection, was repealed 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3425.
§ 650-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-21
1:1121
§ 650-22. B-4 General Business District.
(4) Any business conducted outside the confines of a building, with the
exception of outdoor seating associated with a restaurant or cafe.
[Amended 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3425]
(5) Bars and taverns.
(6) Packaged liquor stores.
(7) Automobile repair or body shops.
(8) Automobile dealerships.
(9) Automobile washes.
(10) Adult entertainment establishment.
(11) Adult-oriented store.396
(12) Live entertainment.
A. Permitted uses shall be as specified for the B-3 District in § 650-21A.
B. Permitted accessory buildings and structures in the B-4 District shall be
as specified for B-1 District in § 650-19B.
C. Uses permitted with a conditional use permit. The following may be
permitted in the B-4 District with a conditional use permit, subject to
the provisions of Article IX:
(1) Gasoline service stations.
(2) Drive-through windows, as accessory uses to restaurants, banks,
drugstores, or other similar uses.
(3) Public utilities.
(4) Pawnbrokers.
(5) Packaged liquor stores.
(6) Automobile repair or body shops.
(7) Automobile dealerships.
(8) Automobile washes.
(9) Check-cashing establishments.
(10) Adult-oriented store.
(11) Child-care centers.
396. Editor's Note: Former § 197-21E(13) of the 1981 Revised Code, Check-cashing
establishments, which previously followed this subsection, was repealed 8-10-2010 by Ord.
No. MC 3425.
§ 650-21 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-22
1:1122
§ 650-23. B-5 Big Box Center District.
(12) Charter schools. [Added 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3425]
D. Height, area and bulk requirements in the B-4 District shall be as
specified in the schedule attached hereto.397
E. Uses not permitted in the B-4 District shall be as follows:
(1) Clinics for the treatment of drug addiction.
(2) Any business conducted outside the confines of a building with the
exception of outdoor seating associated with a restaurant or cafe.
[Amended 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3425]
(3) Bingo halls.
(4) Billiard parlors or dance halls.
(5) Bars and taverns.
(6) Adult entertainment establishment.
(7) Live entertainment.
A. Permitted uses in the B-5 District shall be as follows:
(1) Retail, office and personal service establishments. [Amended
1-15-2008 by Ord. No. MC 3366]
(a) Retail and personal service establishments, such as or similar
in nature to:
[1] Household supplies stores.
[2] Stationery supplies stores.
[3] Furniture and appliance stores.
[4] Hardware stores.
[5] Bookstores.
[6] Barber or beauty shops.
[7] Dry-cleaning shops, but not including dry-cleaning plants.
[8] Tailor shops.
[9] Self-service laundries, subject to the provisions of Article
IX.
397. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Area, Yard and Height Requirements is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 650-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-23
1:1123
[10] Shoe repair shops. [Amended 8-10-2010 by Ord. No.
MC 3425]
[11] Financial services firms (without check-cashing services).
[Added 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3425]
[12] Department stores. [Added 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC
3425]
[13] Financial service centers. [Added 8-10-2010 by Ord.
No. MC 3425]
[14] Career training centers. [Added 8-10-2010 by Ord. No.
MC 3425]
[15] Fitness centers, spas, tanning salons. [Added 8-10-2010
by Ord. No. MC 3425]
[16] Haberdashery, apparel, and jewelry stores. [Added
8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3425]
[17] Personal and business service uses (photocopying,
Internet cafes, mail: bulk, express and regular). [Added
8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3425]
[18] Check-cashing establishments. [Added 8-10-2010 by
Ord. No. MC 3425]
(b) Up to 50% of the building area may be devoted to the
processing, manufacture or storing of goods or products to be
retailed on the premises, provided that no such area shall front
on a public street at street level.
(2) Big box centers, containing a combination of permitted retail and
personal service establishments and restaurants and cafes with
sidewalk seating. [Amended 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3425]
(3) Public garages and parking lots, except within 75 feet of an R-1,
R-2, R-3 or R-4 Zone.
(4) Municipal buildings and other governmental and/or public uses as
deemed necessary and approved by the Planning Board and
Municipal Council.
(5) Temporary buildings as provided in § 650-14A(5).
(6) Business and professional offices. [Added 8-10-2010 by Ord. No.
MC 3425]
B. Permitted accessory buildings and structures in the B-5 District shall be
as follows:
(1) Signs, subject to the provisions of Article VII.
§ 650-23 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-23
1:1124
(2) Off-street parking facilities and loading and unloading ramps in
accordance with the requirements of Article VIII.
(3) Outdoor storage, subject to the provisions of Article IX.
C. Uses permitted with a conditional use permit. The following may be
permitted in the B-5 District with a conditional use permit, subject to
the provisions of Article IX:
(1) Charter schools. [Added 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3425398]
(2) Public utilities.
(3) Child-care centers.
(4) Tattoo parlors, piercing parlors, and other body art shops. [Added
1-15-2008 by Ord. No. MC 3366]
D. Height, area and bulk requirements in the B-5 District shall be as
specified in the schedule attached hereto.399
E. Uses not permitted in the B-5 District shall be as follows:
(1) Bingo halls.
(2) Billiard parlors or dance halls.
(3) Any business conducted outside the confines of a building, with the
exception of outdoor seating associated with a restaurant or cafe.
[Added 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3425400]
(4) Clinics for the treatment of drug addiction.
(5) Drive-through windows.
(6) Bars and taverns.
(7) Packaged liquor stores.
(8) Gasoline service stations.
(9) Auto repair or body shops.
(10) Auto dealerships.
(11) Auto washes.
(12) Adult entertainment establishment.
(13) Adult-oriented store.401
398. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 197-23C(1) of the 1981 Revised Code,
Business and professional offices.
399. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Area, Yard and Height Requirements is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
400. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 197-23E(3) of the 1981 Revised Code,
Pawnbrokers.
§ 650-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-23
1:1125
§ 650-24. CBD Central Business District, Downtown Mixed Use.
(14) Live entertainment.
A. Permitted uses in the CBD shall be as follows:
(1) Retail and personal service establishments.
(a) Retail and personal service establishments, such as or similar
in nature to:
[1] Drugstores.
[2] Meat, fish, and poultry stores.
[3] Produce stores.
[4] Baked goods stores.
[5] Flower shops.
[6] Confectionery stores.
[7] Household supplies stores.
[8] Stationery supplies stores.
[9] Furniture and appliance stores.
[10] Hardware stores.
[11] Appliance and electronics repair establishments.
[12] Haberdashery, apparel, and jewelry stores. [Amended
8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3425]
[13] Barber or beauty shops.
[14] Dry-cleaning shops, but not including dry-cleaning plants.
[15] Tailor shops.
[16] Self-service laundries, subject to the provisions of Article
IX.
[17] Shoe repair shops.
[18] Video rental establishments.
[19] Bookstores.
[20] Financial services firms (without check-cashing services).
[Added 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3425]
401. Editor's Note: Former § 197-23E(14) of the 1981 Revised Code, Check-cashing
establishments, which previously followed this subsection, was repealed 8-10-2010 by Ord.
No. MC 3425.
§ 650-23 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-24
1:1126
[21] Department stores. [Added 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC
3425]
[22] Financial service centers. [Added 8-10-2010 by Ord.
No. MC 3425]
[23] Career training centers. [Added 8-10-2010 by Ord. No.
MC 3425]
[24] Fitness centers, spas, tanning salons. [Added 8-10-2010
by Ord. No. MC 3425]
[25] Grocery stores. [Added 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC
3425]
[26] Personal and business service uses (photocopying,
Internet cafes, mail: bulk, express and regular). [Added
8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3425]
(b) Up to 50% of the building area may be devoted to the
processing, manufacture or storing of goods or products to be
retailed on the premises, provided that no such area shall front
on a public street at street level.
(2) Restaurants and cafes (sidewalk seating with a conditional use
permit, subject to the provisions of Article IX). [Amended
8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3425]
(3) Banks and fiduciary institutions.
(4) Municipal buildings and other governmental and/or public uses as
deemed necessary and approved by the Planning Board and
Municipal Council.
(5) Temporary buildings as provided in § 650-14A(5).
(6) Business and professional offices. [Added 8-10-2010 by Ord. No.
MC 3425]
B. Permitted accessory buildings and structures in the CBD shall be as
follows:
(1) Signs, subject to the provisions of Article VII.
(2) Off-street parking facilities and loading and unloading ramps in
accordance with the requirements of Article VIII.
(3) Live entertainment, as an accessory use to permitted restaurants,
cafes, billiard parlors, dance halls, bars, or taverns, subject to the
provisions of Article IX.
C. Uses permitted with a conditional use permit. The following may be
permitted in the CBD with a conditional use permit, subject to the
provisions of Article IX:402
§ 650-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-24
1:1127
(1) Residential dwelling units, provided that they are located above a
ground floor commercial use. [Amended 8-10-2010 by Ord. No.
MC 3425]
(2) Public utilities.
(3) Hospitals or philanthropic or eleemosynary uses.
(4) Quasi-public buildings and recreational facilities.
(5) Indoor recreational facilities.
(6) Bingo halls.
(7) Billiard parlors or dance halls.
(8) Bars and taverns.
(9) Bowling alleys.
(10) Amusement arcades.
(11) Child-care centers.
(12) Tattoo parlors, piercing parlors, and other body art shops.
(13) Charter schools. [Added 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3425]
(14) Check-cashing establishments. [Added 8-10-2010 by Ord. No.
MC 3425]
D. Height, area and bulk requirements in the CBD shall be as specified in
the schedule attached hereto.403
E. Uses not permitted in the CBD shall be as follows:
(1) Pawnbrokers.
(2) Any business conducted outside the confines of a building, with the
exception of outdoor seating associated with a restaurant or cafe.
(3) Clinics for the treatment of drug addiction.
(4) Drive-through windows.
(5) Packaged liquor stores.
(6) Gasoline service stations.
402. Editor's Note: Former § 197-24C(1) of the 1981 Revised Code, allowing certain business
and professional offices as a conditional use in the CBD District, which was previously
included in this Subsection C, was repealed 1-15-2008 by Ord. No. MC 3366 and 8-10-2010
by Ord. No. MC 3425. Former § 197-24C(2), allowing certain residential dwelling units as a
conditional use in the CBD District, which was previously included in this Subsection C,
was repealed 1-15-2008 by Ord. No. MC 3366.
403. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Area, Yard and Height Requirements is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 650-24 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-24
1:1128
§ 650-25. O-1 Residential-Character Office District.
(7) Auto repair or body shops
(8) Auto dealerships.
(9) Auto washes.
(10) Adult entertainment establishments.
(11) Adult-oriented stores.404
A. Permitted uses in the O-1 District shall be as follows:
(1) One-family dwellings.
(2) Two-family dwellings, but only for properties fronting along
Sanford Avenue south of Clinton Avenue.
(3) Group homes.
(4) Parks and playgrounds.
(5) Municipal buildings other governmental uses as deemed necessary
and approved by the Planning Board and the Municipal Council.
(6) Temporary buildings as provided in § 650-14A(5).
(7) Home professional offices. [Added 3-28-2006 by Ord. No. MC
3316]
(8) Business and professional offices. Any proposed development will
not significantly change the prevailing physical character of
adjacent uses. [Added 3-28-2006 by Ord. No. MC 3316]
B. Permitted accessory buildings and structures in the O-1 District shall be
as specified for R-1 District in § 650-14B.
C. Uses permitted with a conditional use permit. The following may be
permitted in the O-1 District with a conditional use permit, subject to
the provisions of Article IX:405
(1) Hospitals or philanthropic or eleemosynary uses.
(2) Public, parochial or private schools.
(3) Places of worship.
(4) Home professional offices.
404. Editor's Note: Former § 197-24E(12) of the 1981 Revised Code, Check-cashing
establishments, which previously followed this subsection, was repealed 8-10-2010 by Ord.
No. MC 3425.
405. Editor's Note: Former § 197-25C(1) of the 1981 Revised Code, pertaining to business and
professional offices, which was previously included in this Subsection C, was repealed
8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3425.
§ 650-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-25
1:1129
§ 650-26. M-1 Special Industrial Manufacturing District.
(5) Public utility uses.
(6) Child-care centers.
D. Height, area and bulk requirements in the O-1 District shall be as
specified in the schedule attached hereto.406
A. Permitted uses in the M-1 District shall be as follows:
(1) Light industry, subject to the provisions of Article IX, such as or
similar in nature to:
(a) Manufacturing of light machinery, such as but not limited to
carburetors, small machine parts, sewing machines, cash
registers, typewriters, calculators and other office machines.
(b) Fabrication of metal products, such as but not limited to baby
carriages, bicycles and other light vehicles, metal foils
(aluminum, gold, etc.), metal furniture, musical instruments,
sheet metal products and toys.
(c) Fabrication of paper products, such as but not limited to bags,
books, bookbinding, boxes, packaging materials and office
supplies.
(d) Fabrication of wood products, such as but not limited to boats,
boxes, cabinets and woodworking, furniture and toys.
(e) Other light industry uses, such as but not limited to brush and
broom manufacturing, electronics products, glass and glass
products, jewelry manufacturing (including polishing),
laundering and cleaning establishments, sporting goods
manufacturing, storehouses, warehouses and leather goods
manufacturing.
(2) Wholesale sales and distribution.
(3) Research and development, subject to provisions of Article IX.
(4) Laboratories, subject to provisions of Article IX.
(5) Business and professional offices.
(6) Municipal buildings and other governmental uses as approved by
the Planning Board and Municipal Council.
(7) Temporary buildings as provided in § 650-14A(5).
406. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Area, Yard and Height Requirements is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 650-25 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-26
1:1130
(8) Off-street parking lots and facilities in accordance with the
requirements of Article VIII. [Added 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC
3425]
(9) Personal and business service uses (photocopying, Internet cafes,
mail: bulk, express and regular). [Added 8-10-2010 by Ord. No.
MC 3425]
B. Accessory buildings and uses in the M-1 District shall be as follows:
(1) Private garages for the storage of vehicles operated exclusively as
part of a legally permitted use thereon.
(2) Such accessory uses as are customarily incident to the foregoing
permitted uses.
(3) Outdoor storage, subject to the provisions of Article IX.
(4) Signs, subject to the provisions of Article VII.
(5) Loading and unloading ramps and off-street parking facilities in
accordance with the requirements of Article VIII.
(6) Retail sales only as an accessory to an industrial uses and subject to
the provisions of Article IX.
C. Uses permitted with a conditional use permit. The following may be
permitted in the M-1 District with a conditional use permit, subject to
the provisions of Article IX:
(1) Other light industry uses upon a finding by the Planning Board that
such use;
(a) Is of the same general character as those permitted; and
(b) Will not be detrimental to the other uses within the district or
the adjoining land uses.
(2) Public utilities.
(3) Places of worship.
(4) Child-care centers.
D. Height, area and bulk requirements in the M-1 District shall be as
specified in the schedule attached hereto.407
E. Prohibited uses in the M-1 District shall be as follows:
(1) Those uses such as or similar in nature to those uses set forth in
§ 650-22E(1).
(2) Any residential use.
407. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Area, Yard and Height Requirements is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 650-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-26
1:1131
§ 650-27. M-2 Light Industrial Manufacturing District.
(3) Retail sales and services.
(4) Truck terminals and bulk distribution terminals.
(5) Bars and taverns.
(6) Adult entertainment establishment.
(7) Adult-oriented store.
F. All development in the M-1 District shall be subject to the
supplementary standards included in Article IX.
A. Permitted uses in the M-2 District shall be as follows:
(1) Light industry, subject to the provisions of Article IX.
(2) Research and development, subject to provisions of Article IX,
including fabrication, assembly, packing, repackaging and shipping
of previously manufactured products.
(3) Laboratories, subject to provisions of Article IX.
(4) Wholesale sales and distribution.
(5) Business and professional offices.
(6) Warehouses.
(7) Municipal buildings and other governmental uses as approved by
the Planning Board and Municipal Council.
(8) Temporary buildings as provided in § 650-14A(5).
(9) Dry-cleaning plants, subject to the provisions of Article IX.
(10)Off-street parking lots and facilities in accordance with the
requirements of Article VIII. [Added 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC
3425]
(11) Personal and business service uses (photocopying, Internet cafes,
mail: bulk, express and regular). [Added 8-10-2010 by Ord. No.
MC 3425]
B. Permitted accessory buildings and structures in the M-2 District shall
be as follows:
(1) Signs, subject to the provisions of Article VII.
(2) Loading and unloading ramps and off-street parking facilities in
accordance with the requirements of Article VIII.
(3) Outdoor storage, subject to the provisions of Article IX.
§ 650-26 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-27
1:1132
(4) Retail sales, including showrooms, only as an accessory to an
industrial uses and subject to the provisions of Article IX.
(5) Child-care centers, subject to the provisions of Article IX.
C. Uses permitted with a conditional use permit. The following may be
permitted in the M-2 District with a conditional use permit, subject to
the provisions of Article IX:
(1) Clinics for the treatment of drug addiction.
(2) Public utilities.
(3) Places of worship.
(4) Bars and taverns
(5) Bowling alleys.
(6) Amusement arcades.
(7) Billiard parlors and dance halls.
(8) Bingo halls.
(9) Tattoo parlors, piercing parlors, and other body art shops.
(10) Boardinghouses and rooming homes.
(11) Truck terminals and bulk distribution terminals.
(12) Auto dealerships. [Added 3-28-2006 by Ord. No. MC 3316]
(13) Auto-truck repair/body shops. [Added 3-28-2006 by Ord. No. MC
3316]
(14) Auto washes. [Added 3-28-2006 by Ord. No. MC 3316]
(15) Gasoline stations. [Added 3-28-2006 by Ord. No. MC 3316]
D. Height, area and bulk requirements in the M-2 District shall be as
specified in the schedule attached hereto.408
E. Other requirements for the M-2 District.
(1) Prohibited uses shall be as follows:
(a) Any such use as or similar to:
[1] Acetylene gas manufacture.
[2] Ammonia, chlorine or bleaching powder manufacture.
[3] Asphalt manufacturing or refining.
408. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Area, Yard and Height Requirements is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 650-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-27
1:1133
[4] Assaying (other than gold or silver).
[5] Blast furnace, forge or smelter.
[6] Boilerworks.
[7] Brick, tile or terra cotta manufacture.
[8] Candle manufacture.
[9] Celluloid and other cellulose products manufacture.
[10] Creosote treatment or manufacture.
[11] Distillation of coal, wood or bones.
[12] Disinfectant, insecticide or poison manufacture.
[13] Dye stuff manufacture.
[14] Emery cloth and sandpaper manufacture.
[15] Explosives manufacture or storage.
[16] Fat rendering.
[17] Fertilizer manufacture.
[18] Foundry, coke and metal rolling and drawing mill.
[19] Gas manufacture or storage in excess of 10,000 cubic feet.
[20] Glue, size or gelatin manufacture.
[21] Incineration or reduction of garbage, offal, dead animals
or refuse.
[22] Iron, steel, brass or copper foundry.
[23] Junkyard.
[24] Lamp black manufacture.
[25] Lime, cement or plaster of paris manufacture.
[26] Oilcloth or linoleum manufacture.
[27] Petroleum refining or storage of petroleum products above
ground, but nothing herein contained shall prevent the
storage of petroleum products not in excess of 10,000
gallons, provided that such storage is made in tanks below
the surface of the ground covered with two feet of welltamped
earth; provided, however, that fuel oil for use in
fuel oil burners for heating purposes may be stored
underground as above indicated in tanks not exceeding
20,000 gallons' capacity.
§ 650-27 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-27
1:1134
[28] Printing ink manufacture.
[29] Pyroxylin plastic manufacture or the manufacture of
articles therefrom.
[30] Storage, curing or tanning of raw hides or skins.
[31] Rock or stone crusher.
[32] Rolling mill.
[33] Rubber manufacture.
[34] Sale of used lumber, used plumbing and heating pipes and
fixtures and used mason or building materials.
[35] Sauerkraut or sausage manufacture.
[36] Shoe blacking or stove polish manufacture.
[37] Slaughterhouse or slaughtering of animals or fowl.
[38] Soap manufacture.
[39] Starch, glucose, yeast or dextrin manufacture.
[40] Stockyard.
[41] Stone crushing.
[42] Sugar refining.
[43] Sulfurous, sulfuric, nitric or hydrochloric acid
manufacture.
[44] Tallow, grease or lard manufacture or refining.
[45] Tar distillation or manufacture.
[46] Tar roofing or tar waterproofing manufacture.
[47] The dismantling or storage of dismantled automobiles or
used parts thereof or the storage or baling of scrap paper,
iron, bottles, rags or junk.
[48] Any other trade, industry or use that is noxious or
offensive by reason of the emission of odor, dust, smoke,
gas or noise.
(b) Any residential use.
(c) Retail sales and services.
(d) Any use which, by its nature, would create objectionable
conditions due to the emission of smoke, dust, noise, gas or
§ 650-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-27
1:1135
§ 650-28. M-3 Heavy Industrial Manufacturing District.
odor or in any way result in a detrimental effect upon the
surrounding area and the general community.
(2) All areas not occupied by structures or required off-street parking
shall be appropriately landscaped and buffered in accordance with
the requirements of the Planning Board.
(3) Wherever a residential district is adjacent to an industrial use, an
appropriate buffer strip shall be provided and maintained to screen
the residential district.
(4) Bars and taverns.
(5) Adult entertainment establishments.
(6) Adult-oriented stores.
A. Permitted uses in the M-3 District shall be as follows:
(1) Heavy industry, subject to the provisions of Article IX, including
storing, processing, polishing, laundering, cleaning and
manufacture of raw materials.
(2) Light industry, subject to the provisions of Article IX.
(3) Research and development, subject to provisions of Article IX.
(4) Laboratories, subject to provisions of Article IX.
(5) Business and professional offices.
(6) Wholesale sales and distribution.
(7) Warehouses.
(8) Public utilities.
(9) Municipal buildings and other governmental uses as approved by
the Planning Board and Municipal Council.
(10) Temporary buildings as provided in § 650-14A(5).
(11) Dry-cleaning plants, subject to the provisions of Article IX.
(12)Off-street parking lots and facilities in accordance with the
requirements of Article VIII. [Added 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC
3425]
(13) Personal and business service uses (photocopying, Internet cafes,
mail: bulk, express and regular). [Added 8-10-2010 by Ord. No.
MC 3425]
§ 650-27 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-28
1:1136
B. Permitted accessory buildings and structures in the M-3 District shall
be as follows:
(1) Signs, subject to the provisions of Article VII.
(2) Loading and unloading ramps and off-street parking facilities in
accordance with the requirements of Article VIII.
(3) Outdoor storage, subject to the provisions of Article IX.
(4) Retail sales only as an accessory to an industrial use and subject to
the provisions of Article IX.
(5) Child-care centers.
C. Uses permitted with a conditional use permit. The following may be
permitted in the M-3 District with a conditional use permit, subject to
the provisions of Article IX:
(1) Clinics for the treatment of drug addiction.
(2) Public utilities.
(3) Places of worship.
(4) Bars and taverns.
(5) Bowling alleys.
(6) Amusement arcades.
(7) Billiard parlors and dance halls.
(8) Bingo halls.
(9) Tattoo parlors, piercing parlors, and other body art shops.
(10) Adult entertainment establishments.
(11) Adult-oriented stores.
(12) Boardinghouses and rooming houses.
(13) Truck terminals and bulk distribution terminals.
(14) Auto dealerships. [Added 3-28-2006 by Ord. No. MC 3316]
(15) Auto-truck repair/body shops. [Added 3-28-2006 by Ord. No. MC
3316]
(16) Auto washes. [Added 3-28-2006 by Ord. No. MC 3316]
(17) Gasoline stations. [Added 3-28-2006 by Ord. No. MC 3316]
D. Height, area and bulk requirements in the M-3 District shall be as
specified in the schedule attached hereto.409
§ 650-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-28
1:1137
§ 650-29. P-1 Parks District.
§ 650-30. P-2 Institutional District.
E. Other requirements for the M-3 District.
(1) Prohibited uses shall be as follows:
(a) Any residential use.
(b) Retail sales and services.
(c) Any use which, by its nature, would create objectionable
conditions due to the emission of smoke, dust, noise, gas or
odor or in any way result in a detrimental effect upon the
surrounding area and the general community.
(2) All areas not occupied by structures or required off-street parking
shall be appropriately landscaped and buffered in accordance with
the requirements of the Planning Board.
(3) Wherever a residential district is adjacent to an industrial use, an
appropriate buffer strip shall be provided and maintained to screen
the residential district.
A. Permitted uses in the P-1 Parks District shall be as follows:
(1) Parks and playgrounds.
(2) Indoor recreational facilities, subject to the provisions of Article IX.
(3) Cemeteries.
(4) Temporary buildings as provided in § 650-14A(5).
B. Uses permitted with a conditional use permit. The following may be
permitted in the P-1 District with a conditional use permit, subject to
the provisions of Article IX:
(1) Municipal buildings and other governmental uses as deemed
necessary and approved by the Planning Board and Municipal
Council.
C. Height, area and bulk requirements in the P-1 District shall be as
specified in the schedule attached hereto.410
A. Permitted uses in the P-2 Institutional District shall be as follows:
409. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Area, Yard and Height Requirements is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
410. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Area, Yard and Height Requirements is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 650-28 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-30
1:1138
(1) Municipal buildings and other governmental uses as deemed
necessary and approved by the Planning Board and Municipal
Council.
(2) Parks and playgrounds.
(3) Indoor recreational facilities, subject to the provisions of Article IX.
(4) Temporary buildings as provided in § 650-14A(5).
B. Height, area and bulk requirements in the P-2 District shall be as
specified in the schedule attached hereto.411
411. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Area, Yard and Height Requirements is included as an
attachment to this chapter. Editor's Note: Former § 197-30.1 of the 1981 Revised Code,
MUOD Mixed Use Overlay District, added 3-28-2006 by Ord. No. MC 3316, as amended
1-15-2008 by Ord. No. MC 3366, and which immediately followed this section, was
repealed 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3425.
§ 650-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-30
1:1139

ARTICLE VII
Signs
[Amended 8-10-2004 by Ord. No. MC 3268]
§ 650-31. Sign regulations.412
A. Permits required.
(1) It is unlawful for any person to erect, structurally alter or relocate
any sign without first obtaining a permit and making payment of
the required fee. Any sign erected or maintained in violation of this
article shall be removed by the property owner, tenant or agent.
(2) No sign permit will be issued without the written consent of the
landowner or the one in control of the premises.
(3) A permit to erect a sign shall only apply to the premises for which it
was obtained and the sign for which it was obtained and shall not
be transferable to another premises or sign.
(4) Any sign not specifically permitted by this article is prohibited.
B. Definitions. For the purposes of this article, the following words and
phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this
section:
ABANDONED SIGN — Sign which no longer identifies or advertises a
bona fide business, lessee, service, owner, product, or activity or for
which no legal owner can be found, or a sign which is in a state of
disrepair.
ADVERTISING SIGN — A sign which may be a changeable sign and
which provides information in addition to that included in the
definitions for "identification sign" and for "directory sign."
ANIMATED SIGN — A sign or display having action, motion, flashing
lights, color changes, rotating or moving parts, banners, spinners, flags,
or pennants, except for barber poles.
AWNING SIGN — A fireproof space frame structure with translucent,
flexible, reinforced vinyl covering designed in awning form, but whose
principal purpose and use is signage. Such signs are wholly supported
by the building to which they are attached and may be internally
illuminated by fluorescent or other light sources in fixtures approved
under the National Electrical Code and BOCA Code.
CHANGEABLE SIGN — A sign whose informational content can be
changed or altered by manual, electric, electromechanical, or
electronic means.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — A sign containing directional information about
public places owned or operated by federal, state, or local governments
412. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 513, Signs and Billboards.
§ 650-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-31
1:1141
or their agencies or pursuant to government statute, order, or
regulation; publicly or privately owned natural phenomena or historic,
cultural, scientific, educational, and religious sites; and areas of natural
beauty or naturally suited to outdoor recreation; and a sign containing
directional information whose purpose it is to regulate and control the
flow of vehicular and pedestrian traffic to identify sidewalks, parking
areas, loading zones, entrances, exits, fire lanes, handicapped spaces,
private parking, and similar areas.
DIRECTORY SIGN — A freestanding sign that lists the occupants or
tenants of a site or building and may cite the building owner or
manager and telephone number.
DOUBLE-FACED SIGN — One sign with print on both sides or two
signs attached to each other back-to-back. Whenever there is an angle
between two or more faces, each shall be considered as separate signs.
ERECT — To construct, build, raise, assemble, place, affix, attach,
create, paint, draw, or in any other way bring into being or establish,
but not any of the foregoing activities when performed as an incident to
the changes of an advertising message or normal maintenance or repair
of a sign or sign structure.
FACADE SIGN — A sign attached to, painted on, or erected against the
exterior wall of a building, with the sign face parallel to such wall, the
highest portion of which sign is not higher than the lowest portion of
the roofline of the building and is not wider than the building.
FLASHING SIGN — A sign, the illumination of which is not kept
constant in intensity at all times when in use.
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign which may be a changeable sign and
which is supported by poles, columns, uprights, or foundations affixed
to the ground but not attached to any part of any building.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign which states the name, address, and/
or telephone number of the occupant(s) therein or identifies a place
or development or the name and profession of a home occupation
conducted on the premises.
ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign which is illuminated either indirectly
from an external artificial source with nonglaring lights or directly by
shielded floodlights.
MEMORIAL SIGNS — Historical tablets, cornerstones, memorial
plaques, building name, erection date and emblems which do not
exceed six square feet in surface area and which are cut into any
masonry and which are constructed of bronze or other durable
material.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — A sign which was erected legally, but
which does not comply with current sign restrictions and regulations.
OUTDOOR DISPLAY STRUCTURE or BILLBOARD — A sign which
advertises a product or service or which directs attention to a business,
§ 650-31 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-31
1:1142
industry, profession, commodity, service, organization, or
entertainment not sold or offered upon the premises where the sign is
located and any sign unrelated to the premises on which the sign is
erected.
PARAPET — The extension of a false front or wall above a roofline.
PERSON — Any individual, association, partnership, firm or
corporation.
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign which is attached to a building wall and
extends from the face of such wall.
ROOF SIGN — A sign constructed or supported upon the roof or above
the roofline of any building or structure.
SHOPPING CENTER or OFFICE PLAZA — A collection of more than two
stores, businesses, offices, or separate commercial uses with shared,
on-site parking for customers in one or more connected lots.
SIGN — Any device, structure, fixture, or placard using graphics,
symbols, and written copy for the primary purpose of identifying,
providing directions or advertising any establishment, product, goods,
or services, provided that the display of public notices in connection
with a public entity or the flag, emblem or insignia of a nation or
political unit shall not be considered signs under the provisions of this
article.
SIGN AREA — The entire display space available for print, including
decorative trim, or, in the case of individual box letters, the box
dimensions encompassing all the letters, including decorative trim. If
there is no background, the sign area shall be the smallest rectangular
area required to encompass all lines of lettering, illustration, or display.
SPECIAL EVENT SIGN — A sign in connection with special events in
the community.
SIGN STRUCTURE — Any structure which supports or is capable of
supporting any sign or signs.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A nonilluminated sign which advertises a
political election or a political event, a community or civic project, real
estate for sale or lease, garage or other sale or special event on a
temporary basis and is removed within seven days of completion of the
event.
C. Exempt signs. Exempt signs shall not be included in the calculations of
maximum signage area as specified elsewhere in this article. The
following signs are permitted where specified and with the following
conditions. Such signs shall not require permits or the payment of fees,
but are subject to the other provisions of this article:
(1) Any sign erected by the federal, state, county, or Township
government or agency thereof.
§ 650-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-31
1:1143
(2) Nonilluminated facade identification signs on any building,
provided that such signs do not exceed two square feet in area.
(3) Decals not exceeding one square foot in area.
(4) Permanent painted or neon letters with no background and not
exceeding 25% of any window of a commercial establishment.
(5) Nonilluminated temporary signs inside windows of commercial
establishments covering not more than 25% of any window and not
unreasonably obstruct light or visibility.
(6) Directional signs not exceeding three square feet in area.
(7) Nonilluminated signs denoting the architect, engineer, or
contractor who is completing work under construction and not
exceeding 12 square feet in area, and which shall be removed
within seven days after the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
Such sign may either be a facade sign or a freestanding sign not
exceeding eight feet in height nor located within 15 feet of any lot
line.
(8) Memorial signs.
(9) Nonilluminated signs forbidding trespassing, hunting, fishing, or
trapping as authorized by the fish and game laws, provided that the
signs shall not exceed two square feet in area.
(10) One nonilluminated, temporary sign, per lot, indicating a political
preference, election, or event, or advertising public functions or
fund-raising events for charitable or religious organizations for a
period of 60 days prior to the event, provided that such signs do not
exceed 12 square feet in area, not exceeding eight feet in height.
Such sign may be a facade sign or a changeable and/or
freestanding sign not located within 10 feet of any lot line.
(11) One nonilluminated, temporary sign, per lot, advertising a garage
or yard sale only on the premises on which the sign is located, not
to exceed four square feet, and containing the date(s) of the sale,
and shall be removed within 24 hours after the last day of the sale
and limited to no more than 10 sale days per calendar year.
(12) One nonilluminated, temporary sign, per 25 feet of road frontage,
advertising the sale or rental of the premises upon which they are
situated, provided that such signs do not exceed 24 square feet in
area and may contain such phrases as "inquire within," a telephone
number, the name and address of the owner or agent, and which
shall be removed within seven days of when the purpose of the sign
is fulfilled.
(13) One nonilluminated, temporary sign, per lot, on a sold premises,
provided that such signs do not exceed four square feet in area and
may contain the word "sold" and the name, address, and telephone
§ 650-31 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-31
1:1144
number of the owner or agent, and which shall be removed within
14 days after the sale.
(14) One nonilluminated, temporary sign, per 25 feet of road frontage,
on a premises for sale announcing an "open house," but only on the
day that such open house is being conducted, and only once in any
seven day period, provided that such signs do not exceed four
square feet in area.
(15) Temporary and permanent traffic signs and signals installed by the
Township, county, and state for the purpose of directing and
regulating the flow of traffic.
(16) Signs indicating public transportation stops when installed by the
Township or a public transportation utility.
(17) Flags or emblems of religious, educational, civic or governmental
organizations flown from supports on the buildings or grounds
occupied by the organization and the American flag or an official
state flag whenever and wherever flown in accordance with the
laws and rules promulgated by the government.
(18) For a single-family residential building, one lawn sign identifying
residents, not exceeding two square feet in area. The sign shall not
contain any advertising message and shall be nonilluminated
except by a light which is an integral part of a lamppost if used as
support for the sign.
(19) Gasoline price signs, not exceeding one square foot in area, limited
to one per nozzle. Such signs shall be mounted on the pump or
canopy support.
D. Preexisting nonconforming signs.
(1) A preexisting nonconforming sign may continue to exist (except for
prohibited specified herein at § 650-31E(1) through (13), which
shall be removed upon passage of this article) at its present
location, but shall not be rebuilt, relocated, enlarged, extended,
replaced, or altered in any way (except for change in lettering or
printed content and its backboard) unless the change results in a
sign conforming in all aspects to this article. Alterations include,
but shall not be limited to, any change made to the supporting
members, frame, backing, or lighting system.
(2) In owner-occupied or one-tenant occupancy of a building, no permit
shall be issued for any additional sign if the property contains a
nonconforming sign.
E. Prohibited signs and sign features.
(1) No sign shall be erected, used or maintained which in any way
simulates or is similar to official, traffic, directional, or warning
signs erected or maintained by the state, any county, any
§ 650-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-31
1:1145
municipality, or by any public utility or similar agency concerned
with the protection of the public health or safety.
(2) No portion of any sign shall be located within or suspended over a
public right-of-way, street, or pedestrian walkway, or public
sidewalk, except for official Township functions, unless specifically
authorized by ordinance or regulations of the Township.
(3) No sign (except for official signs) shall be of such color, shape, or
lettering, or placed in such a position as to diminish or detract in
any way from the effectiveness, obscure visibility of, or potentially
cause a danger near any traffic signal or similar safety or warning
device.
(4) No portion of a sign may obstruct any window, door, fire escape,
stairway, or opening intended to provide light, ingress, or egress to
or from any building or structure, with the exception of those
allowed in § 650-31C(2).
(5) No sign may be placed in such a position as to cause a danger to
traffic by obscuring visibility.
(6) No portion of a sign shall be attached to any fire escape or fire
escape support. No portion of a sign shall be closer than two feet
from the edges of a fire escape platform. No sign, brace or guy wire
shall obstruct access to a fire escape or other means of egress.
(7) No sign may be animated with the exception of clocks and weather
information or banners used as special event signs.
(8) No sign visible from the street may use the word "stop" or "danger"
or any other word, phrase, symbol, or character which simulates a
public safety warning or traffic signal.
(9) No sign may have advertising matter of an illegal, indecent, or
obscene nature.
(10)No sign, other than officially authorized signs, may be placed,
painted, or attached to standpipes, trees, fences, utility poles,
sidewalks, curbs, other signs, or motor vehicles which are
continuously or repeatedly parked in a conspicuous location to
serve as a sign, but nothing herein contained prohibits directional
or identification signs.
(11)No sign shall advertise a proposed use for a property without
having been issued a zoning permit from the Township.
(12)No sign shall cause glare or have a direct source of light which is
not shielded in such a manner that it is not visible from the street or
any adjacent residential property.
(13) No sign shall be on a balloon.
§ 650-31 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-31
1:1146
(14)No sign shall be a sequential series of two or more signs placed in a
line parallel to the highway, or in similar fashion, all carrying a
single advertisement message, part of which is contained on each
sign.
(15)No sign shall be a flashing sign or have exposed high-intensity
illumination or exposed neon tubes or reflective material or neon
tubes encased in a transparent material.
(16)No sign shall be a roof sign on buildings, structures, parapets, or
vehicles, excluding licensed and registered taxicabs for hire.
(17) No sign may be an outdoor display structure or a billboard.
(18)No freestanding sign or projecting sign shall be erected on lots
facing 40th Street.
(19)No freestanding sign shall exceed the height of or extend above the
first story or roofline.
(20)No projecting sign shall exceed four square feet in area or extend
outward more than 18 inches from the exterior wall surface of the
supporting sign structure or be closer than 10 feet to the ground.
(21) Abandoned signs shall be removed by the tenant, property owner,
or agent.
F. Administration and filing procedure.
(1) The Building Inspector shall only issue a permit for the erection of
a sign which complies with this article and, where applicable, in
accordance with approvals granted by the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
(2) Applications for permits to erect a sign shall be submitted on forms
obtainable from the Building Inspector. Each application shall be
accompanied by plans showing the sign area, dimensions, square
footage, printing, symbols, materials, method of illumination if any,
location, method of fastening, vertical distance between the bottom
of the sign and the ground, and the horizontal distance between the
sign and property lines. The application must include the name and
address of the applicant, as well as the name, address, and written
consent of the owner of the property, and the name and address of
the person erecting the sign. The applicant shall specify whether
the sign will be an advertising sign, an awning sign, a directional
sign, a directory sign, or an identification sign and whether the sign
will be temporary or permanent.
G. Permitted signs in residential districts (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, and R-5).
(1) For a single-family residential building, either one nonilluminated
facade identification sign located on the house not to exceed two
square feet in area, or one nonilluminated freestanding
§ 650-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-31
1:1147
identification sign in the front yard not to exceed four feet in height
and not less than 10 feet from a property line.
(2) For a home professional occupation or a preexisting nonconforming
use or a conditional use other than residential, either one
nonilluminated facade identification sign located on the principal
building not to exceed two square feet in area or one
nonilluminated freestanding identification sign not exceeding two
square feet in area nor exceeding four feet in height and not
located less than 10 feet from a property line.
(3) Religious institutions, hospitals, nursing homes, private schools,
service organizations and public buildings and facilities may have
one nonilluminated freestanding sign or changeable sign not more
than 35 square feet in area, not to exceed six feet in height, and not
less than 10 feet from a property line, on each major street
bordering the property, as necessary to provide directions or
describe the use and upcoming events.
(4) Signs are permitted in connection with each housing or
multibuilding development complex, as follows:
(a) At each entrance to the multibuilding development complex,
two freestanding signs, which may be illuminated, stating the
name of the development only. Each sign shall not exceed 25
square feet in area and not more than eight feet in height.
(b) At the rental or sales office of the development, one
freestanding sign, which may be illuminated, advertising the
office, not to exceed 15 square feet in area and not more than
five feet in height.
(c) Nonilluminated temporary real estate unit for lease or sale
signs, the sole purpose of which is to direct the public to a
housing or land development under construction. Not more
than one such sign shall be permitted per 300 feet of street
frontage of a lot. Each sign shall not exceed 15 square feet in
area and five feet in height above ground and shall be set back
at least 10 feet from each property line. The signs must be
removed after construction of the complex is completed.
(d) Directional signs as necessary and one directory sign per
complex not closer than 10 feet to a property line.
(e) At each building entrance, one nonilluminated identification
facade sign, which the sole purpose shall be to identify
residents' doorbells, and which sign shall not exceed one
square foot.
H. Signs in business districts (B-1, B-2, and O-1).
(1) Facade signs shall be permitted as follows:
§ 650-31 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-31
1:1148
(a) One facade advertising sign, which may be illuminated,
attached to the front of a building shall not exceed 10% of the
front first story surface area of the portion of the building
allocated to that particular business.
(b) For lots served by a rear parking lot, one facade advertising
sign, which may be illuminated, attached to the rear building
wall shall not exceed 5% of the rear first story surface area of
the portion of the building allocated to that particular business.
(c) For lots served by a parking lot in a side yard, one facade sign,
which may be illuminated, attached to the side building wall
shall not exceed 5% of the side first story surface area of the
portion of the building allocated to that particular business.
(d) No one sign shall exceed 150 square feet in area, unless the
front wall area exceeds 1,500 square feet. In such case, the
sign(s) shall be permitted to increase in size by one square foot
for each 200 additional square feet of front wall area, but not to
exceed 300 square feet of area for any one sign.
(e) No sign shall project more than 12 inches from the building
facade; provided, however, that where a sign extends more
than three inches from the face of the wall, the bottom edge of
the sign shall not be less than eight feet from the ground.
(f) No sign shall have a top height higher than 20 feet from
ground level nor project above the roofline, whichever is less.
(g) Such signs may be illuminated. Lettering and backing material
shall be coordinated with other adjacent sign colors.
(2) Freestanding and changeable signs for business uses other than
shopping centers or office plazas shall be permitted as follows:
(a) Not more than one such sign shall be permitted per 300 feet of
street frontage on any one lot.
(b) No one surface of any such sign shall exceed 75 square feet in
area or one square foot for each five feet of street frontage,
whichever is less.
(c) No such sign shall be higher than 20 feet nor project above the
roofline of the building, whichever is less; the bottom of the
sign shall not be closer than eight feet to the ground level.
(d) All such signs shall be located in the front yard and must be set
back from the front lot line at least 15 feet.
(3) Freestanding and changeable signs in shopping centers or office
plazas shall be permitted as follows:
§ 650-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-31
1:1149
(a) One per main driveway entrance to identify the center and
occupants therein, not to exceed 250 square feet or one square
foot for each five feet of street frontage, whichever is less. The
total area of such signs shall not exceed 500 square feet and
shall not be closer to one another than 1,600 feet on the same
street frontage.
(b) Such signs shall not exceed 25 feet in height and shall be set
back 10 feet from the front lot line, and no such sign shall
encroach upon the required side yard or rear yard setbacks.
(c) Such signs may be illuminated.
(4) Awning signs for business uses are permitted as follows:
(a) All frames are to be manufactured from tubular or structurally
shaped steel or aluminum with finishes or coatings as required
to insure against corrosion.
(b) Vinyl fabric coverings are to be 14 ounces per yard minimum
weight with certification as to tensile strength and flame
resistance to meet industry and NFPA and BOCA codes.
(c) Fastenings and/or structural attachments to buildings must be
only to structural members and of sufficient size and strength
to meet BOCA standards.
(d) Electrical components and/or lighting equipment is to be
labeled and rated for protected outdoor use and installed by a
licensed electrical contractor.
(e) Ceilings are optional and may consist of egg crate, mesh fabric,
or solid plastic material. Removable panels or sections must be
provided to allow access for service and cleaning.
(f) Awning signs which project over or above backup walls are to
be covered and weather protected with structural plastic,
rustproofed metal, or aluminum.
(g) Such signs may be illuminated. Lettering and backing material
shall be coordinated with other adjacent sign colors.
(h) Letter copy on awning signs is to be applied with
manufacturer-approved processes.
(i) Minimum height clearance shall be eight feet between the
bottom of the awning and the ground level, including any
fringe or valance, and may not project over a public right-ofway.
(j) Such signs shall be limited to single-story buildings or to the
first level only of multistory buildings.
§ 650-31 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-31
1:1150
(k) Such signs may be attached to buildings not to exceed property
lines. In shopping centers or multiunit developments, such
signs may not exceed control curbs or safety zones. Awnings
shall not protrude from the wall more than adjacent signs.
(l) Only the copy area of such signs shall be considered in the
square footage limitations. The remaining portion shall be
considered as awning area only.
I. Signs in manufacturing districts (M-1, M-2, and M-3).
(1) Facade signs for nonresidential uses: the same regulation as
specified for business districts herein at § 650-31H(1).
(2) Freestanding and changeable signs for nonresidential uses shall be
permitted as follows: the same regulations as specified for
shopping centers herein at § 650-31H(3).
§ 650-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-31
1:1151

ARTICLE VIII
Off-Street Parking and Loading
§ 650-32. Off-street parking regulations.
A. Every use or activity constructed or created within the Township of
Irvington subsequent to the passage of this chapter shall be
accompanied by off-street parking space as defined within this chapter
according to the requirements set forth below and shall be furnished
with all necessary passageways and driveways.
(1) All such space shall be deemed to be required space on the lot on
which it is situated and shall not be encroached upon or reduced in
any manner. Such space may be considered as yard area in meeting
the requirements of the schedule.
(2) In the CBD Zoning District, for lots fronting on Springfield Avenue,
Clinton Avenue, New Street, Nye Avenue (east of Lincoln Place),
Union Avenue, and Washington Avenue, the following provisions
shall apply:
(a) Any change of use and any renovation or reconstruction of an
existing building that does not involve any increase in building
footprint or floor area may be permitted, and no additional onsite
parking spaces will be required.
(b) Any new development or any expansion of the building
footprint or floor area of an existing building shall not be
permitted unless the applicant can demonstrate that there are
adequate, available parking spaces on the street, in public
parking lots or garages, or in publicly accessible private lots
within a walking distance of the main building entrance of
1,500 linear feet. The applicant must take into account the
competing demand for available spaces from adjacent uses.
The applicant must demonstrate that an adequate number of
spaces will be available to serve all the proposed uses within
the building on an average weekday between the hours of
12:00 noon and 2:00 p.m. and between the hours of 4:00 p.m.
and 8:00 p.m., and on an average Saturday between the hours
of 12:00 noon and 2:00 p.m.
(c) To the greatest extent practicable, no private garage doors,
driveways, or parking lots shall front on these streets, in order
to promote pedestrian safety and maintain the pedestrian
activity that the retail businesses in those locations rely upon.
(3) All parking areas, passageways and driveways, except when
provided in connection with one- or two-family residences, shall be
surfaced with a concrete or bituminous concrete surface, clearly
marked for car spaces, shall be adequately drained and maintained
§ 650-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-32
1:1153
§ 650-33. Off-street parking standards.
The following off-street parking spaces are required:
free of obstruction and snow, all subject to the approval of the
Township Engineer.
B. Additional off-street parking as required by this chapter shall not be
required for any existing building or use unless said building shall be
enlarged or extensively altered or if the use is changed, in which case
off-street parking shall be provided up to the requirements of this
section.
C. Parking areas may be located in any yard space for uses in the
industrial districts and in any yard except the front yard for other uses.
D. The collective provisions of off-street parking areas by two or more
buildings or uses located on adjacent lots is permitted, provided that
the total of such facilities shall not be less than the sum required of the
various buildings or uses computed separately, and further provided
that the land upon which the collective facilities are located is owned or
is leased for a minimum period of 10 years by one or more of the
collective owners.
E. All parking areas and appurtenant passageways and driveways serving
commercial or industrial uses shall be illuminated during the hours
between sunset and sunrise when the use is in operation. [See
Ordinance No. MC 2492, Article X, Section 2C(7).413]
F. All parking spaces shall have a slope of less than 15%.
G. Where more than one use or activity is present within a single building
or on a single parcel, off-street parking shall be provided for each of the
uses or activities according to § 650-33.
H. Access lanes shall be provided to allow for ingress and egress and
maneuverability, with no parking on any aisles, driveways or access
lanes, based on the degree of angle parking: 90° shall be 25 feet in
depth, 60° and 45° shall be 22 feet in depth.
I. Exemption. Municipal garages and multistory parking garages
maintained and operated by the Township of Irvington are exempted
and excluded from the requirements of this article.
A. All residential uses: one parking space per dwelling unit.
B. Motels: one parking space per sleeping or dwelling unit.
C. Retail establishment, wholesale store and personal service
establishment:
413. Editor's Note: See § 560-50C(7).
§ 650-32 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-33
1:1154
(1) Each retail store, wholesale store and personal service shop in any
one building or structure, which building or structure contains not
more than 2,500 square feet of floor areas: no parking spaces shall
be required.
(2) Each retail store, wholesale store or personal service shop in any
one building or structure, which building or structure contains
more than 2,500 square feet of floor area but not more than 20,000
square feet of floor area: four parking spaces, plus one parking
space for each 333 square feet above 2,500 square feet of floor
area.
(3) Each retail store, wholesale store and personal service shop in any
one building or structure, which building or structure contains
more than 20,000 square feet of floor area: 62 parking spaces, plus
one parking space for each 250 square feet above 20,000 square
feet of floor area.
D. Banks, financial and business offices and professional and commercial
offices:
(1) Banks, financial and business offices and professional and
commercial offices: one parking space for every 400 square feet of
building area or major fraction thereof.
(2) Exceptions.
(a) Those premises which lie within the business zone as
delineated on the Zoning Map414 of the Township of Irvington,
fronting on Springfield Avenue, northerly side of the street,
between Maple Avenue westerly to Florence Avenue; and those
premises which lie in the business zones as delineated on the
Zoning Map of the Township of Irvington, fronting on
Springfield Avenue, southerly side of street, between Maple
Avenue westerly to 40th Street, and which are used and
maintained as a commercial or professional office type of
enterprise shall be required to maintain two parking spaces for
each 1,200 square feet of floor area.
(b) Those premises which lie in a business zone as delineated on
the Zoning Map of the Township of Irvington and which are
used as a commercial or professional office type of enterprise
and which lie within 350 feet of a municipal parking lot need
not provide off-street parking, provided that they rent space
from the municipal parking garage on a yearly basis.
E. Supermarkets, self-service food stores: one parking space for every 250
square feet of building area.
414. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 650-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-33
1:1155
F. Automobile service stations: one parking space for each service bay,
plus one parking space for every employee present for duty at the time
the highest number are present on a daily basis. [See Ord. No. MC
2492, Article X, Section 2C and 2D.415]
G. Motor vehicle sales and service:
(1) Any building or structure containing not more than 2,500 square
feet of floor area: two parking spaces shall be required.
(2) Any building or structure containing more than 2,500 square feet of
floor area but not more than 20,000 square feet of floor area: two
parking spaces, plus one parking space for each 333 square feet
above 2,500 square feet of floor area.
(3) Any building or structure which contains more than 20,000 square
feet of floor area: 62 parking spaces, plus one parking space for
each 250 square feet above 20,000 square feet of floor area.
H. Used car sales: five parking spaces, plus one parking space for each
employee present for duty at the time the highest number are present,
on a daily basis.
I. Restaurants, cafeterias, taverns and bars, having more than 1,500
square feet of floor area: 10 parking spaces, plus one parking space for
each 100 square feet of floor area over 1,500 square feet.
J. Bowling alleys: four parking spaces for each bowling lane.
K. Auditoriums, exhibition halls, union halls, community centers, dance
halls, churches, theaters, stadiums, assembly halls and similar places of
public assembly having fixed seating facilities: one parking space for
every 100 square feet of total building area.
L. Hospitals, nursing homes and similar institutional uses for care of the ill
or aged: two parking spaces for every six beds.
M. Mortuaries and funeral homes: two parking spaces for every 50 square
feet of floor area in the slumber rooms, parlors or individual funeral
service rooms.
N. Industrial manufacturing establishments: three parking spaces for
every five employees on the largest shift.
O. Public swim clubs: one parking space for every full-time employee, and
one parking space for every four separate memberships.
P. Within the B-1 Neighborhood Business District, off-street parking space
shall be provided for each employee present at the time of the greatest
number of employees present.
415. Editor's Note: See § 560-50C and D.
§ 650-33 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-33
1:1156
§ 650-34. Off-street loading and unloading.
Q. Research and office building uses in any district shall provide one offstreet
parking facility for every 400 square feet of floor space, unless an
amount is required under any other ordinance. Said required area shall
be permitted in the side and rear yards, but not in the front yard,
provided that said permitted area is at no point closer than 25 feet to
any property line and not closer than 10 feet to any residential zone.
R. Off-street parking for schools shall be provided in the following ratio:
elementary schools shall provide one parking space for each staff
member and/or employee, plus adequate space for buses and delivery
vehicles. All other schools shall provide 1 1/2 parking spaces for each
member or employee, plus adequate space for buses and delivery
vehicles. These requirements may be increased if, in the judgment of
the Board of Adjustment and/or the Planning Board, the unavailability
of bus services, the particular location or a relatively high percentage of
pupils driving or anticipated to be driving cars to school make such
increased requirements desirable.
S. Driveways shall have a minimum width of 10 feet.
A. For every building, structure or part thereof having over 3,000 square
feet of gross building area erected and occupied for commerce,
hospital, laundry, dry cleaning, places of public and quasi-public
assembly industry and other similar uses involved in the receipt and
distribution by vehicles of materials or merchandise, there shall be
provided and permanently maintained adequate space for standing,
loading and unloading services in order to avoid undue interference
with the public use of streets or alleys. Every use or activity constructed
or created within the Township of Irvington subsequent to the passage
of this chapter which complies with the above definitions shall be
provided with at least one truck standing, loading and unloading space
on the premises of not less than 12 feet in width, 55 feet in length and
with at least 14 feet overhead clearance. One additional truck space of
these dimensions shall be provided for every additional 10,000 square
feet or fraction thereof of gross floor area in the building. No zones are
excepted from this requirement.
B. Access to truck standing, loading and unloading space shall be directly
from any public street or alley or from any right-of-way that will not
interfere with public convenience and will permit the orderly and safe
movement of traffic.
C. Loading space as required under this section shall be provided in
addition to off-street parking space and shall not be considered as
supplying off-street parking space.
D. Off-street loading and unloading area shall be surfaced with a concrete
or bituminous concrete surface, which shall be adequately drained, all
subject to the approval of the Township Engineer.
§ 650-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-34
1:1157
§ 650-35. Parking lot layout and landscaping.
E. Whenever an off-street loading and unloading area shall be located
adjacent to or across the street from a residential zone, appropriate
evergreen planting or attractive noncorrosive fencing shall be provided
and maintained, thereby screening the residential zone.
F. Off-street loading spaces shall be located entirely on the lot, and no
truck or trailer truck occupying any such berth shall project into or
encroach upon a public sidewalk or upon the roadway of a public street.
A. Except for parking lots serving single-family and two-family dwellings,
suitable landscaping shall be provided, as required pursuant to Articles
VI and IX, along the periphery of parking lots and within parking lots.
B. All parking lots and loading spaces shall be curbed, screened, and
landscaped with appropriate trees, shrubs, hedges, ground cover, and
other plant materials along the periphery of parking lots and within
parking lots to assure the establishment of a safe, convenient, and
attractive facility. Parking lots serving single-family and two-family
dwellings and parking lots with less than 10 spaces shall be exempt
from this requirement.
C. Such landscaping as required under Subsection B above shall be
planted and maintained in accordance with the following standards. For
certain uses, Article IX requires alternate landscaping standards. In
case of any discrepancy between the following provisions and those in
Article IX, the more stringent shall be required.
(1) The entire perimeter of the parking lot shall be surrounded by a
landscaped area having a minimum width of five feet.
(2) Not including landscaped areas along the periphery of the parking,
at least 6% of the total parking lot shall be landscaped.
(3) There shall be a minimum of one landscaped island the size of a
single normal-sized parking space for every 15 parking spaces. The
islands shall be evenly distributed throughout the parking lot. Each
landscaped island shall be planted with at least one evergreen or
deciduous tree of not less than three inches caliper.
(4) All landscaped areas shall be protected from adjacent parking and
loading areas by curbs or concrete, metal, or wood bumpers at
least six inches in height and securely anchored to the ground.
(5) Raised planting islands shall be provided in appropriate locations
in order to guide vehicle movement, to provide adequate space for
plant growth, and to accommodate pedestrian circulation or
vehicle overhang. Such raised planting islands and the landscaping
within them shall be designed and arranged so as to provide
vertical definition to major traffic circulation aisles, entrances, and
exits, to channel internal traffic flow, to prevent indiscriminate
§ 650-34 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-35
1:1158
diagonal movement of vehicles, and to provide cooling shade and
visual relief from the visual monotony and summer heat of a large
paved parking lot. Curbs of such islands shall be designed so as to
facilitate surface drainage and prevent vehicles from overhanging
sidewalks and damaging landscaping materials.
D. The selection, amount, and location of all landscaping materials shall be
subject to approval by the Planning Board, based upon considerations
of the adequacy of the proposed landscaping to serve its intended
purpose with minimal maintenance problems, including plant care,
snowplowing, and lead removal.
E. All landscaped areas shall be attractively planted, and all landscaping
shall be maintained in a manner satisfactory to the Township at all
times.
F. The placement of landscaping shall not obstruct a driver's vision at
traffic intersections or driveway openings.
G. All off-street parking lots shall be designed in accordance with the
following standards:
(1) Unobstructed access from a parking or loading area to and from a
street shall be designed so as to not require the backing of any
vehicle across a sidewalk or into a street except for permitted
single-family and two-family homes.
(2) In order to provide maximum efficiency, minimum curb cuts, and
encourage safe and convenient traffic circulation, an applicant may
request, as part of the site plan application, an interconnection of
parking lots via access drives within and between adjacent lots,
provided that the applicant has obtained the written consent of the
owners of those adjacent lots. The Planning Board may require
deed restrictions to be adopted in order to bind the owner of the
properties to maintain the interconnection permanently.
(3) Off-street parking areas shall be designed to prevent the
maneuvering of vehicles into or out of parking spaces or the
parking or storage of vehicles within any portion of an entrance
driveway or driveways that is within 10 feet of the right-of-way line
of any road.
(4) No required off-street parking space, including adjacent parking
access lanes or maneuvering space, shall be located within an
existing or proposed right-of-way of any road, nor within 10 feet of
any existing or proposed right-of-way line or any public street or
highway. Fire lanes shall be provided to give access to buildings for
firefighting, as required.
(5) Parking spaces shall be usable without requiring excessive
maneuvering when all other spaces are occupied by vehicles. The
Planning Board shall make a determination of whether a parking
§ 650-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-35
1:1159
space is usable. Parking spaces that are not usable shall not count
toward satisfying any parking requirement and shall not be
approved.
(6) In order to provide visibility and definition at the ends of parking
aisles, a planted area enclosed by concrete curbing shall be
provided. Such planted islands may be used to partially satisfy the
landscaping requirements of this section.
(7) Dead-end parking aisles shall not be permitted except where
unavoidable, as determined by the Planning Board.
(8) Concrete wheel stops or raised curbing shall be provided as
required by the Planning Board and shall be so located as to
prevent the overhang of any vehicle into any pedestrian sidewalk or
landscaped area or required buffer strip.
(9) Each parking space shall not be less than nine feet wide and 18 feet
long, except that where a parking space is bounded by a curb or the
wall of a building, each space shall be a minimum of 10 feet wide.
Parallel parking spaces shall be minimum of 10 feet wide and 22
feet long. Handicapped parking spaces shall be designed in
accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act.416
(10) The side perimeter of each parking space shall be delineated by
painted lines on the pavement.
(11) The facilities provided in any parking lot and their arrangement
shall not be changed without due consideration and approval by the
Planning Board. Furthermore, any modification of fire lanes in a
parking lot shall be reviewed and approved by the Township.
H. Appropriate signs shall be provided in parking lots to direct internal
traffic flow. Such signs shall generally not exceed one square foot in
area.
I. Lighting.
(1) Mounting heights shall not exceed 20 feet above grade. Lower
heights shall be used for walkways.
(2) All luminaires shall be shielded to eliminate glare, especially on any
other property and public streets off the site, to the greatest extent
possible. Lamps shall be recessed in the luminaire.
(3) All wires and cables shall be underground.
(4) At least 50% of all lighting shall be turned off after business hours,
when only lights necessary for security purposes shall be left on.
416. Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.
§ 650-35 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-35
1:1160
(5) Luminaires shall be manufactured by a major manufacturer of
illumination equipment.
(6) The lighting plan shall be designed by an experienced lighting
designer who shall certify that the lighting plan conforms with
these standards.
§ 650-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-35
1:1161

ARTICLE IX
Limited and Conditional Uses
§ 650-36. All conditional uses.
Any use permitted with a conditional use permit in any zoning district,
pursuant to Article VI, shall be required to meet the following minimum
standards. Additional standards pursuant to the specific use may be
required over and above these standards.
A. The location and size of the use, the nature and intensity of the
operations involved, the size of the site in relation to the use and the
location of the site with respect to existing and future streets and roads
providing access shall be in harmony with the orderly development of
the zoning district and neighborhood in which the proposed use would
be located.
B. The location, nature and height of the buildings, structures, equipment,
walls and fences and the nature and intensity of intended operations
will not discourage the appropriate development of adjacent land and
buildings or impair the value thereof.
C. All proposed traffic entrances to the site shall be adequate but not
excessive in number; adequate in width, grade, alignment and visibility;
sufficiently separated from street intersections; and meet similar safety
considerations pursuant to Article VIII of this chapter. Adequate offstreet
parking and loading spaces shall be provided, pursuant to Article
VIII of this chapter.
D. In all residential and business zoning districts, the location, design, and
character of the proposed use shall allow for adequate pedestrian
access, circulation, and safety by providing direct and safe walkways
between public sidewalks, parking lots, and building entrances.
E. All proposed buildings, structures, equipment and/or material shall be
readily accessible for fire and police protection, as well as for
ambulance, rescue, and other emergency response.
F. The character and appearance of the proposed use, buildings,
structures and/or outdoor signs shall be in general harmony with the
character and appearance of the surrounding neighborhood, shall not
be more objectionable to nearby properties by reason of noise, fumes,
vibration or flashing lights than would the operations of any permitted
principal use and shall not adversely affect the health, safety, and
general welfare of the residents of the Township of Irvington.
G. The use shall meet the prescribed area and bulk requirements for the
zoning district in which it is located, or as further specified by the
regulations of this chapter, including such matters as minimum setback,
maximum height, required off-street parking and sign regulations.
§ 650-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-36
1:1163
§ 650-37. All development in M-1 Zoning District.
H. The utility services required to support the proposed activity or use are,
or will be, available to meet the needs of the proposed activity or use.
This consideration shall include the suitability of water supply and
sanitary sewage facilities to accommodate the intended use.
I. The use shall be carried out in a manner compatible with its natural and
man-made surroundings and with due consideration to drainage
patterns, streams, wetlands, and steep slopes.
J. The Planning Board may impose additional conditions and restrictions
upon the special permit as may be reasonably necessary to assure
continual conformance with all applicable standards and requirements,
including reasonable assurance that these conditions and restrictions
can be responsibly monitored and enforced.
K. The Board of Appeals may, when reasonable, waive any preestablished
requirement for special permit approval contained in this article, or in
Articles V or VIII of this chapter, if the Board finds that any such
requirement is found not to be requisite in the interest of the public
health, safety or general welfare or inappropriate to a particular special
use permit.
A. Driveway and loading requirements.
(1) Common driveways on adjoining properties are permitted.
(2) No loading dock or platform shall face a street unless said dock or
platform is at least 50 feet from the property line; provided,
however, that no loading dock or platform shall face 40th Street or
Chancellor Avenue.
(3) All spaces provided for standing, loading and unloading services
shall be subject to the approval of the Town Engineer and Director
of Public Safety. [Amended 1-12-2016 by Ord. No. MC 3562]
B. Off-street parking facilities.
(1) Industrial use. There shall be a minimum of one parking space for
each 1,000 square feet or fraction thereof of floor area devoted to
an industrial use.
(2) Restaurant use. There shall be a minimum of one parking space for
each 200 square feet or fraction thereof of floor area devoted to
restaurant use.
(3) Banking and office uses. There shall be a minimum of one parking
space for each 400 square feet or fraction thereof of floor area
devoted to banking and office use.
(4) All parking areas shall provide service aisles in accordance with the
following minimum standards:
§ 650-36 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-37
1:1164
Type of Parking
Minimum Aisle Width
(feet)
Parallel 10
30-degree angle 11
45-degree angle 13
60-degree angle 18
90-degree angle 20
C. Signs.
(1) No sign shall be erected, reerected, constructed, altered, painted
on a wall or mounted except as permitted herein and a permit for
the same having been issued by the Building Inspector.
(2) Signs shall be permitted only in connection with a business lawfully
conducted upon the premises, except temporary signs of a civic,
political, religious, philanthropic or commemorative nature and
institutional flags. Only the following types of signs shall be
permitted: ground signs, pole signs, projecting signs, wall signs
and temporary signs. The following signs shall be prohibited: roof
signs, marquee signs, billboards, strings of pennants, advertising
flags and any modifications thereof.
(3) Pole signs and projecting signs shall be prohibited on lots facing
40th Street.
(4) Signs shall be permitted to the extent of 1 1/2 square feet for each
foot of width of the front elevation of the building but need not be
less than 40 square feet, but the total gross area of all signs on the
premises shall not exceed 150 square feet. Projecting signs shall
not exceed four square feet in area.
(5) The direct source of light of an illuminated sign shall be shielded in
such a manner that it is not visible from the street or any adjacent
residential property.
(6) No sign shall be erected nearer to any street or road than 1/2 the
setback distance required for the principal building.
(7) A temporary sign shall not exceed 15 square feet in area. A
temporary sign shall be removed within 24 hours after its purpose
has been met.
(8) In the interpretation of the area of signs, the size shall be the
display surface available for advertising, including decorative trim,
or, in a case of individual box letters, the box dimensions
encompassing all the letters, including decorative trim.
(9) No part of a ground sign shall exceed a height of 14 feet above the
ground.
§ 650-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-37
1:1165
(10)No projecting sign shall extend outward more than 18 inches from
the exterior wall surface of the building or supporting structure.
Such signs shall have a clear space of not less than 10 feet between
all parts of the sign and the ground.
(11)No rotating beacon or flashing color beacon shall be permitted on
any pole, building or sign. Colored lights similar to those used in
traffic control are prohibited within 150 feet of any traffic signal
light.
D. Landscaping.
(1) All that area of the lot not used for walks, driveways or off-street
parking shall be devoted to the planting of grass, trees, shrubs,
flowers and ornamental plants.
(2) The integrity of the planting plan shall be preserved by the
maintenance or replacement of planting by the owner or occupant.
(3) There shall be a minimum of one tree and five deciduous or
evergreen shrubs for each 7,000 square feet of lot area.
E. Buffering and screening.
(1) Whenever buffering and screening shall be required by this chapter
or by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, the
screen shall meet the following minimum requirements:
(a) All planted screens shall consist of a strip not less than four
feet wide, densely planted (or having equivalent natural
growth) with shrubs or evergreens not less than four feet high
at the time of planting, and of a type that will form a yearround
screen not less than six feet in height within three years
from the date of planting.
(b) Evergreens or conifers shall be used in screen planting. No
deciduous screening shall be used.
(c) Screen shall be maintained in good condition at all times.
(d) There shall be no encroachment of any kind into the buffering
or screening area.
(2) The integrity of buffering and screening shall be preserved by the
maintenance and replacement of buffering and screening, and such
maintenance and replacement shall be a condition of approval by
the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment.
F. Sidewalks.
(1) Sidewalks shall be required along 40th Street and Chancellor
Avenue.
§ 650-37 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-38
1:1166
§ 650-38. Adult entertainment establishment.
Adult entertainment establishments, wherever permitted as of right or with
a conditional use permit pursuant to Article VI, shall be required to meet
the following minimum standards:
A. No adult entertainment establishment shall be located within 500 feet
of another such use, nor within 500 feet of a residential use, residential
zoning district boundary, school, place of worship, hospital,
philanthropic or eleemosynary institution, park, or playground.
B. The building in which the use is housed shall be designed and built so as
to contain any noise-generating activities within the building. All
interior spaces shall be sufficiently sound-insulated. Sounds emanating
from such uses shall not be audible beyond the property line.
C. All entertainment shall be conducted within fully enclosed buildings.
With the exception of parking, no outdoor activity of any kind shall be
permitted in conjunction with such a use.
D. The lot upon which an adult entertainment establishment is located
shall have a minimum size of 15,000 square feet.
E. Landscaped areas and buffer strips shall be provided as follows:
(1) A minimum landscaped area 10 feet wide shall be provided and
maintained along all property lines abutting public streets, except
where curb cuts are permitted.
(2) Where such use abuts another property, a landscaped buffer strip
with a minimum width of 15 feet shall be provided and maintained.
(3) All buffer strips abutting adjacent properties shall be planted with
evergreen trees, shrubs, or hedges with a minimum height of six
feet and shall have opaque fencing with a minimum height of six
feet. Where a buffer strip is located along a side property line, it
shall extend all the way from the front to the back property line,
except that the required fence may terminate 10 feet back from the
front property line.
(4) All landscaped areas and buffer strips shall be attractively planted,
and all landscaping shall be maintained in a manner satisfactory to
the Township at all times.
F. Signs.
(1) The following types of signs shall be prohibited in conjunction with
such uses: freestanding signs, roof-mounted signs, flashing signs,
neon signs, and internally illuminated signs.
(2) One wall-mounted sign may be attached to the front-facing exterior
wall of the structure, not to exceed 30 square feet in size. In
§ 650-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-38
1:1167
§ 650-39. Adult-oriented stores.
Adult-oriented stores, wherever permitted as of right or with a conditional
use permit pursuant to Article VI, shall be required to meet the following
minimum standards:
§ 650-40. Automobile-oriented uses.
Automobile dealerships, automobile repair or body shops, automobile
washes, and gasoline service stations, wherever permitted as of right or
with a conditional use permit pursuant to Article VI, shall be required to
meet the following minimum standards:
addition, one hanging sign may be suspended from the front-facing
exterior wall, not to exceed 15 square feet in size.
(3) Signs provided in conjunction with such uses shall not depict
sexual activity, human genitalia or female breasts, persons or
genitalia in a state of sexual arousal, or any other depictions that
may be deemed pornographic in nature.
A. No adult entertainment establishment shall be located within 200 feet
of another such use, nor within 200 feet of a residential use, residential
zoning district boundary, school, place of worship, hospital,
philanthropic or eleemosynary institution, park, or playground.
B. All adult-oriented products shall be displayed and sold within fully
enclosed buildings.
C. Signs provided in conjunction with such uses shall not depict sexual
activity, human genitalia or female breasts, persons or genitalia in a
state of sexual arousal, or any other depictions that may be deemed
pornographic in nature.
A. All such uses shall comply with the use and bulk regulations of the
districts in which they are located, pursuant to Article VI.417
B. All lighting shall be so designed, arranged, and installed as to reflect all
light down and away from adjoining properties.
C. A solid, enclosed area shall be provided for the temporary storage of
trash, garbage, and unusable automobile parts. Except for tires, all
trash shall be stored in tight containers. The enclosed area shall be so
designed such that the trash shall be visible from a public street or from
adjacent properties.
D. Curb cuts and driveways:
417. Editor's Note: See also the Schedule of Area, Yard and Height Requirements, which is
included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 650-38 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-40
1:1168
(1) Driveways shall not be less than 20 feet wide and no more than 24
feet wide at any point. Driveways shall be flared or slanted to
facilitate vehicular ingress and egress.
(2) Driveways and curb cuts must be at least five feet from any
adjacent property line and 25 feet from the intersection as
measured along the property line.
(3) No more than two driveways shall be permitted for each 100 feet of
street frontage.
(4) There shall not be more than two curb cuts providing access to any
one street. Any two driveways giving access to a single street shall
be separated by a curbed island of least 20 feet.
E. No motor vehicle parts or partially dismantled motor vehicles shall be
stored outside of an enclosed building.
F. Landscaped areas and buffer strips shall be provided as follows:
(1) A minimum landscaped area five feet wide shall be provided and
maintained along all property lines abutting public streets, except
where curb cuts are permitted.
(2) Where such use abuts another property, a landscaped buffer strip
with a minimum width of five feet shall be provided and
maintained. Where such use abuts a residential property or zoning
district, the landscaped buffer strip shall be increased to a
minimum width of 10 feet.
(3) All buffer strips abutting adjacent properties shall be planted with
evergreen trees, shrubs, or hedges with a minimum height of six
feet and shall have opaque fencing with a minimum height of six
feet. Where a buffer strip is located along a side property line, it
shall extend all the way from the front to the back property line,
except that the required fence may terminate 10 feet back from the
front property line.
(4) All landscaped areas and buffer strips shall be attractively planted,
and all landscaping shall be maintained in a manner satisfactory to
the Township at all times.
G. The Planning Board shall affirmatively find that:
(1) The use will not constitute a nuisance because of noise, fumes,
odors or physical activity in the location proposed.
(2) The use at the proposed location will not create a traffic hazard or
traffic nuisance because of its location in relation to similar uses,
necessity of turning movements in relation to its access to public
roads or intersections or its location in relation to other buildings
or proposed buildings on or near the site and the traffic pattern
from such buildings or by reason of its location near a vehicular or
§ 650-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-40
1:1169
§ 650-41. Automobile dealerships.
Automobile dealerships, wherever permitted as of right or with a
conditional use permit pursuant to Article VI, shall be required to meet the
following minimum standards:
pedestrian entrance or crossing to a public or private school, park,
playground or hospital or other public use or place of public
assembly.
(3) The use at the proposed location will not adversely affect nor retard
the logical development of the general neighborhood or zone in
which the station is proposed, considering service required,
population, character, density and number of similar uses.
H. No such use shall be located within 500 feet of any entrance to a school,
library, hospital, place of worship, child-care center, family day-care
home, public park or playground, or charitable institution. No gasoline
service station shall be located within 200 feet of a residential property
line, a residential zoning district boundary, or the pedestrian entrance
or any retail establishment, not including other auto-oriented uses.
Such distances shall be measured in a straight line from said entrance
to the lot line nearest said entrance along the street line.
I. The storage of inoperable vehicles on the site shall be prohibited.
A. All automobile dealerships shall be required to meet the requirements
for auto-oriented uses, pursuant to § 650-40.
B. The principal use of the property shall be the sale of automobiles, with
minor service and repair as accessory uses. All service and repair
activity shall be conducted within fully enclosed and soundproofed
buildings.
C. An automobile dealership shall have a fully enclosed sales building.
D. Front yards may be used only for necessary driveways and customer
parking, as well as required landscaping. As an accessory use, the side
and rear yards not devoted to required buffer strips and landscaping
may be used for the storage, display, or sale of automobiles.
E. Display lighting shall be shielded and shall be so located and
maintained as not to constitute a hazard or nuisance to the traveling
public or neighboring uses. In particular, so-called "string lights,"
banners, temporary signs, balloons, and flags shall be prohibited.
F. No vehicle awaiting service or repair may be stored outdoors overnight.
G. No tractors, trailers or trucks shall be parked outdoors overnight.
§ 650-40 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-42
1:1170
§ 650-42. Automobile repair or body shops.
Automobile repair or body shops, wherever permitted as of right or with a
conditional use permit pursuant to Article VI, shall be required to meet the
following minimum standards:
§ 650-43. Automobile washes.
Automobile washes, wherever permitted as of right or with a conditional
use permit pursuant to Article VI, shall be required to meet the following
minimum standards:
A. All automobile repair or body shops shall be required to meet the
requirements for auto-oriented uses, pursuant to § 650-40.
B. Garage bays and doors shall be at least 50 feet distant from the nearest
point of the street line.
C. Front yards may be used only for necessary driveways and customer
parking, as well as required landscaping.
D. All repair and body work shall be entirely conducted in a fully enclosed
building.
E. No motor vehicle shall be offered for sale or rental on the site.
F. No vehicles shall be permitted to be standing or parked on the premises
of an automobile wash other than those used or serviced by the
employees in the operation of the establishment. No vehicle awaiting
repairs may be stored outdoors for more than three consecutive days.
Not more than five passenger vehicles awaiting repairs or parts shall be
stored outdoors overnight.
G. No tractors, trailers or trucks shall be parked outdoors overnight.
A. All automobile washes shall be required to meet the requirements for
auto-oriented uses, pursuant to § 650-40.
B. An adequate off-street automobile stacking area shall be provided,
which shall not be less than 15 spaces per bay. Stacking areas shall be
designed such that the presence of stacked cars in no way hinders or
impairs normal traffic flow on any adjacent property or public street.
C. Automobile washes shall be completely enclosed for all operations,
except final hand drying.
D. Automobile washes shall not provide services other than washing,
drying, waxing, simonizing, or similar treatment.
E. The exit from the automobile wash for automobiles that have completed
the washing process shall be at least 50 feet distant from the nearest
point of street line.
§ 650-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-43
1:1171
§ 650-44. Bars and taverns.
Bars and taverns, wherever permitted as of right or with a conditional
use permit pursuant to Article VI, shall be required to meet the following
minimum standards:
§ 650-45. Big box centers.
Big box centers, wherever permitted as of right or with a conditional use
permit pursuant to Article VI, shall be required to meet the following
minimum standards:
F. Any automatic automobile wash shall be so soundproofed, the entire
development shall be so arranged, and the operations so conducted that
the noise emanating from the car wash shall be no more audible than
the ambient street noise, as measured at the edges of the property.
G. No motor vehicle shall be offered for sale or rental on the site.
H. No vehicles shall be permitted to be standing or parked on the premises
of an automobile wash other than those used or serviced by the
employees in the operation of the establishment. No vehicle may be
stored on the site overnight.
I. No tractors, trailers or trucks shall be parked outdoors overnight.
A. Bars or taverns shall not be located within 500 feet of schools, places of
worship, hospitals, philanthropic or eleemosynary institutions, parks, or
playgrounds.
B. The building in which the use is housed shall be designed and built so as
to contain any noise-generating activities within the building. All
interior spaces shall be sufficiently sound-insulated. Sounds emanating
from such uses shall not be audible beyond the property line.
C. Bars and taverns have a valid liquor license issued by the Township of
Irvington.
A. The tract area for the big box center shall be no less than five acres.
B. The big box center shall be located on an arterial street, upon which it
has a minimum frontage of 300 feet.
C. A traffic study shall be prepared by a certified and licensed traffic
engineer indicating that the local road network can accommodate the
weekday and weekend peak hour traffic generated by the use without
causing significant adverse traffic conditions. In any circumstances
where a deterioration in the levels of service at any impacted
intersection reaches level D or worse, the Township shall require the
applicant to pay for the costs of mitigation measures to ameliorate
traffic conditions to satisfactory levels.
§ 650-43 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-46
1:1172
§ 650-46. Billiard parlors and dance halls.
Billiard parlors and dance halls, wherever permitted as of right or with a
conditional use permit pursuant to Article VI, shall be required to meet the
following minimum standards:
§ 650-47. Bowling alleys.
Bowling alleys, wherever permitted as of right or with a conditional use
permit pursuant to Article VI, shall be required to meet the following
minimum standards:
§ 650-48. Check-cashing establishments.
Check-cashing establishments, wherever permitted as of right or with a
conditional use permit pursuant to Article VI, shall be required to meet the
following minimum standards:
§ 650-49. Child-care centers.
Child-care centers, wherever permitted as of right or with a conditional
use permit pursuant to Article VI, shall be required to meet the following
minimum standards:
A. If liquor is sold on the premises, such uses shall not be located within
500 feet of schools, places of worship, hospitals, philanthropic or
eleemosynary institutions, parks, or playgrounds.
B. The building in which the use is housed shall be designed and built so as
to contain any noise-generating activities within the building. All
interior spaces shall be sufficiently sound-insulated. Sounds emanating
from such uses shall not be audible beyond the property line.
C. If liquor is sold on the premises, such uses have a valid liquor license
issued by the Township of Irvington.
A. The building in which the use is housed shall be designed and built so as
to contain any noise-generating activities within the building. All
interior spaces shall be sufficiently sound-insulated. Sounds emanating
from such uses shall not be audible beyond the property line.
A. No such use shall be located within 500 feet of another such use, nor
within 500 feet of a residential use, school, place of worship, hospital,
philanthropic or eleemosynary institution, park, or playground.
A. Any residence or facility used for the purpose of providing a child-care
center shall be required to be licensed with the New Jersey Department
of Health Services, Division of Youth and Family Services, and to place
on file with the Township a copy of the license, prior to the Township
granting a certificate of occupancy for the use.
§ 650-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-49
1:1173
§ 650-50. Drive-through windows.
Drive-through windows, wherever permitted as of right or with a
conditional use permit pursuant to Article VI, shall be required to meet the
following minimum standards:
B. Child-care centers shall not be located near or adjacent to areas
determined to be hazardous to the physical health and safety of the
children.
C. The building or portion thereof used for such purposes shall be required
to meet all of the applicable standards and regulations for
nonresidential buildings in the zoning district in which it is located.
However, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.6 and 66.7, the floor area
occupied in any building as a child-care center shall be excluded in
calculating any parking requirement and shall not be counted toward
the maximum permitted floor space under this chapter.
A. No lot with a total lot area of less than 10,000 square feet shall be
permitted to have a drive-through window. All drive-through lanes shall
be located on the site, and in no case shall public streets or rights-ofway
be utilized as drive-through lanes.
B. In no case shall drive-through windows be permitted if the drivethrough
window and/or lane area would occupy land necessary for
required parking spaces, landscaping, or other required features of the
development site.
C. Each drive-through lane shall have a minimum width of 10 feet. In
addition, a single lane of at least 10 feet in width shall be provided
adjacent to the outermost stacking or queuing lane to allow vehicles not
entering the stacking lane to exit the property.
D. There shall be sufficient space between the property line and the
entrance of the stacking or queuing lane to allow for safe entry, access
to parking spaces, and on-site circulation.
E. The drive-through window shall be located at least 30 feet from the
street curbline to provide sufficient space for vehicles to safely exit the
property. The drive-through window shall not be located on any building
facade that faces a public street.
F. Drive-through lanes shall be set back at least five feet from all property
lines, except in the case of residential property lines or residential
zoning district boundaries, where the setback shall be increased to 15
feet. Drive-through lanes shall be screened from adjacent residential
property by means of a solid, opaque fence or wall with a minimum
height of six feet and evergreen trees, shrubs, or hedges with a
minimum height of six feet.
G. All drive-through vehicular circulation shall be in a counter-clockwise
direction.
§ 650-49 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-50
1:1174
§ 650-51. Dry-cleaning plant.
Dry-cleaning plants, wherever permitted as of right or with a conditional
use permit pursuant to Article VI, shall be required to meet the following
minimum standards:
§ 650-52. Family day-care homes.
Family day-care homes, wherever permitted as of right or with a conditional
use permit pursuant to Article VI, shall be required to meet the following
minimum standards:
§ 650-53. Grocery stores.
H. In conjunction with restaurants, a minimum of eight stacking or
queuing spaces of at least 20 feet in length per space shall be provided
for each drive-through lane.
I. In conjunction with banks, drugstores, or any other use, a minimum of
five stacking or queuing spaces of at least 20 feet in length per space
shall be provided for each drive-through lane.
A. No such establishment shall be permitted in any building containing
residential uses, places of worship, schools, hospitals, philanthropic or
eleemosynary uses, or child-care centers.
B. Such processes shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building.
C. Such uses shall comply with all pertinent rules, regulations, and
guidelines promulgated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
the U.S. Department of Labor's Occupational Safety and Health
Administration, and the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection with regard to dry-cleaning practices.
A. Any residence used for the purpose of providing a family day-care home
shall be required to register with the New Jersey Department of Health
Services, Division of Youth and Family Services, and to place on file with
the Township a certificate of registration, prior to the Township
granting a certificate of occupancy for the use.
B. Family day-care homes shall be permitted in all residential zones, but
they shall be permitted only in conjunction with single-family houses.
C. Family day-care homes shall not be located near or adjacent to areas
determined to be hazardous to the physical health and safety of the
children.
D. The residence used for such purposes shall be required to meet all of
the applicable standards and regulations for single-family houses in the
zoning district in which it is located, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.5d.
A. The minimum lot area shall be two acres, and the minimum lot width
shall be 200 feet.
§ 650-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-53
1:1175
§ 650-54. Home occupations.
Home occupations, wherever permitted as of right or with a conditional
use permit pursuant to Article VI, shall be required to meet the following
minimum standards:
B. All outside loading berths, docks, or delivery areas shall be provided to
the rear of the building, and where adjacent to a residential use or
zoning district boundary shall be located a minimum distance of 30 feet
to such property line or boundary.
C. Any outside storage of trucks, pallets, cases, etc., shall be completely
fenced with appropriate access gates sufficient for the movement of
large commercial vehicles, and such areas shall be adequately screened
from view on all sides.
D. Internal traffic circulation for a grocery store shall be so arranged that
off-street parking for retail customers shall be in an area distinct and
separate from any maneuvering areas for any loading berths or truck
storage for employee parking.
A. A home occupation shall be carried on entirely within the principal
building and shall under no circumstances exceed 20% of the total
gross habitable floor area of the principal building.
B. No home occupation shall require interior or exterior alterations of the
principal structure.
C. No sign shall be permitted in connection with such home occupation.
No other outward display shall be permitted which indicates that the
dwelling is being used in whole or in part for any other purpose other
than residential. There shall be no display of goods or advertising.
D. No mechanical or electrical equipment shall be permitted which
exceeds five horsepower, or which creates heat, glare, smoke, noise, or
vibration which is perceptible beyond the boundary of the premises.
E. No commodity shall be sold on the premises.
F. Only residents who occupy the dwelling shall be engaged in the home
occupation. No outside employees shall be permitted to work on the
premises.
G. On a typical workday, there shall be on average not more than one
visitor or client per hour visiting the home occupation during the
normal workday of 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. and none at other times.
H. With the exception of U.S. mail or other conventional mail courier
services, no truck deliveries shall be permitted in conjunction with the
home occupation.
I. No outdoor storage shall be permitted.
§ 650-53 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-55
1:1176
§ 650-55. Home professional offices.
Home professional offices, where permitted as of right or with a conditional
use permit pursuant to Article VI, shall be required to meet the following
minimum standards:
A. A home professional office shall be carried on entirely within the
principal building and shall not under any circumstances exceed 40% of
the total gross habitable floor area of the building.
B. No home professional office shall require exterior alterations of the
principal structure which will cause the structure to be at a variance or
further at variance with the minimum and maximum building bulk
standards required for the district in which it is located.418
C. The professional conducting the practice shall also be the resident who
occupies the dwelling. No home professional office shall permit the
employment of more than two employees who are not permanent
residents of the dwelling.
D. No home professional office shall be permitted to have any advertising
display other than a professional nameplate as provided in Article VII.
With the exception of the nameplate, there shall be no exterior feature
of the building which indicates that the dwelling is being used in whole
or in part for any other purpose other than residential.
E. No exterior feature of the building shall change or modify its residential
character and appearance. There shall be no display of goods or
advertising.
F. Sufficient on-site parking shall be provided for the employees, visitors,
and clients of the professional, in addition to the residents occupying
the residential portion of the structure.
G. On a typical workday, there shall be on average not more than three
visitors or clients per hour visiting the home professional office during
the normal workday of 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. and none at other times.
H. No home professional office shall be permitted on a property that does
not front on an arterial or collector street, as identified in the adopted
Township Master Plan.
I. With the exception of U.S. mail or other conventional mail courier
services, no truck deliveries shall be permitted in conjunction with the
home occupation.
J. No outdoor storage shall be permitted.
K. Home professional offices shall be permitted only in single-family or
two-family houses.
418. Editor's Note: See the Schedule of Area, Yard and Height Requirements, which is included
as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 650-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-56
1:1177
§ 650-56. Hospitals or philanthropic or eleemosynary uses.
Hospitals or philanthropic or eleemosynary uses, wherever permitted as
of right or with a conditional use permit pursuant to Article VI, shall be
required to meet the following minimum standards:
§ 650-57. Industrial performance standards.
Wherever permitted as of right or with a conditional use permit pursuant to
Article VI, the following minimum standards shall be required to be met:
A. The principal building will not occupy more than 25% of the lot area; all
other requirements as set forth in this chapter for the zone in which it is
to be located are observed; such use will not be detrimental to the
surrounding neighborhood; and the structure or proposed use will
serve the general welfare of the Township.
B. The front, rear and side yards shall be increased one foot for each foot
by which such building exceeds the height limit herein established for
the zone in which it is located.
C. The appropriate area and number of off-street parking spaces shall be
established, and adequate buffer areas, as well as an attractive and
functional landscaping scheme, shall be provided.
D. Signs shall be limited to an area of not more than 30 square feet on any
one side and shall not be closer than 15 feet to any property line or five
feet to any street line. Signs may be illuminated.
A. Fire and explosion hazards. All activities shall be carried on only in
fireproof structures which conform to the standards of the National
Board of Fire Underwriters, Township Building Code or Fire Prevention
Code, whichever is the more restrictive.419 All explosive raw materials,
fuels, liquids and finished products shall be stored in accordance with
the standards of said National Board of Fire Underwriters.
B. Radioactivity. Any and all machines, devices, testing equipment or
anything similar which emits any radiation or radioactive rays is
prohibited, except where any and all emissions of radiation or
radioactive rays do not exceed the maximum permissible limits
established by either a federal or state agency having jurisdiction over
emissions of radiation or radioactive rays and where such machines,
devices, testing equipment or anything similar is registered with and
approved by either a federal or state agency having jurisdiction over
the same.
C. Air quality and emissions.
(1) No substance shall be emitted into the atmosphere in quantities
which are injurious to human, plant, or animal life or to property or
419. Editor's Note: See Ch. 240, Construction Code, Uniform, and Ch. 307, Fire Prevention.
§ 650-56 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-57
1:1178
which unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life and
property anywhere in the Township.
(2) All uses shall be required to comply with Title 7, Chapter 27 of the
New Jersey Administrative Code (N.J.A.C.), regarding air pollution
control.
(3) No open burning shall be permitted in any district.
D. Odor. No odorous material may be emitted into the atmosphere in
quantities sufficient to be detected beyond property lines.
E. Liquid or solid waste.
(1) The discharge of industrial wastes into the sanitary sewer system
shall be in accordance with Rules and Regulations Relating to the
Use of the Sewer System for the Discharge of Sewerage, Industrial
Wastes and Other Wastes established by the Joint Meeting, and its
amendments and revisions. In addition, no industrial use shall
discharge into any public sanitary sewer system quantities of water
or industrial wastes beyond the capacity of said sewer system. The
amount of effluent permitted shall be approved by the Township
Engineer.
(2) No industrial operation shall discharge industrial wastes of any
kind into any reservoir, pond or lake. The discharge of untreated
industrial wastes into a stream is prohibited.
(3) No waste shall be discharged into a water body or watercourse
without all necessary permits from the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection. All methods of sewerage and industrial
waste treatment and disposal shall be approved by the Township.
(4) No effluent shall contain any acids, oils, dust, toxic metals,
corrosives or other toxic substances in solution or suspension
which would create odors or discolor, poison or otherwise pollute
water in any way.
F. Vibration. No vibration is permitted which is discernible to the human
sense of feeling beyond the lot on which such use is conducted.
G. Noise. All uses shall be required to comply with the provisions of Title 7,
Chapter 29 of the New Jersey Administrative Code (N.J.A.C.), regarding
noise control.
H. Glare. All glare shall be prevented from escaping the site to the greatest
extent possible. Industrial processes resulting in glare shall be
conducted entirely within enclosed structures.
I. All industrial uses shall be located at least 20 feet from any street or
property line and 35 feet from any residential property line or
residential zoning district boundary.
§ 650-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-57
1:1179
§ 650-58. Sidewalk restaurant/cafe seating. [Added 8-10-2010 by
Ord. No. MC 3425]
§ 650-59. Laboratories.
Laboratories, wherever permitted as of right or with a conditional use
permit pursuant to Article VI, shall be required to meet the following
minimum standards:
§ 650-60. Self-service laundries.
Self-service laundries, wherever permitted as of right or with a conditional
use permit pursuant to Article VI, shall be required to meet the following
minimum standards:
J. Landscaped areas and buffer strips shall be provided as follows:
(1) A minimum landscaped area 10 feet wide shall be provided and
maintained along all property lines abutting public streets, except
where curb cuts are permitted.
(2) Where such use abuts another property, a landscaped buffer strip
with a minimum width of eight feet shall be provided and
maintained. Where such use abuts a residential property or zoning
district, the landscaped buffer strip shall be increased to a
minimum width of 15 feet.
(3) All buffer strips abutting adjacent properties shall be planted with
evergreen trees, shrubs, or hedges with a minimum height of six
feet. Where a buffer strip is located along a side property line, it
shall extend all the way from the front to the back property line,
except that the evergreen shrubbery may terminate eight feet back
from the front property line.
(4) All landscaped areas and buffer strips shall be attractively planted,
and all landscaping shall be maintained in a manner satisfactory to
the Township at all times.
A. Such uses shall not include the mass production or manufacture of
products for sale to the general public.
B. Such uses shall take place entirely within enclosed buildings.
C. All laboratory uses shall be required to meet the requirements for light
industry uses, pursuant to § 650-57.
A. No substance shall be emitted into the atmosphere in quantities which
are injurious to human, plant, or animal life or to property or which
unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life and property
anywhere in the Township.
B. No such use shall discharge into any public sanitary sewer system
quantities of water or industrial wastes beyond the capacity of said
§ 650-57 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-60
1:1180
§ 650-61. Packaged liquor stores.
Liquor stores, wherever permitted as of right or with a conditional use
permit pursuant to Article VI, shall be required to meet the following
minimum standards:
§ 650-62. Live entertainment.
Live entertainment, wherever permitted as of right or with a conditional
use permit pursuant to Article VI, shall be required to meet the following
minimum requirements:
§ 650-63. Meat, fish and poultry stores.
Meat, fish and poultry stores, wherever permitted as of right or with a
conditional use permit pursuant to Article VI, shall be required to meet the
following minimum requirements:
sewer system. The amount of effluent permitted shall be approved
by the Township Engineer. No effluent shall contain any acids, oils,
dust, toxic metals, corrosives or other toxic substances in solution or
suspension which would create odors or discolor, poison or otherwise
pollute water in any way.
A. No such use shall be located within 500 feet of another such use, nor
within 500 feet of a residential use, school, place of worship, hospital,
philanthropic or eleemosynary institution, park, or playground.
B. Liquor stores shall have a valid liquor license issued by the Township of
Irvington.
A. Live entertainment such as singing, dance, theater, concerts, and other
live performances shall only be permitted in association with and
accessory to permitted restaurants, bars, and taverns.
B. Such live entertainment uses shall take place entirely within an
enclosed building which shall be sufficiently sound insulated and
separated from adjacent uses, particularly residential uses, so as to
avoid any noise nuisances.
C. No outdoor music or public address system shall be permitted.
D. No live entertainment shall be permitted after 12:00 midnight Sundays
through Thursdays or after 2:00 a.m. Saturday morning or Sunday
morning.
A. Such processes shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building.
B. Buildings shall be so designed and built and meat, fish, and poultry
shall be so handled as to reduce the potential for spoilage, limit the
emission of odors, prevent untreated wastewater from leaking out of
the building, and keep from attracting rodents, vermin, or scavenging
animals, to the greatest extent possible.
§ 650-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-63
1:1181
§ 650-64. Office uses, business and professional, above ground floor
commercial use.
Business and professional offices, wherever permitted above a ground floor
commercial use, shall be required to meet the following minimum
standards:
§ 650-65. Office uses, business and professional, in O-1 Zone.
Business and professional offices may be permitted in the O-1 Zone subject
to the approval of a conditional use permit and shall be required to meet the
following minimum requirements:
C. No slaughtering, skinning, or feather-plucking shall be permitted on the
site.
D. No storage or sale of live animals shall be permitted on the site.
E. Such uses shall comply with all pertinent rules, regulations, and
guidelines promulgated by the U.S. Department of Agriculture and the
New Jersey Department of Agriculture.
A. Each office suite shall have its own entrance to a hallway, staircase, or
to the exterior.
B. The ground floor entrance to the office suite or suites shall be separate
from the entrance to the ground floor commercial use.
C. Sufficient parking spaces shall be made available and/or reserved in
either public or private off-street parking lots for parking of tenants'
vehicles.
A. The building shall maintain the appearance of a residential use. The
facade shall use materials and colors that are compatible with adjacent
residential structures. The architectural design, fenestration,
orientation of doors, landscaping, and parking shall also be compatible
with adjacent residential structures.
B. Off-street parking spaces needed for the office uses shall be provided on
the site, pursuant to Article VIII. However, parking spaces shall not be
located in the front yard.
C. Landscaped areas and buffer strips shall be provided in the rear and
side yards as follows:
(1) A minimum landscaped area five feet wide shall be provided and
maintained along all rear and side property lines. Where such use
abuts a residential property or zoning district, the landscaped area
shall be increased to a minimum width of 10 feet.
(2) All such landscaped strips shall be planted with evergreen trees,
shrubs, or hedges with a minimum height of six feet. Where a
buffer strip is located along a side property line, it shall extend all
§ 650-63 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-65
1:1182
§ 650-66. Outdoor storage.
Outdoor storage, wherever permitted as of right or with a conditional use
permit pursuant to Article VI, shall be required to meet the following
minimum requirements:
the way from the front to the back property line, except that the
required fence may terminate at the required front yard setback
line.
(3) All landscaped areas shall be attractively planted, and all
landscaping shall be maintained in a manner satisfactory to the
Township at all times.
A. No highly flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be stored
in bulk above ground. Tanks or drums of fuel directly connecting with
heating devices or appliances located on the same premises as the
tanks or drums of fuel are excluded from this requirement, provided
they meet the requirements of the National Board of Fire Underwriters.
No more fuel than is required for the principal use(s) shall be stored on
the premises.
B. No materials or wastes shall be deposited on any premises in such form
or manner that they may be transferred off the premises by natural
causes or forces, such as wind or rain.
C. All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which
constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible by or otherwise be
attractive to animals or vermin shall be stored outdoors only in
enclosed containers.
D. All outdoor storage areas shall be enclosed by a solid, opaque fence or
wall adequate to fully conceal such facilities and the contents thereof
from adjacent properties and shall meet all required setbacks for the
district in which they are located. This provision shall not apply to
outdoor storage of automobiles in conjunction with automobile sales
uses.
E. No material or equipment stores outdoors shall exceed a height of 10
feet above grade within 50 feet of a property line. In no case shall
material or equipment stored exceed the height of the principal
building on the property.
F. In no case shall areas with grades in excess of 8% be utilized for the
purposes of outdoor storage.
G. In industrial zoning districts, the area utilized for outdoor storage shall
not exceed 15% of the total lot area. In business zoning districts, the
area utilized for outdoor storage shall not exceed 20% of the ground
floor area of the principal building on the site.
§ 650-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-66
1:1183
§ 650-67. Pawnbrokers.
Pawnbrokers, wherever permitted as of right or with a conditional use
permit pursuant to Article VI, shall be required to meet the following
minimum standards:
§ 650-68. Places of worship.
Places of worship, wherever permitted as of right or with a conditional
use permit pursuant to Article VI, shall be required to meet the following
minimum requirements:
§ 650-69. Quasi-public buildings and recreation facilities.
Quasi-public buildings and recreation facilities, wherever permitted as of
right or with a conditional use permit pursuant to Article VI, shall be
required to meet the following minimum standards:
H. In no case shall outdoor storage be permitted if the outdoor storage
area would occupy land necessary for required parking spaces,
landscaping, or other required features of the development site.
I. Outdoor storage shall be permitted only in the side or rear yards and
shall be prohibited in the front yard.
A. No such use shall be located within 500 feet of another such use, nor
within 500 feet of a residential use, school, place of worship, hospital,
philanthropic or eleemosynary institution, park, or playground.
A. The minimum lot area in any residential zoning district shall be 15,000
square feet, and the minimum lot width shall be 150 square feet.
B. Banquet halls, cafeteria or kitchen facilities, classrooms, libraries, and
other similar uses which are customarily accessory to places of worship
shall be permitted.
(1) Child-care centers may be permitted as an accessory use only with
the approval of a conditional use permit, provided that it complies
with the requirements of § 650-49.
(2) With the exception of a parsonage, no housing or dormitories,
whether for temporary or permanent occupancy, shall be permitted
as accessory uses.
C. No building, parking lot, or outdoor facility shall be located closer than
25 feet to any residential property line or residential zoning district
boundary. A landscaped buffer, berm, fence, hedge, or other screening
material shall be provided along such property lines or district
boundaries to a height of no less than six feet.
D. All required parking shall be provided on the site.
E. Building coverage shall not exceed 50%.
§ 650-66 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-69
1:1184
§ 650-70. Residential structures containing three or more units.
A. A statement detailing the operation of the use and a complete list of the
proposed charter membership, including names and addresses, shall be
filed with the Zoning Board.
B. The proposed use is to be operated by a bona fide nonprofit
organization and will be operated solely for the recreation and
enjoyment of the members of said organization.
C. The proposed use shall not adversely affect the safe and reasonable
enjoyment of the surrounding property; the design of any structures
erected in connection with such use shall be in keeping with the general
character of the residential area; and sufficient landscaping, including
trees, shrubs and lawn, shall be provided to serve as a buffer between
said use and adjoining residential properties and to enhance the
appearance of the use.
D. The buildings will not occupy more than 25% of the lot area; all
requirements as set forth in this chapter for the zone in which it is to be
located shall be observed; such use shall not be detrimental to the
surrounding neighborhood; and the structure or proposed use shall
serve the general welfare of the Township.
E. The front, rear and side yards shall be increased one foot for each foot
by which such building exceeds the height limit herein established for
the zone in which it is located.
F. Off-street parking spaces shall be established in accordance with this
chapter.
G. Signs may be illuminated but nonflashing and limited in area to not
more than 15 square feet on any one side and shall not be closer than
15 feet to any property line or five feet to any street line.
A. Courtyards bounded on three or more sides by the wings of a single
building or by the walls of separate buildings shall have a minimum
court width of two feet for each one foot in height of the tallest adjacent
building.
B. Every building containing more than five dwelling units shall have a
minimum setback of 10 feet from all interior roads, driveways and
parking areas.
C. Garages not a part of a multiple-family dwelling structure but intended
for use of the residents of a multiple-family dwelling structure, and all
other accessory buildings shall be located at least 10 feet from the
nearest wall of any multiple-family dwelling structure.
D. Each dwelling unit shall contain complete kitchen facilities, toilet,
bathing and sleeping facilities and shall have a minimum gross
habitable floor area in accordance with the following:
§ 650-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-70
1:1185
(1) An efficiency apartment shall contain a minimum of 450 square
feet.
(2) A one-bedroom apartment shall contain a minimum of 700 square
feet.
(3) A two-bedroom apartment shall contain a minimum of 850 square
feet.
(4) A three-bedroom apartment shall contain a minimum of 1,000
square feet.
E. There shall be a minimum common storage area in each building for
bicycles, perambulators and similar types of equipment of 50 cubic feet
per dwelling unit.
F. The total number of one-bedroom or efficiency apartments shall not be
less than 70% of the entire project in high-rise and garden apartment
developments.
G. Sufficient laundry, drying, garbage pickup and other utility areas must
be provided and shall be located with a view both to convenience and to
minimize the detrimental effect on the aesthetic character of the
building(s) and shall be enclosed and shielded from view by fencing,
walls or shrubbery of at least six feet in height around the perimeter.
Fencing and walls shall not be less than 30% nor more than 50% open
on the vertical surface.
H. A strip of land at least five feet in width surrounding each building shall
be kept completely open except for foundation plantings of less than six
feet in height. Open space adjacent to, around or between buildings not
surfaced as walkways, driveways, parking areas, utility areas or other
required improvements shall be sodded or seeded to provide a thick
stand of grass or other plant material. Approaches to multiple-family
dwelling structures and entrance areas shall be attractively shrubbed
and properly maintained.
I. Driveways, parking areas, dwelling entranceways and pedestrian walks
shall be provided with sufficient illumination to minimize hazards to
pedestrians and motor vehicles utilizing the same, and light sources
shall, where necessary, be shielded to avoid glare disturbing to
occupants of buildings.
J. Topsoil shall not be removed from the site during construction but shall
be stored and redistributed to areas where seeding is required.
K. The land shall be so graded, paved areas so pitched and, if necessary,
storm drains and/or catch basins so located and designed to provide
restricted runoff of stormwaters, all in accordance with flood
management standards adopted by the Township.420
420. Editor's Note: See Ch. 313, Flood Damage Prevention.
§ 650-70 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-70
1:1186
§ 650-71. Residential uses above ground floor commercial use.
Residential uses, wherever permitted above a ground floor commercial use,
shall be required to meet the following minimum standards:
L. Site planning shall create usable, private open space to the fullest
extent feasible. Any or a combination of the following features may be
required to conceal parked vehicles from adjoining residential
properties: masonry wall of ornamental design, dense planting of
evergreen shrubs or trees, depression of visible portion of the site
below grade or similar protective measure or fences.
M. Other standards and conditions to the site plan and to curbing,
driveways, parking areas, pedestrian walks, landscaping and planting
not otherwise specified herein may be attached as conditions by the
Planning Board or Municipal Council if circumstances indicate that they
will further the purposes and intent of this chapter.
N. There shall be a full-time superintendent for every multiple-dwelling
project containing more than 20 individual dwelling units in one or
more buildings.
O. At least one exterior wall of every dwelling unit shall be entirely above
ground level, except that one unit may be provided for a superintendent
with not more than 50% of any exterior wall below ground level.
P. Provision shall be made so that television antenna equipment will be
built into the building, thereby eliminating the need for individual
antennas being erected on the roof, except for common towers.
Q. Any air-conditioning unit hereafter installed in any multiple-family
dwelling unit shall not project outwardly more than three inches from
the face of the wall of the building.
A. Each apartment shall have its own entrance to a hallway, staircase, or
to the exterior.
B. The ground floor entrance to the apartment units or units shall be
separate from the entrance to the ground floor commercial use.
C. Sufficient parking spaces shall be made available and/or reserved in
either public or private off-street parking lots for overnight parking of
tenants' vehicles.
D. Each dwelling unit shall contain complete kitchen facilities, toilet,
bathing and sleeping facilities and shall have a minimum gross
habitable floor area in accordance with the following:
(1) An efficiency apartment shall contain a minimum of 450 square
feet.
(2) A one-bedroom apartment shall contain a minimum of 700 square
feet.
§ 650-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-71
1:1187
§ 650-72. Retail uses as accessory to industrial uses.
Retail uses, wherever permitted as an accessory to an industrial use, shall
be required to meet the following minimum standards:
§ 650-73. Research and development.
Research and development uses, wherever permitted as of right or with a
conditional use permit pursuant to Article VI, shall be required to meet the
following minimum standards:
§ 650-74. Gasoline service stations.
Gasoline service stations, wherever permitted as of right or with a
conditional use permit pursuant to Article VI, shall be required to meet the
following minimum requirements:
(3) A two-bedroom apartment shall contain a minimum of 850 square
feet.
(4) A three-bedroom apartment shall contain a minimum of 1,000
square feet.
A. Retail uses shall be permitted only for the purpose of selling products
made on the site. No portion of the merchandise for sale shall consist of
products manufactured off-site.
B. Adequate off-street parking for the retail uses shall be provided, over
and above what is necessary for the industrial use, in accordance with
Article VIII.
C. Such uses shall be open only on those days and during those hours
when the industrial use is active and shall terminate no later than 9:00
p.m. on weekdays and 5:00 p.m. on Saturdays. In no case shall such a
use be open on Sundays.
A. Such uses shall not include the mass production or manufacture of
products for sale to the general public.
B. Such uses shall take place entirely within enclosed buildings.
C. All research and development uses shall be required to meet the
requirements for light industry uses, pursuant to § 650-57.
A. The site plan shall contain, in addition to the requirements of all other
ordinances of the Township, the number and location of fuel tanks to be
installed, the dimensions and capacity of each storage tank, the depth
the tanks will be placed below the ground, the number and location of
pumps to be installed, the type of structure and accessory buildings to
be constructed and the number of garage bays and other details as
required by site plan regulations.
§ 650-71 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-74
1:1188
§ 650-75. Indoor recreation facilities.
Indoor recreation facilities, wherever permitted as of right or with a
conditional use permit pursuant to Article VI, shall be required to meet the
following minimum requirements:
§ 650-76. Clinics for treatment of drug addiction.
Clinics for the treatment of drug addiction, wherever permitted as of right
or with a conditional use permit pursuant to Article VI, shall be required to
meet the following minimum requirements:
B. All gasoline service stations be required to meet the requirements for
auto-oriented uses, pursuant to § 650-40.
C. Underground fuel storage tanks shall be placed at least 20 feet from
any structure, 20 feet from any street or property line, and 30 feet from
any residential property line or residential zoning district boundary.
D. Repair of motor vehicles may be performed as an accessory use to a
gasoline service station, not including work on the automobile body,
provided that it is conducted in a fully enclosed building whose
coverage is not more than 8% of the lot area.
E. No motor vehicle shall be offered for sale or rental on the site.
F. No vehicles shall be permitted to be standing or parked on the premises
of a gasoline service station other than those used or serviced by the
employees in the operation of the establishment. No vehicle awaiting
repairs may be stored outdoors for more than three consecutive days.
Not more than five passenger vehicles awaiting repairs or parts shall be
stored outdoors overnight. No tractors, trailers or trucks shall be
parked outdoors overnight.
G. Accessory goods for sale may be displayed on the pump island and the
building island only. Oil cans, antifreeze and similar products may be
displayed on the respective island if a suitable metal stand or rack is
provided therefor.
H. All fuel pumps shall be located at least 20 feet from any street or
property line and 30 feet from any residential property line or
residential zoning district boundary. A canopy may be permitted to
cover the fuel pump area, provided that it is at least 25 feet from any
street or property line.
A. The Planning Board shall affirmatively find that such use will not
constitute a nuisance because of noise or pedestrian traffic generated;
that the use at the proposed location will not create a traffic hazard;
and that the use at the proposed location will not adversely affect nor
retard the logical development of the general neighborhood or zone in
which the recreation area is proposed, considering the character of the
zone, density of population and number of similar uses.
§ 650-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-76
1:1189
§ 650-77. Public, parochial, or private schools.
Schools, wherever permitted as of right or with a conditional use permit
pursuant to Article VI, shall be required to meet the following minimum
requirements:
§ 650-78. Shopping centers.
Shopping centers, wherever permitted as of right or with a conditional
use permit pursuant to Article VI, shall be required to meet the following
minimum requirements:
A. The Planning Board shall affirmatively find that such use will not
constitute a nuisance because of noise or pedestrian traffic generated;
that the use at the proposed location will not create a traffic hazard;
and that the use at the proposed location will not adversely affect nor
retard the logical development of the general neighborhood or zone in
which the clinic area is proposed, considering the character of the zone,
density of population and number of similar uses.
A. The minimum lot area in any residential zoning districts shall be 15,000
square feet, and the minimum lot width shall be 150 square feet.
B. Recreational facilities, playgrounds, cafeteria or kitchen facilities,
performance theaters or halls, libraries, and other similar uses that are
customarily accessory to schools shall be permitted.
(1) Child-care centers may be permitted as an accessory use only with
the approval of a conditional use permit, provided that it complies
with the requirements of § 650-49.
(2) No housing or dormitories, whether for temporary or permanent
occupancy, shall be permitted as accessory uses.
C. All interior spaces within school buildings to be utilized for potential
noise-generating activity shall be sufficiently sound-insulated and
separated from adjacent residential structures so as to avoid any noise
nuisance.
D. No school building, parking lot, or outdoor facility shall be located
closer than 25 feet to any residential property line or residential zoning
district boundary. A landscaped buffer, berm, fence, hedge, or other
screening material shall be provided along such property lines or
district boundaries to a height of no less than six feet.
E. Play facilities for the use of students enrolled at an elementary school
shall not require the crossing of any street by the students.
F. All required parking shall be provided on the site.
G. Building coverage shall not exceed 50%.
§ 650-76 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-78
1:1190
§ 650-79. Tattoo parlors, piercing parlors, and other body art shops.
Tattoo parlors, piercing parlors, and other body art shops, wherever
permitted as of right or with a conditional use permit pursuant to Article VI,
shall be required to meet the following minimum standards:
§ 650-80. Truck terminals and bulk distribution terminals.
Truck terminals and bulk distribution terminals, wherever permitted as
of right or with a conditional use permit pursuant to Article VI, shall be
required to meet the following minimum standards:
A. The shopping center shall be designed as a single complex with a
comprehensive and uniform plan for internal site circulation,
landscaping, building design, facade treatments, and signage.
B. Uses within the shopping center shall be limited to those permitted in
the zoning district.
C. To the extent possible, the number of curb cuts shall be limited to one
entrance and one exit per street frontage, except where such street
frontage exceeds a distance of 400 feet.
D. The minimum lot area shall be two acres, and the minimum lot width
shall be 200 feet.
E. All outside loading berths, docks, or delivery areas shall be provided to
the rear of the building, and where adjacent to a residential use or
zoning district boundary, shall be located a minimum distance of 30 feet
to such property line or boundary.
F. Any outside storage of trucks, pallets, cases, etc., shall be completely
fenced with appropriate access gates sufficient for the movement of
large commercial vehicles, and such areas shall be adequately screened
from view on all sides.
G. Internal traffic circulation for a shopping center shall be so arranged
that off-street parking for retail customers shall be in an area distinct
and separate from any maneuvering areas for any loading berths or
truck storage for employee parking.
A. No such use shall be located within 500 feet of another such use, nor
within 500 feet of a school, place of worship, hospital, philanthropic or
eleemosynary institution, park, or playground.
A. All truck terminals and bulk distribution terminals shall meet the
minimum requirements for auto-oriented uses, pursuant to § 650-40.
B. All parking areas for trucks and other vehicles shall meet the minimum
Township requirements for all parking lots pursuant to Article VIII.
C. Parking areas shall be at least 60 feet from any residential use or zoning
district boundary and at least 25 feet from any property line.
§ 650-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-80
1:1191
§ 650-81. Amusement arcades.
Amusement arcades, wherever permitted as of right or with a conditional
use permit pursuant to Article VI, shall be required to meet the following
minimum standards:
§ 650-82. Charter schools. [Added 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. MC 3425]
D. Adequate space shall be provided on the site for all the elements to be
incorporated into the terminal, including provision for off-street
parking for the maximum number of idle trucks, tractors, semitrailers,
buses and automobiles, and off-street loading and unloading. No
loading shall occur across curbs or sidewalks. Adequate access and
egress with appropriate turning radii shall be provided as well as
adequate queuing and turnaround space on the site so that at no time is
street traffic disrupted or blocked by vehicles entering or leaving the
site. Queuing of trucks or buses on the street or shoulder waiting to
enter the terminal shall not be permitted.
E. All fuel, oil, gasoline, or similar substances shall be stored underground
and shall be placed at least 20 feet from any structure, 20 feet from any
street or property line, and 30 feet from any residential property line or
residential zoning district boundary. Such facilities shall be installed
and maintained in accordance with the standards of the National Board
of Underwriters.
A. The building in which the use is housed shall be designed and built so as
to contain any noise-generating activities within the building. All
interior spaces shall be sufficiently sound-insulated. Sounds emanating
from such uses shall not be audible beyond the property line.
§ 650-80 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-82
1:1192
ARTICLE X
Nonconforming Uses
§ 650-83. Continuance.
Except as otherwise provided in this article, the lawful use of land or
buildings existing on the effective date of this chapter may be continued
although such use or building does not conform to the regulations specified
by this chapter for the zone in which such land or building is located;
provided, however, that:
§ 650-84. Abandonment.
In the event that there is a cessation of operation of any nonconforming
use for a period of 12 consecutive calendar months, the same shall be
presumed to be an abandonment of such nonconforming use. Such use shall
not thereafter be reinstated, and the structures shall not be reoccupied
except in conformance with this chapter.
§ 650-85. Previously approved construction.
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in plans, construction
or designated use of a building for which a building permit has been
heretofore issued and the construction of which shall have been diligently
prosecuted within three months of the date of such permit and the ground
story framework of which, including the second tier of beams, shall have
been completed within six months of the date of the permit, and which
entire building shall be completed according to plans as filed within one
year from the date of this chapter.
§ 650-86. Reversion.
No nonconforming use which has been changed to a conforming use may be
changed back to a nonconforming use.
§ 650-87. Alteration.
A nonconforming building may be altered, but not enlarged or extended, to
an extent not exceeding in aggregate 50% of the recorded true value of the
A. No nonconforming lot shall be further reduced or increased in size.
B. No nonconforming building shall be enlarged, extended or increased
unless such enlargement would tend to reduce the degree of
nonconformance.
C. No nonconforming use may be expanded.
D. A use not conforming to any previous zoning ordinance without permit
and also not conforming to this chapter shall not be continued by this
section.
§ 650-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-87
1:1193
building as appraised in the records of the Tax Assessor, unless said building
is changed to a building conforming to the requirements of this chapter.
§ 650-88. Restoration.
If any nonconforming building shall be destroyed by reason of windstorm,
fire, explosion or other act of God or the public enemy to an extent of more
than 50% of the recorded true value as appraised in the records of the Tax
Assessor, then such destruction shall be deemed complete destruction, and
the structure may not be rebuilt, restored or repaired except in conformity
with this chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the straightening
or restoring to a safe condition of any wall, floor or roof which has been
declared unsafe.
§ 650-89. District changes.
Whenever the boundaries of a district shall be changed so as to transfer
an area from one district to another district of a different classification, the
foregoing provisions shall also apply to any nonconforming uses existing
therein or created thereby.
§ 650-87 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-89
1:1194
ARTICLE XI
Administration and Enforcement
§ 650-90. Enforcement.
The Division of Building Construction shall administer and enforce this
chapter and shall have such powers as are conferred upon it by this chapter
and as reasonably may be implied. In no case shall a permit be granted
for the construction or alteration of any building where the proposed
construction, alteration or use thereof would be in violation of any provision
of this chapter. It shall be the duty of the Division of Building Construction
Inspectors to cause any building, plans or premises to be inspected or
examined and to order, in writing, the remedying of any conditions found to
violate this chapter, and employees of said Division may enter any building
or premises in the performance of their duties between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
§ 650-91. Permits and certificates.
A. Conditional use permits:
(1) Application for any conditional use permit as provided in this
chapter shall be made to the Planning Board through the Division
of Building Construction.
(2) The Planning Board shall grant or deny an application for a
conditional use within 95 days of submission of a complete
application to the Division of Building Construction or within such
further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
(3) Any conditional use permit granted under the provisions of this
chapter shall expire should the applicant fail to obtain a building
permit and begin construction with one year of the date of the
granting of said conditional use permit.
B. Temporary use permits. The Planning Board may grant temporary use
permits for activities to be conducted for a limited period of time, which
activities would not otherwise be permitted by this chapter. Such
permits may be granted under the same regulations and procedures for
the issuance of conditional use permits as specified elsewhere in this
chapter. The Board shall determine that such uses are of such a nature
and so located as to have no detrimental effect upon the uses of land
and the activities normally permitted in the zone. The Planning Board
shall also determine that such uses contribute materially to the general
welfare under conditions peculiar to the time and place involved. Upon
such determination, the Planning Board shall direct the Building
Inspector to issue a temporary use permit for a period not to exceed six
months. Such permit may be extended not more than once for an
additional six months.
§ 650-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-91
1:1195
C. Certificate of occupancy. Certificates of occupancy shall be issued by
the Construction Official in the manner prescribed by the Building
Code.421 On the serving of notice by the Division of Building
Construction to an owner of any violation of this chapter with respect to
any building or use thereof of land, any certificate of occupancy
previously issued for such use shall become void and a new certificate
of occupancy shall be required for any further use of such land or
building. Certificates of occupancy shall acknowledge compliance with
all requirements of this chapter or of the Planning Board or Zoning
Board.
D. Records. The Division of Building Construction shall keep a record of all
permits applied for and issued, together with a notation of all special
conditions involved. Copies of all plans submitted shall be filed and
safely kept, and the same shall form a part of the records of that office
and shall be available for the use of the officials of the Township. The
Municipal Council shall receive a monthly summary of all permits
applied for and issued and all complaints of violation and the action
taken by the Division of Building Construction consequent thereon. A
copy of each report shall be filed with the Tax Assessor.
E. Fees. Fees to cover costs of processing, reviewing and acting upon all
applications for variances, conditional use permits, temporary use
permits, certificates of occupancy and appeals may be fixed by the
appropriate board or by the Municipal Council. Such fees may be
changed from time to time as necessary to maintain their relationship
to all costs incurred, directly or indirectly, by the Township.
421. Editor's Note: See Ch. 240, Construction Code, Uniform.
§ 650-91 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-91
1:1196
ARTICLE XII
Interpretation
§ 650-92. Interpretation of provisions.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of
public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. It is not
intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair
or interfere with any existing provision of law or ordinance or any rules,
regulations or permits previously adopted or issued or which shall be
adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use of buildings or
premises; nor is it intended by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate
or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties;
provided, however, that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction
upon the use of buildings or premises or upon the height of building or
requires larger yards, courts or other open spaces than are imposed or
required by such existing provision of law or ordinance or by such rules,
regulations or permits or by such easements, covenants or agreements, the
provisions of this chapter shall control.
§ 650-92 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-92
1:1197

ARTICLE XIII
Conflict With Other Laws
§ 650-93. Ordinances saved from repeal.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of this
chapter are hereby repealed, except:
A. The Fire Prevention Code and the provisions of Chapter 307 of the
Revised Code and the amendments and supplements thereto.
B. The BOCA Building Code and the rules and regulations adopted
thereunder pursuant to Chapter 200 of the Revised Code and the
amendments and supplements thereto.
C. The Housing Code adopted under Chapter 355 of the Revised Code and
the amendments and supplements thereto, as well as the rules and
regulations adopted thereunder.
D. The Nonresidential Property Maintenance Code adopted as Chapter
460 of the Revised Code and the amendments and supplements thereto.
E. The Air Pollution Code adopted under Chapter 149 of the Revised Code
and the amendments and supplements thereto.
F. The Uniform Fire Safety Act.422
422. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.
§ 650-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-93
1:1199

ARTICLE XIV
Violations
§ 650-94. Violations and penalties.
For any and every violation of the provisions of this chapter, the owner,
contractor or other person or persons interested as lessees, tenants or
otherwise in any building, land or premises where such violation has been
committed or will exist, and who shall refuse to abate said violation within
five days after written notice so to do has been served upon him by certified
mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service, shall, for each and
every violation, be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000 or 90 days'
imprisonment, or both. Each and every day that such violation shall
continue after such notice shall have been served shall be considered a
separate and specific violation of this chapter and as a part of a continuing
offense.
§ 650-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-94
1:1201

ARTICLE XV
Wireless Telecommunications Towers and Antennas
§ 650-95. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish general guidelines for the siting of
wireless communications towers and antennas. In furtherance of the goals
listed below, the Township of Irvington shall give due consideration to the
adopted Township Master Plan, Zoning Map,423 and existing land uses, in
considering sites for the location of towers and antennas. The goals of this
article are to:
§ 650-96. Applicability.
All new telecommunications towers or antennas in the Township of
Irvington shall be subject to these regulations, with the exception of the
following:
A. Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impacts
of towers and antennas;
B. Encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas;
C. Minimize the total number of towers throughout the community;
D. Strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites as a
primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers;
E. Encourage users of towers and antenna to locate them, to the extent
possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is
minimal;
F. Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way
that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas
through careful design, siting, landscape screening, and innovative
camouflaging techniques;
G. Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to
provide such services to the community quickly, effectively, and
efficiently;
H. Consider the public health and safety of communication towers; and
I. Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure
through engineering and careful siting of tower structures.
A. Amateur radio station operators/receive-only antennas. This section
shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is
under 70 feet in height and is owned and operated by a federally
licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for
receive-only antennas.
423. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 650-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-96
1:1203
§ 650-97. General requirements.
B. Residential satellite dish antennas. This section shall not govern any
satellite dish antennas used for residential purposes.
C. AM array. For the purposes of implementing this section, an AM array,
consisting of one or more tower units and supporting ground system
which functions as one AM broadcasting antenna, shall be considered
one tower. Measurements for setbacks and separation distances shall
be measured from the outer perimeter of the towers included in the AM
array. Additional tower units may be added within the perimeter of the
AM array by right.
A. Antennas and towers may be considered either principal or accessory
uses. The presence of an existing use or structure on a lot shall not
preclude the installation of a telecommunications tower or antenna on
such lot. If a tower and its appurtenant structures constitute the sole
use of the lot, the tower shall be deemed to be the principal use.
B. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a tower or
antenna complies with zone development regulations, including but not
limited to setback requirements, lot-coverage requirements, and other
such requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even
though the antennas or towers may be located on leased parcels within
such lot.
C. Each applicant for a telecommunications tower or antenna shall provide
the Township with an inventory of its existing telecommunications
towers, antennas, or sites approved for telecommunications towers or
antennas, that are either within the jurisdiction of the Township of
Irvington or within three miles of the borders thereof, including specific
information about the location, height, and design of each tower. The
Township may share such information with other applicants applying
for administrative approvals or permits under this section or other
organizations seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of the
Township of Irvington, provided, however that the Township is not, by
sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that
such sites are available or suitable.
D. Telecommunications towers and antennas shall meet the following
requirements:
(1) Telecommunications towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel
finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted
a neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
(2) At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures
shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures,
screening, and landscaping that will blend them into the natural
setting and surrounding buildings.
§ 650-96 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-97
1:1204
§ 650-98. Permitted uses.
(3) If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a
telecommunications tower, the antenna and supporting electrical
and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is
identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting
structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as
visually unobtrusive as possible.
E. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or
other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the lighting
alternatives and design chosen must cause the least disturbance to the
surrounding views.
F. All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of
the FAA, the FCC, and any other agencies of the state or federal
government with the authority to regulate telecommunications towers
and antennas.
G. To ensure the structural integrity of telecommunications towers, the
owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with
standards contained in applicable state or local building codes424 and
the applicable standards for telecommunications towers that are
published by the Electronic Industries Association.
H. Towers and antennas shall be regulated and permitted pursuant to this
section and shall not be regulated or permitted as essential services,
public utilities, or private utilities.
I. Owners and/or operators of telecommunications towers or antennas
shall certify that all franchises required by law for the construction and/
or operation of a wireless communication system in the Township of
Irvington have been obtained and shall file a copy of all required
franchises with the Township of Irvington.
J. No signs shall be allowed on an antenna or tower.
K. To minimize adverse visual impacts associated with the proliferation
and clustering of towers, collocation of antennas by more than one
carrier on existing towers shall take precedence over the construction
of new towers.
A. Telecommunications towers or antennas shall be permitted on property
owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the Township of Irvington,
provided a license or lease authorizing such antenna or tower has been
approved by the Township of Irvington. The Township may, as a
condition of such lease, require site plan approval.
424. Editor's Note: See Ch. 240, Construction Code, Uniform.
§ 650-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-98
1:1205
§ 650-99. Conditional use regulations.
B. Telecommunications towers and antennas permitted with a conditional
use permit shall be as follows, except as restricted pursuant to
Subsection C below:
(1) Antennas on existing nonresidential structures, subject to the
provisions of Article XV, Wireless Telecommunication Towers and
Antennas.
(2) Antennas on existing telecommunication towers, subject to the
provisions of Article XV, Wireless Telecommunication Towers and
Antennas.
(3) New telecommunication towers in business or industrial zoning
districts, subject to the provisions of Article XV, Wireless
Telecommunication Towers and Antennas.
C. Telecommunications towers and antennas shall be prohibited as
follows:
(1) No antennas shall be permitted on any existing structure
containing one or more residential dwelling units, and no towers
shall be permitted on a lot containing one or more residential
dwelling units.
(2) No towers shall be permitted on the site of any existing park,
schoolyard, or cemetery. No antennas shall be permitted on the site
of any such uses, unless the antenna is mounted to an existing
nonresidential structure and fully screened from view.
(3) No new towers shall be permitted in the CBD, B-1, or any
residential zoning district.
A. All antennas permitted on existing nonresidential structures shall be
required to comply with the following standards:
(1) The existing structure shall not contain residential uses and shall
not be located in a residential zoning district.
(2) The antenna does not extend beyond the maximum building height
for the zoning district in which the antenna is located.
(3) The antenna is screened from view or camouflaged to the greatest
extent possible.
(4) The equipment cabinet or structure used in association with
antennas shall comply with the following:
(a) The cabinet or structure shall not contain more than 100
square feet of gross floor area or be more than 10 feet in
height.
§ 650-98 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-99
1:1206
(b) For buildings less than 40 feet in height, the related unmanned
equipment structure shall be located on the ground and shall
not be located on the roof.
(c) If the equipment structure is located on the roof, the area of
the equipment structure and other equipment and structures
shall not occupy more than 5% of the roof area.
(d) The cabinet or structure shall not be located in a front yard.
The cabinet or structure shall comply with all setback
requirements for the zoning district in which the site is located.
(e) The cabinet or structure shall be surrounded by evergreen
trees, shrubs, or hedges with a height of no less than eight feet.
B. All antennas permitted on existing telecommunication towers shall be
required to comply with the following standards:
(1) A tower that is modified or reconstructed to accommodate the
collocation of an additional antenna shall be of the same tower type
as the existing tower.
(2) An existing tower may be modified or rebuilt to a taller height,
provided the new tower meets all the requirements that would
normally be required for the construction of a new tower pursuant
to this article.
C. All new permitted telecommunication towers shall be required to
comply with the following standards:
(1) No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates
to the satisfaction of the Planning Board that no existing tower,
structure or alternative technology that does not require the use of
towers or structures can accommodate the applicant's proposed
antenna.
(a) The Planning Board shall consider the following factors in
determining whether to issue a conditional use permit:
[1] Height of the proposed tower;
[2] Proximity of the tower to residential structures and
residential district boundaries;
[3] Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
[4] Surrounding topography;
[5] Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
[6] Design of the tower, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or
eliminating visual obtrusiveness;
§ 650-99 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-99
1:1207
[7] Proposed ingress and egress;
[8] Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or
alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers or
structures; and
[9] Availability of proposed tower to other potential users.
(b) An applicant shall submit information requested by the
Planning Board as to the availability of suitable existing
towers, other structures or alternative technology.
(c) In order to demonstrate that no existing tower, structure or
alternative technology that does not require the use of towers
or structures can accommodate the proposed antenna, the
applicant shall submit evidence to that effect. Such evidence
definitely proves one or more of the following points:
[1] No existing telecommunications towers or structures are
located within the geographic area which meets the
applicant's engineering requirements.
[2] Existing telecommunications towers or structures are not
of sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering
requirements.
[3] Existing telecommunications towers or structures do not
have sufficient structural strength to support the
applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment.
[4] The applicant's proposed antenna would cause
electromagnetic interference with existing or approved
antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the
antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause
interference with the applicant's proposed antenna.
[5] The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting
factors that render existing towers and structures
unsuitable.
[6] The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology
that does not require the use of towers or structures is
unsuitable. Costs of alternative technology that exceed
new tower or antenna development shall not be presumed
to render the technology unsuitable.
(2) The tower base and any accessory structures and buildings
attached thereto must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback
requirements. In addition, the following setback requirements shall
apply:
§ 650-99 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-99
1:1208
§ 650-100. Submission requirements.
In addition to any information that would normally be required in
conjunction with a conditional use permit application, applicants for a
conditional use permit for a telecommunication tower or antenna shall
submit the following information:
(a) Telecommunication towers must be set back a distance equal
to at least 50% of the height of the tower from any adjoining lot
line and all nonappurtenant buildings.
(b) Telecommunication towers shall be set back from a residential
use, residential zoning district boundary, school, place of
worship, child-care center, hospital, or philanthropic or
eleemosynary use a minimum of 200 feet.
(3) No proposed telecommunication tower shall be located within 1/2
mile of any preexisting tower.
(4) Telecommunication towers shall be enclosed by security fencing
not less than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with an
appropriate anticlimbing device.
(5) Sites with telecommunication towers shall provide a buffer along
those property lines that adjoin residential uses or residential
zoning district boundaries. The buffer shall screen the tower from
view to the maximum extent possible from the vantage point of
those adjoining properties or zones. The buffer shall consist of a
strip of land at least five feet wide planted with evergreen trees,
shrubs, or hedges at least six feet in height.
(6) The height of a telecommunication tower shall not exceed 120 feet
in height.
(7) The equipment cabinet or structure used in association with
antennas shall comply with the following:
(a) The cabinet or structure shall not contain more than 200
square feet of gross floor area or be more than 10 feet in
height.
(b) The cabinet or structure shall not be located in a required front
yard. The cabinet or structure shall comply with all setback
requirement for the zoning district in which the site is located.
(c) The cabinet or structure shall be surrounded by evergreen
trees, shrubs, or hedges with a height of no less than eight feet.
A. A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and height of the
proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses and
zoning (including when adjacent to other municipalities), Master Plan
classification of the site and all properties within 200 feet of the site,
adjacent roadways, proposed means of access, setbacks from property
§ 650-99 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-100
1:1209
§ 650-101. Removal, abandonment, and rebuilding.
lines, elevation drawings of the proposed tower and any other
structures, topography, parking, and other information deemed by the
Planning Board to be necessary to assess compliance with this section.
B. Legal description of the entire tract and leased parcel (if applicable).
C. The setback distance between the proposed tower and the nearest
residential unit, platted residentially zoned properties, and unplatted
residentially zoned properties.
D. The separation distance from other towers described in the inventory of
existing sites submitted pursuant to Article XV, Wireless
Telecommunication Towers and Antennas, shall be shown on an
updated site plan or map. The applicant shall also identify the type of
construction of the existing tower(s) and the owner/operator of the
existing tower(s), if known.
E. A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials.
F. Method of fencing, and finished color and, if applicable, the method of
camouflage and illumination.
G. A description of compliance with all relevant provisions of this article.
H. A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether construction of
the tower will accommodate collocation of additional antennas for
future users.
I. Identification of the entities providing the backhaul network for the
tower(s) described in the application and other cellular sites owned or
operated by the applicant in the Township.
J. A description of the suitability of the use of existing towers, other
structures or alternative technology not requiring the use of towers or
structures to provide the services to be provided through the use of the
proposed new tower.
K. A description of the feasible location(s) of future towers or antennas
within the Township of Irvington based upon existing physical,
engineering, technological or geographical limitations in the event the
proposed tower is erected.
L. A visual study depicting where, within a three-mile radius, any portion
of the proposed tower could be seen.
M. A statement of intent on whether excess space will be leased.
N. Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant submits,
whether civil, mechanical, or electrical, shall be certified by a licensed
professional engineer.
§ 650-100 IRVINGTON CODE § 650-101
1:1210
A. Any telecommunication tower or antenna that is not operated for a
continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, and the
owner of such telecommunication tower or antenna shall remove the
same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the Township of Irvington
notifying the owner of such abandonment. Failure to remove an
abandoned antenna or tower within said 90 days shall be grounds to
remove the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. If there are two or
more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become
effective until all users cease using the tower. The Township may
condition the issuance of any permit to demolish or remove a tower or
antenna on the posting of an appropriate performance bond or other
suitable guarantee in a face amount of not less than 120% of the cost of
such removal.
B. Nonconforming telecommunication towers or antennas that are
damaged or destroyed may not be rebuilt without first having to obtain
a conditional use permit pursuant to Article XV, Wireless
Telecommunication Towers and Antennas. The type and location of the
new tower shall be the same as the preexisting tower, and the height
shall be no taller than the original tower. Building permits to rebuild the
facility shall be obtained within 180 days from the date the facility is
damaged or destroyed. If no permit is obtained or if said permit expires,
the tower or antenna shall be deemed abandoned as specified in this
section.
§ 650-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 650-101
1:1211
Appendix
Chapter A670
CABLE TELEVISION AND COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 555. Trees — See Ch. 610.
§ A670-1. Purpose.
The municipality hereby grants to Comcast renewal of its nonexclusive
municipal consent to place in, upon, across, above, over and under
highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, easements, public ways and public
places in the municipality, poles, wires, cables, underground conduits,
manholes and other television conductors, fixtures, apparatus and
equipment as may be necessary for the construction, operation and
maintenance in the municipality of a cable television and communications
system.
§ A670-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Such meaning
or definition of terms is supplemental to those definitions of the Federal
Communications Commission ("FCC") rules and regulations, 47 CFR 76.1 et
seq., and the Cable Communications Policy Act, 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq., as
amended, and the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq., and shall in
no way be construed to broaden, alter or conflict with the federal and state
definitions:
ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT — Chapter 186 of the General Laws of
New Jersey, and subsequent amendments thereto, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1, et seq.
APPLICATION — The company's application for renewal of municipal
consent.
BASIC CABLE SERVICE — Any service tier, which includes the
retransmission of local television broadcast signals as defined by the FCC.
BOARD or BPU — The Board of Public Utilities, State of New Jersey.
COMPANY — The grantee of rights under this ordinance and is known as
"Comcast of New Jersey II, LLC."
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
OFFICE or OCTV — The Office of Cable Television of the Board.
§ 650-101 IRVINGTON CODE § A670-2
1:1212
PRIMARY SERVICE AREA or PSA — Consists of the area of the municipality
currently served by existing plant as set forth in the map annexed to the
company's application for municipal consent.
TOWN or MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Irvington, County of Essex,
State of New Jersey.
§ A670-3. Statement of findings.
Public hearings conducted by the municipality concerning the renewal of
municipal consent herein granted to the company were held after proper
public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act and the
regulations of the Board adopted pursuant thereto. Said hearings having
been fully open to the public, and the municipality having received at said
public hearings all comments regarding the qualifications of the company
to receive this renewal of municipal consent, the municipality hereby finds
that the company possesses the necessary legal, technical, character,
financial and other qualifications and that the company's operating and
construction arrangements are adequate and feasible.
§ A670-4. Duration of franchise.
§ A670-5. Franchise fee.
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act, the company shall, during
each year of operation under the consent granted herein, pay to the
municipality 2% of the gross revenues from all recurring charges in the
nature of subscription fees paid by subscribers for cable television
reception service in the municipality or any higher amount required by the
Act or otherwise allowable by law, whichever is greater.
§ A670-6. Franchise territory.
The consent granted under this ordinance to the renewal of the franchise
shall apply to the entirety of the municipality and any property subsequently
annexed hereto.
A. The nonexclusive municipal consent granted herein shall expire 15
years from the date of expiration of the previous certificate of approval
issued by the Board.
B. In the event that the municipality shall find that the company has not
substantially complied with the material terms and conditions of this
ordinance, the municipality shall have the right to petition the OCTV,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47, for appropriate action, including
modification and/or termination of the certificate of approval; provided
however, that the municipality shall first have given the company
written notice of all alleged instances of noncompliance and an
opportunity to cure same within 90 days of that notification.
§ A670-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A670-7
1:1213
§ A670-7. Extension of service.
The company shall be required to proffer service to any residence or
business along any public right-of-way in the primary service area, as set
forth in the company's application. The company's line extension policy, as
set forth in the company's application, shall govern any extension of plant
beyond the primary service area.
§ A670-8. Construction requirements.
§ A670-9. Customer service.
In providing services to its customers, the company shall comply with
N.J.A.C. 14:18-1, et seq. and all applicable state and federal statutes and
regulations. The company shall strive to meet or exceed all voluntary
company and industry standards in the delivery of customer service and
shall be prepared to report on it to the municipality upon written request of
the Municipality Administrator or Clerk.
A. Restoration. In the event that the company or its agents shall disturb
any pavement, street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways, or other surface
in the natural topography, the company shall, at its sole expense,
restore and replace such places or things so disturbed in as good a
condition as existed prior to the commencement of said work.
B. Relocation. If at any time during the period of this consent the
municipality shall alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other
way or place, the company, upon reasonable notice by the municipality,
shall remove, re-lay or relocate its equipment at the expense of the
company.
C. Removal or trimming of trees. During the exercise of its rights and
privileges under this franchise, the company shall have the authority to
trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks or other
public places of the municipality so as to prevent the branches of such
trees from coming in contact with the wires and cable of the company.
Such trimming shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper
clearance of the company's wire and cables.
A. The company shall continue to comply fully with all applicable state and
federal statutes and regulations regarding credit for outages, the
reporting of same to regulatory agencies and notification of same to
customers.
B. The company shall continue to fully comply with all applicable state and
federal statues and regulations regarding the availability of devices for
the hearing impaired and the notification of same to customers.
C. The company shall use every reasonable effort to meet or exceed
voluntary standards for telephone accessibility developed by the
National Cable Television Association (NCTA).
§ A670-7 IRVINGTON CODE § A670-9
1:1214
§ A670-10. Municipal complaint officer.
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designed as the Complaint Officer
for the municipality pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26(b). All complaints shall
be received and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.5. The
municipality shall have the right to request copies of records and reports
pertaining to complaints by municipality customers from the OCTV.
§ A670-11. Local office.
During the term of this franchise and any renewal thereof, the company
shall maintain a business office or agent in accordance with N.J.A.C.
14:18-5.1 for the purpose of receiving, investigating and resolving all local
complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions, and
similar matters. Such business office shall have a publicly listed toll-free
telephone number and be open during standard business hours, and in no
event (excepting emergent circumstances) less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday.
§ A670-12. Performance bonds.
During the life of the franchise, the company shall give to the municipality
a bond in the amount of $25,000. Such bond shall be to insure the faithful
performance of all undertakings of the company as represented in its
application for municipal consent incorporated herein.
§ A670-13. Subscriber rates.
The rates of the company shall be subject to regulation as permitted by
federal and state law.
§ A670-14. Public, educational and governmental access.
D. Nothing herein shall impair the right of any subscriber or the
municipality to express any comment with respect to telephone
accessibility to the Complaint Officer, or impair the right of the
Complaint Officer to take any action that is permitted under law.
A. The company shall continue to provide residents with a system-wide
public access channel maintained by the company. Qualified individuals
and organizations may utilize public access for the purpose of
cablecasting noncommercial access programming in conformance with
the company's published public access rules.
B. The company shall continue to provide a system-wide leased access
channel maintained by the company for the purpose of cablecasting
commercial access programming in conformance with the company's
guidelines and applicable state and federal statutes and regulations.
C. The company shall continue to provide two dedicated local access
channels and existing return lines, maintained by the company for the
§ A670-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A670-14
1:1215
§ A670-15. Commitments by the company.
purpose of cablecasting noncommercial access programming in
conformance with the company's guidelines and applicable state and
federal statutes and regulations.
D. The company shall take any steps that are necessary to ensure that the
signals originated on the access channels are carried without material
degradation, and with a signal whose quality is equal to that of the
other standard channels that the company transmits.
E. The Communications Act of 1934, as amended (47 U.S.C. § 543(b)(4)),
allows the company to itemize and/or identify the amount on the
monthly bill assessed to satisfy any requirements imposed on the
company by the cable franchise to support public, educational and
governmental channels, or the use of such channels or any other
services required under the franchise. The company reserves its
external cost, pass-through rights to the extent permitted by law.
A. The company shall provide standard installation and basic cable
television service on one outlet at no cost to each school in the
municipality, public and private, elementary, intermediate and
secondary, provided the school is within 200 feet of active cable
distribution plant. Each additional outlet installed, if any, shall be paid
for on a materials plus labor basis by the school requesting service.
Monthly service charges shall be waived on all additional outlets except
for equipment.
B. The company shall provide standard installation and basic cable
television service at no cost on one outlet to each police, fire,
emergency management facility, Township Hall, public works facilities
and public library in the municipality, provided the facility is located
within 200 feet of active cable distribution plant. Each additional outlet
installed, if any, shall be paid for on a materials plus labor basis by the
municipality. Monthly service charges shall be waived on all additional
outlets except for equipment.
C. The company shall provide, free of charge, one nonnetworked high
speed cable modem and monthly Internet service to each school in the
municipality, including public, private, elementary, and intermediate
and secondary schools and to the public library. The Internet service
provided herein must be available to student and patron use and cannot
be limited to administrative uses. All facilities must be located within
200 feet of active cable distribution plant.
D. The company shall provide, at no cost to the municipality, two
additional access channel return lines and necessary transmission
equipment for signal transmission for the access channels referenced in
§ A670-14C above and at locations determined by the Township.
Origination sites for access channels and return lines must be with 200
feet of active cable distribution plant.
§ A670-14 IRVINGTON CODE § A670-15
1:1216
§ A670-16. Emergency uses.
§ A670-17. Liability insurance.
The company shall at all times maintain a comprehensive general liability
insurance policy with a single limit amount of $1,000,000 covering liability
for any death, personal injury, property damages or other liability arising
out of its construction and operation of the cable television system, and an
excess liability (or "umbrella") policy in the amount of $5,000,000.
§ A670-18. Incorporation of the application.
All of the statements and commitments contained in the application or
annexed thereto and incorporated therein, and any amendment thereto,
except as modified herein, are binding upon the company as terms and
conditions of this consent. The application and other relevant writings
submitted by the company shall be annexed hereto and made a part hereof
E. Within six months of the issuance of a renewal certificate of approval
(COA) by the Board, the company shall provide to the municipality a
one-time access-related technology grant in the amount of $125,000.
F. Company representative shall appear at least once annually, upon
written request from the Township, at a public meeting of the governing
body, to discuss matters pertaining to the provision of cable television
service to residents of the Township and other related issues as the
Township and the company may see fit.
G. The company shall make available to the Township on a first-come, firstserved
basis, a mobile production vehicle for the purpose of producing
noncommercial community, governmental or educational access
programing, consistent with the company's written rules and
regulations on the use of said vehicle, and provided the vehicle is in
service by the company.
H. The company shall provide an additional grant of $75,000 in support of
cable-related and communications programs, or as otherwise
determined by the Township, which grant shall be payable in annual
installments in the amount of $5,000 per year for the term of the
franchise. The first payment due on April 1, 2015, and each additional
payment due on April 1 of each succeeding year for the term of the
franchise.
A. The company will comply with the Emergency Alert System (EAS) rules
in accordance with applicable state and federal statues and regulations.
B. The company shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by the
municipality or any other person during an emergency if for any reason
the municipality is unable to make full use of the cable television system
as contemplated herein.
§ A670-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A670-18
1:1217
by reference, provided same do not conflict with applicable state or federal
law.
§ A670-19. Competitive equity.
Should the municipality grant a franchise to construct, operate and
maintain a cable television system to any other person, corporation or
entity on terms materially less burdensome or more favorable than the
terms contained herein, the company may substitute such language that
is more favorable or less burdensome for the comparable provision of this
ordinance, subject to the provisions of N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
§ A670-20. Separability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court
or federal or state agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and its validity or
unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of
the chapter.
§ A670-21. Third-party beneficiaries.
Nothing in this franchise or in any prior agreement is or was intended to
confer third-party beneficiary status on any member of the public to enforce
the terms of such agreements or franchise.
§ A670-22. Effective date.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon issuance of a renewal
certificate of approval from the BPU.
Chapter A675
COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES FRANCHISES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 555. Cable television and communications
system — See Ch. A670.
§ A670-18 IRVINGTON CODE § A670-22
1:1218
ARTICLE I
Verizon New Jersey, Inc.
[Adopted 4-10-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3166 (Ch. A210, Art. I, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ A675-1. Consent granted.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:17-10, N.J.S.A. 48:17-11, and
N.J.S.A. 48:17-12, permission and consent is hereby granted to Verizon New
Jersey Inc., (the "company"), its successors and assigns, to install, operate,
inspect, maintain, repair, replace and remove its communications facilities
and other transmission or process equipment, including underground
facilities, such as conduits, manholes, cables, wires, and all other facilities
appurtenant thereto, and aboveground facilities, such as cables, wires,
antennas, poles, posts, supports, guys, pedestals, cable termination and
distribution cabinets and all other facilities appurtenant thereto, in,
through, upon, along, over, under, and across all of the various public
streets and ways, which include the roads, avenues, rights-of-way,
sidewalks, highways, bridges, waterways, and other public places, and parts
thereof, throughout their entire length, and to effect the necessary street
openings and lateral connections to curb poles, property lines and other
facilities in the Township of Irvington (the "Township") for said company's
local and through lines and other communications facilities in connection
with the transaction of its business. In the event that any public street
or way where the company has facilities is vacated by the Township, the
Township agrees to reserve unto said company the rights granted the
company by the present ordinance.
§ A675-2. Location of equipment and facilities.
All poles, posts, pedestals, cabinets, or other facilities shall be located and
placed back of the curblines where shown on the Official Map(s) of the
Township; the poles and posts, however, shall be located within 18 inches
of the face of such curbline or as may otherwise be mutually agreed by
both parties, or at the points or places now occupied by the poles, posts,
pedestals, cabinets, or other facilities of the company, its successors and
assigns, and where there are no curblines, at other convenient points or
places in, upon, along, adjacent, or across the public streets and ways as
may be mutually agreed upon between the parties.
§ A675-3. Underground facilities.
The company may bury its local and through communications facilities such
as cables, conduit, manholes and associated equipment, fixtures, process
equipment and appurtenances within the right-of-way of the various public
streets and ways and at such locations as shall be mutually agreed upon by
the parties for said company's local and through lines and communications
facilities. Underground conduits and associated facilities, as
aforementioned, shall be placed at least 18 inches below the surface of said
public streets and ways and with the exception of lateral branches to curb
§ A675-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A675-3
1:1219
poles and property lines and other facilities, the same shall generally not be
constructed more than 10 feet from the curbline, unless obstructions make
it necessary to deviate from such course or unless the parties mutually
agree to another location. Manholes shall be located at such points along
the line of underground conduits as may be necessary or convenient for
placing, maintaining, and operating the facilities, as aforementioned, which
the company may from time to time use in connection with its underground
conduit system and shall be so constructed as to conform to the crosssectional
and longitudinal grade of the surface so as not to interfere with
the safety or convenience of persons or vehicles.
§ A675-4. Notification prior to construction; street openings.
Before proceeding with any new construction or relocation work in an
area covered by this ordinance, the company shall give prior notice in
writing thereof to the Township, through its designated representative, of
its intention to perform such work. The company shall obtain such street
opening, utilities or excavation permits as may be lawfully required by any
applicable ordinances regulating such openings or excavations. Any such
area affected by the company in constructing its facilities shall be restored
to as good condition as it was before the commencement of work thereon.
No public streets or ways shall be encumbered for a period longer than shall
be reasonable to execute the work.
§ A675-5. Liability.
The company agrees to indemnify and save harmless the Township from and
against all claims and liabilities resulting from any injury or damage to the
person or property of any person, firm or corporation caused by or arising
out of road conditions resulting from any negligent or faulty excavations,
installation or maintenance connected with the work or equipment of said
company, and not attributable to the fault or negligence of the Township,
except that, if such injury or damage shall be caused by the joint or
concurring negligence or fault of the company and the Township, the same
shall be borne by them to the extent of their respective fault or negligence.
§ A675-6. Establishment or relocation of curblines.
Whenever a curbline shall be established on streets where one does not now
exist or where an established curbline shall be relocated in order to widen
an existing street in conjunction with road construction being performed
by the Township, the company shall change the location of its aboveground
facilities covered by this ordinance in accordance with applicable law, so
that the same shall be back of, and adjacent to, the new curbline so
long as the Township has acted in accordance with applicable law and
with reasonable care in establishing the new curbline and providing notice
thereof.
§ A675-3 IRVINGTON CODE § A675-7
1:1220
§ A675-7. Joint use of structures.
Any company or corporation having legal authority to place its facilities in
the public streets and ways of the Township may jointly use the company's
poles, posts, pedestals or other structures for all lawful purposes, provided
the company consents to such use, on terms and conditions acceptable
to the company and not inconsistent with the provisions of the present
ordinance.
§ A675-8. Use of space by Township.
The company shall provide space, to the extent available, on its poles
so long as said poles are occupied by the company and space, to the
extent available, in its main conduits existing on the date of passage of
this ordinance, but not exceeding one duct of standard size, for the sole
benefit of the Township during the pendency of this ordinance. Such space
shall be provided for the exclusive use of the Township which use shall
be limited to accommodating the wires or electrical conductors required
for one-way signal control in connection with municipal police patrol, fire
alarm signal control and traffic signal control systems only; but for no
other uses or purposes, either alone or in conjunction therewith; nor for
circuits for the supply of electrical energy for traffic or other signals; nor
for wires, conductors, cable or the equivalent which provide a means of
transmitting any signal to a private, commercial or residential location,
and which is normally provided by a nongovernmental supplier; provided,
further, that no such use or attachment by the Township shall interfere
with the plant or facilities of or the use thereof by the company. All costs
or expenses incurred by the company in connection therewith shall be
paid by the Township. It shall be the obligation of the Township to attach
its wires to the poles or place its electric conductors in the conduits or
manholes of the company, provided that, before proceeding with said work,
either by itself or by a person, firm or corporation engaged to perform
such work, the Township shall give the company 30 days' prior notice in
writing. All such work shall be performed under the supervision of said
company. The Township will indemnify and save harmless the company
from and against all claims, liabilities or demands arising in any manner
in connection with the Township's wires or facilities or their installation,
maintenance, operation or removal, or the Township's use or enjoyment of
the company's plant or facilities provided under this § A675-8.
§ A675-9. Control over streets by county or state.
If any or all of the said streets or ways are later taken over by the County of
Essex or the State of New Jersey, such county or state shall have such rights
and privileges and be subject to the same terms, conditions and limitations
of use as apply herein to the Township; provided, however, that satisfactory
prior arrangements as may be necessary are made with the Township and
the company for the full protection of the respective interest of each.
§ A675-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A675-10
1:1221
§ A675-10. Future changes in Township.
The term "Township" as used in this ordinance shall be held to apply to and
include any form of municipality or government into which the Township or
any part thereof may at any time hereafter be changed, annexed, or merged.
§ A675-11. Effect on future equipment; supersession of prior
consent ordinances.
The permission and consent hereby granted shall apply to and cover all
communications facilities of the company existing at any time, and related
structures, process equipment, and appurtenances heretofore or hereafter
erected, constructed, reconstructed, removed, located, relocated, replaced,
maintained, repaired, or operated by the company, its predecessors,
successors, or assigns within the Township. This ordinance shall cancel
and supersede all prior consent ordinances between the Township and the
company regarding the subject matter hereof.
§ A675-12. Responsibilities of company.
The company shall maintain its property within the Township and shall
comply with applicable law for the provision of safe, adequate and proper
service at just and reasonable rates, and safeguard the public interest in
continuous and uninterrupted service within the Township.
§ A675-13. Severability.
In the event that any provision herein shall for any reason be illegal or
unenforceable under applicable law, such illegality or unenforceability shall
not affect any other provisions of this ordinance, and this ordinance shall
be construed as if such illegal or unenforceable provision(s) had never been
contained herein.
§ A675-14. Publication expenses; when effective.
The company shall pay the expenses incurred for advertising required in
connection with the passage of this ordinance, after the date of its first
reading, within 30 days after the company has received a bill for said
advertising from the publisher. Following final passage of this ordinance,
the Township Clerk shall provide the company with written notice thereof
by certified mail. As provided by applicable law, this ordinance, and any
subsequent amendments, shall not become effective until acceptance
thereof by the company and approval thereof by the Board of Public Utility
Commissioners.
§ A675-15. Fees to be paid by company.
A. Verizon shall pay the Township of Irvington $1,000 as an initial
administrative processing fee, upon effective date; and
§ A675-10 IRVINGTON CODE § A675-15
1:1222
§ A675-16. Repealer.
All ordinances inconsistent with or in conflict with this ordinance are hereby
expressly repealed.
§ A675-17. Court rulings concerning higher fees.
This agreement is subject to any ruling by a court of competent jurisdiction
allowing municipalities to impose a higher fee.
§ A675-18. When effective.
This ordinance shall become effective upon final adoption and publication
according to law.
B. A fee equal to the actual costs to the Township of Irvington as invoiced
annually, within one year of the accrual of said actual cost; or
C. The greater of $500 or $200 per route mile of its facilities physically
occupying the public rights-of-way.
§ A675-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A675-18
1:1223

ARTICLE II
TCG New Jersey
[Adopted 4-10-2001 by Ord. No. MC 3167 (Ch. A210, Art. II, of the
1981 Revised Code)]
§ A675-19. Consent granted.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:17-10, N.J.S.A. 48:17-11, and
N.J.S.A. 48:17-12, permission and consent is hereby granted to TCG New
Jersey, a wholly owned affiliate of AT&T, (the "company"), its successors and
assigns, to install, operate, inspect, maintain, repair, replace and remove
its communications facilities and other transmission or process equipment,
including underground facilities, such as conduits, manholes, cables, wires,
and all other facilities appurtenant thereto, and aboveground facilities, such
as cables, wires, antennas, poles, posts, supports, guys, pedestals, cable
termination and distribution cabinets and all other facilities appurtenant
thereto, in, through, upon, along, over, under, and across all of the various
public streets and ways, which include the roads, avenues, rights-of-way,
sidewalks, highways, bridges, waterways, and other public places, and parts
thereof, throughout their entire length, and to effect the necessary street
openings and lateral connections to curb poles, property lines and other
facilities in the Township of Irvington (the "Township") for said company's
local and through lines and other communications facilities in connection
with the transaction of its business. In the event that any public street
or way where the company has facilities is vacated by the Township, the
Township agrees to reserve unto said company the rights granted the
company by the present ordinance.
§ A675-20. Location of equipment and facilities.
All poles, posts, pedestals, cabinets, or other facilities shall be located and
placed back of the curblines where shown on the Official Map(s) of the
Township; the poles and posts, however, shall be located within 18 inches
of the face of such curbline or as may otherwise be mutually agreed by
both parties, or at the points or places now occupied by the poles, posts,
pedestals, cabinets, or other facilities of the company, its successors and
assigns, and where there are no curblines, at other convenient points or
places in, upon, along, adjacent, or across the public streets and ways as
may be mutually agreed upon between the parties.
§ A675-21. Underground facilities.
The company may bury its local and through communications facilities such
as cables, conduit, manholes and associated equipment, fixtures, process
equipment and appurtenances within the right-of-way of the various public
streets and ways and at such locations as shall be mutually agreed upon by
the parties for said company's local and through lines and communications
facilities. Underground conduits and associated facilities, as
aforementioned, shall be placed at least 18 inches below the surface of said
public streets and ways and with the exception of lateral branches to curb
§ A675-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A675-21
1:1225
poles and property lines and other facilities, the same shall generally not be
constructed more than 10 feet from the curbline, unless obstructions make
it necessary to deviate from such course or unless the parties mutually
agree to another location. Manholes shall be located at such points along
the line of underground conduits as may be necessary or convenient for
placing, maintaining, and operating the facilities, as aforementioned, which
the company may from time to time use in connection with its underground
conduit system and shall be so constructed as to conform to the crosssectional
and longitudinal grade of the surface so as not to interfere with
the safety or convenience of persons or vehicles.
§ A675-22. Notification prior to construction; street openings.
Before proceeding with any new construction or relocation work in an
area covered by this ordinance, the company shall give prior notice in
writing thereof to the Township, through its designated representative, of
its intention to perform such work. The company shall obtain such street
opening, utilities or excavation permits as may be lawfully required by any
applicable ordinances regulating such openings or excavations. Any such
area affected by the company in constructing its facilities shall be restored
to as good condition as it was before the commencement of work thereon.
No public streets or ways shall be encumbered for a period longer than shall
be reasonable to execute the work.
§ A675-23. Liability.
The company agrees to indemnify and save harmless the Township from and
against all claims and liabilities resulting from any injury or damage to the
person or property of any person, firm or corporation caused by or arising
out of road conditions resulting from any negligent or faulty excavations,
installation or maintenance connected with the work or equipment of said
company, and not attributable to the fault or negligence of the Township,
except that, if such injury or damage shall be caused by the joint or
concurring negligence or fault of the company and the Township, the same
shall be borne by them to the extent of their respective fault or negligence.
§ A675-24. Establishment or relocation of curblines.
Whenever a curbline shall be established on streets where one does not now
exist or where an established curbline shall be relocated in order to widen
an existing street in conjunction with road construction being performed
by the Township, the company shall change the location of its aboveground
facilities covered by this ordinance in accordance with applicable law, so
that the same shall be back of, and adjacent to, the new curbline so
long as the Township has acted in accordance with applicable law and
with reasonable care in establishing the new curbline and providing notice
thereof.
§ A675-21 IRVINGTON CODE § A675-25
1:1226
§ A675-25. Joint use of structures.
Any company or corporation having legal authority to place its facilities in
the public streets and ways of the Township may jointly use the company's
poles, posts, pedestals or other structures for all lawful purposes, provided
the company consents to such use, on terms and conditions acceptable
to the company and not inconsistent with the provisions of the present
ordinance.
§ A675-26. Use of space by Township.
The company shall provide space, to the extent available, on its poles
so long as said poles are occupied by the company and space, to the
extent available, in its main conduits existing on the date of passage of
this ordinance, but not exceeding one duct of standard size, for the sole
benefit of the Township during the pendency of this ordinance. Such space
shall be provided for the exclusive use of the Township which use shall
be limited to accommodating the wires or electrical conductors required
for one-way signal control in connection with municipal police patrol, fire
alarm signal control and traffic signal control systems only; but for no
other uses or purposes, either alone or in conjunction therewith; nor for
circuits for the supply of electrical energy for traffic or other signals; nor
for wires, conductors, cable or the equivalent which provide a means of
transmitting any signal to a private, commercial or residential location,
and which is normally provided by a nongovernmental supplier; provided,
further, that no such use or attachment by the Township shall interfere
with the plant or facilities of or the use thereof by the company. All costs
or expenses incurred by the company in connection therewith shall be
paid by the Township. It shall be the obligation of the Township to attach
its wires to the poles or place its electric conductors in the conduits or
manholes of the company, provided that, before proceeding with said work,
either by itself or by a person, firm or corporation engaged to perform
such work, the Township shall give the company 30 days' prior notice in
writing. All such work shall be performed under the supervision of said
company. The Township will indemnify and save harmless the company
from and against all claims, liabilities or demands arising in any manner
in connection with the Township's wires or facilities or their installation,
maintenance, operation or removal, or the Township's use or enjoyment of
the company's plant or facilities provided under this § A675-26.
§ A675-27. Control over streets by county or state.
If any or all of the said streets or ways are later taken over by the County of
Essex or the State of New Jersey, such county or state shall have such rights
and privileges and be subject to the same terms, conditions and limitations
of use as apply herein to the Township; provided, however, that satisfactory
prior arrangements as may be necessary are made with the Township and
the company for the full protection of the respective interest of each.
§ A675-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A675-28
1:1227
§ A675-28. Future changes in Township.
The term "Township" as used in this ordinance shall be held to apply to and
include any form of municipality or government into which the Township or
any part thereof may at any time hereafter be changed, annexed, or merged.
§ A675-29. Effect on future equipment; supersession of prior
consent ordinances.
The permission and consent hereby granted shall apply to and cover all
communications facilities of the company existing at any time, and related
structures, process equipment, and appurtenances heretofore or hereafter
erected, constructed, reconstructed, removed, located, relocated, replaced,
maintained, repaired, or operated by the company, its predecessors,
successors, or assigns within the Township. This ordinance shall cancel
and supersede all prior consent ordinances between the Township and the
company regarding the subject matter hereof.
§ A675-30. Responsibilities of companies.
The company shall maintain its property within the Township and shall
comply with applicable law for the provision of safe, adequate and proper
service at just and reasonable rates, and safeguard the public interest in
continuous and uninterrupted service within the Township.
§ A675-31. Severability.
In the event that any provision herein shall for any reason be illegal or
unenforceable under applicable law, such illegality or unenforceability shall
not affect any other provisions of this ordinance, and this ordinance shall
be construed as if such illegal or unenforceable provision(s) had never been
contained herein.
§ A675-32. Publication expenses; when effective.
The company shall pay the expenses incurred for advertising required in
connection with the passage of this ordinance, after the date of its first
reading, within 30 days after the company has received a bill for said
advertising from the publisher. Following final passage of this ordinance,
the Township Clerk shall provide the company with written notice thereof
by certified mail. As provided by applicable law, this ordinance, and any
subsequent amendments, shall not become effective until acceptance
thereof by the company and approval thereof by the Board of Public Utility
Commissioners.
§ A675-33. Fees to be paid by company.
A. TCG New Jersey, a wholly owned affiliate of AT&T, shall pay the
Township of Irvington $1,000 as an initial administrative processing
fee, upon effective date; and
§ A675-28 IRVINGTON CODE § A675-33
1:1228
§ A675-34. Repealer.
All ordinances inconsistent with or in conflict with this ordinance are hereby
expressly repealed.
§ A675-35. Court rulings concerning higher fees.
This agreement is subject to any ruling by a court of competent jurisdiction
allowing municipalities to impose a higher fee.
§ A675-36. When effective.
This ordinance shall become effective upon final adoption and publication
according to law.
B. A fee equal to the actual costs to the Township of Irvington as invoiced
annually, within one year of the accrual of said actual cost; or
C. The greater of $500 or $200 per route mile of its facilities physically
occupying the public rights-of-way.
§ A675-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A675-36
1:1229
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 1981 Revised Code to 2017 Code.
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. I.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Chapter/Title From 1981 Revised Code Location in 2017 Code
Part I, Administrative Legislation
Ch. 1, General Provisions
Part 1, General Provisions
Art. I, Adoption of Code NLP; see Ch. 1, Art. I
Art. II, Definitions and Word Usage Ch. 1, Art. II
Art. III, Penalties Ch. 1, Art. III
Art. IV, Severability; Effective Date;
Incorporation of Provisions
NLP; see Ch. 1, Art. I
Part 2, Supplemental Penalties
Art. V, Local Supplemental Violations
Bureau Schedule
Ch. 1, Art. IV
Ch. 5, Administration
Arts. I through XV, XX, XXV, XXVIII, XXXII
and XXXIII, Administration
Ch. 7
Art. XVI, Traffic Safety Advisory Committee REP
Art. XVII, Municipal Alliance Committee Ch. 22, Art. I
Art. XVIII, Industrial Commission REP
Art. XIX, Citizens' Advisory Commission Ch. 22, Art. II
Art. XXI, Emergency Management Council Ch. 22, Art. III
Art. XXII, Purchasing Ch. 100
Art. XXIII, Environmental Commission Ch. 22, Art. IV
Art. XXIV, Parking Advisory Committee REP
Art. XXVI, Residence of Officers and
Employees
Ch. 105, Art. I
Art. XXVII, Residence of Police and Fire
Personnel
Ch. 105, Art. II
Art, XXIX, (Reserved) Omitted
Art. XXX, Student Advisory Council Ch. 22, Art. V
§ A675-36 IRVINGTON CODE § DT-1
1:1230
Chapter/Title From 1981 Revised Code Location in 2017 Code
Art. XXXI, Redevelopment Agency Ch. 22, Art. VI
Art. XXXIV, Youth Council Ch. 22, Art. VII
Art. XXXV, Senior Citizens Committee Ch. 22, Art. VIII
Ch. 7, Attendance at Meetings Ch. 13
Ch. 8, Audit Reports and Expense Ch. 18
Ch. 10, Defense and Indemnification of Officers
and Employees
Ch. 32
Ch. 11, Contracts
Art. I, Political Contribution Limits for
Professional Contract
Repealed by Ord. No.
MC 3519
Ch. 12, Education, Board of
Art. I, Composition REP
Art. II, Use of Paging Devices on School
Property
REP
Ch. 13, Fire Department Superseded by Ord. No.
MC 3553
Ch. 15, First Source Employment Linkage
Program
Ch. 49
Ch. 17, Flood Control Commission Ch. 22, Art. IX
Ch. 25, Irvington General Hospital REP
Ch. 33, Municipal Court Ch. 26
Ch. 37, Officer and Employees
Art. I, Display of Portrait Photographs Ch. 96, Art. I
Ch. 40, Police Department
Art. I, Establishment and Organization Superseded by Ord. No.
MC 3553
Art. II, Special Detail Assignments for Off-
Duty Officers
Superseded by Ord. No.
MC 3553
Art. III, Auxiliary Police Superseded by Ord. No.
MC 3553
Ch. 44, Salaries and Compensation Ch. 110
Ch. 46, Sexual Harassment Ch. 114
Ch. 47, Township-Owned Motor Vehicles
Art. I, Use by Employees and Elected Officials Ch. 122, Art. I
Art. II, Control of Emissions Ch. 122, Art. II
Ch. 48, Urban Enterprise Zone
Art. I, Urban Enterprise Zone Development
Corporation
Ch. 128, Art. I
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:1231
Chapter/Title From 1981 Revised Code Location in 2017 Code
Art. II, Acceptance of Designation Ch. 128, Art. II
Part II, General Legislation
Ch. 51, Abandoned Property
Art. I, Rehabilitation Ch. 140, Art. I
Art. II, Abandoned Property List Ch. 140, Art. II
Ch. 53, Air Pollution Ch. 149
Ch. 56, Alarm Systems Ch. 154
Ch. 59, Alcoholic Beverages Ch. 158
Ch. 62, Amusements
Art. I, Amusement Games Ch. 163
Art. II, Poolrooms and Billiard Rooms Ch. 455
Art. III, (Reserved) Repealed by Ord. No.
MC 2961
Art. IV, Bingo and Raffles Ch. 331, Art. I
Art. V, Motion-Picture Theaters Ch. 593
Art. VI, Dances and Dance Halls Ch. 253
Art. VII, Miniature Golf Courses Ch. 336
Art. VIII (Reserved) Repealed by Ord. No.
MC 2751
Art. IX, Bowling Alleys Ch. 192
Art. X, Video Stores Ch. 632
Art. XI, Filming Ch. 299
Ch. 65, Animals
Part 1, Domestic Animals
Art. I, Domestic Animals and Fowl Ch. 167, Art. I
Art. II, Dogs and Cats Ch. 167, Art. II
Art. III, Animal Treatment Establishments Ch. 167, Art. III
Part 2, Wildlife
Art. IV, Feeding on Public Property Ch. 167, Art. IV
Ch. 69, Barbers and Barbershops; Hair Braiding
and Nail Salons; Beauty Supply Establishments
Art. I, Licensing; Regulations Ch. 174
Art. II, Hair Braiding and Nail Salons Ch. 180, Art. I
Art. III, Retail Beauty Supply Establishments Ch. 180, Art. II
Ch. 72, Boarding Homes
Art. I, Boarding Homes for Children NI
§ DT-1 IRVINGTON CODE § DT-1
1:1232
Chapter/Title From 1981 Revised Code Location in 2017 Code
Art. II (Reserved) Repealed by Ord. No.
MC 2751
Ch. 75, Building and Sign Regulations
Art. I, Moving and Demolition of Buildings Ch. 200
Art. II, Signs and Billboards Ch. 513
Ch. 77, Cellular Telephones
Art. I, Mobile Communications Device Use in
Vehicles
REP
Ch. 78, Claims Against Township
Art. I, Tort Claim Notice Ch. 222, Art. I
Ch. 79, Coin-Operated Machines
Art. I, Automatic Amusement Devices Ch. 229, Art. I
Art. II, Kiddie Carousels, Jukeboxes, Skill
Amusement Games and Weighing Machines
Ch. 229, Art. II
Art. III, Vending Machines Generally Ch. 229, Art. III
Art. IV, Food and Beverage Vending Machines Ch. 229, Art. IV
Art. V, Washing and Drying Machines Located
in Apartment Houses
Ch. 229, Art. V
Ch. 81, Condominium and Cooperative
Conversions
Ch. 234
Ch. 82, Construction Code, Uniform Ch. 240
Ch. 83, Contractors, Licensing of Ch. 245
Ch. 85, Curfew Ch. 249
Ch. 89, Discriminatory Practices
Art. I, Canvassing for Real Estate Listings REP
Art. II, Community Relations Board REP
Art. III, Civilian Complaint Review Board Ch. 22, Art. X
Ch. 98, Fees and Licenses Ch. 290
§ 98-52, Government Record Fees Ch. 462
Ch. 100, Fences Ch. 294
Ch. 102, Fire Prevention
Art. I, Standards Ch. 307, Art. I
Art. II, Enforcement Ch. 307, Art. II
Ch. 105, Flood Damage Prevention Ch. 313
Ch. 108, Florists Ch. 318
Ch. 111, Food Establishments
Art. I, Retail Food Establishments Ch. 324, Art. I
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:1233
Chapter/Title From 1981 Revised Code Location in 2017 Code
Art. II, Food Handler's Card Ch. 324, Art. II
Art. III, Hours of Operation Ch. 324, Art. III
Art. IV, Access to Facilities Ch. 324, Art. IV
Art. V, Public Health Nuisance Code Ch. 402
Art. VI, Hours of Operation Ch. 324, Art. III
Art. VII, Grease Traps Ch. 324, Art. V
Ch. 119, Housing Standards Ch. 355
Ch. 123, Junk Dealers Ch. 360
Ch. 127, Land Use Procedures Ch. 365
Ch. 131, Laundromats Ch. 369
Ch. 133, Library Rules Ch. 374
Ch. 134, Littering
Art. I, General Provisions Ch. 380, Art. I
Art. II, Clean Communities Program Ch. 380, Art. II
Ch. 134A, Loitering REP
Ch. 135, Pay Telephones REP
Ch. 136, Parks and Recreation
Art. I, Tennis Courts and Swimming Pools REP
Art. II, General Regulations Ch. 428, Art. I
Ch. 139, Peace and Good Order
Art. I, Miscellaneous Offenses
§§ 139-1 through 139-22, 139-25.1,
139-29 through 139-33, 139-43
through 139-51, Miscellaneous
Offenses
Ch. 439, Art. I
§§ 139-23 through 139-25, 139-26
through 139-28, Noise
Ch. 397, Art. I
§§ 139-34 through 139-42, Shopping
Carts
Ch. 508
Art. II, Drug Paraphernalia REP
Art. III, Spray Painting Ch. 342
Art. IV, Drug-Free Zones Ch. 266, Art. I
Art. V, Obscene Materials Ch. 409
Art. VI, Weapons-Free Zone REP
Art. VII, Public Health Nuisances Ch. 439, Art. II
Art. VIII, Public Urination Ch. 439, Art. III
Art. IX, Prostitution and Solicitation Ch. 439, Art. IV
§ DT-1 IRVINGTON CODE § DT-1
1:1234
Chapter/Title From 1981 Revised Code Location in 2017 Code
Art. X, Parental Responsibility for Juvenile
Misconduct
Ch. 419
Art. XI, Boats and Trailers Ch. 620
Ch. 142, Peddling and Soliciting Ch. 443
Ch. 145, Political Fund-Raising Ch. 91
Ch. 148, Property Maintenance Ch. 460
Ch. 150, Solid Waste and Recycling Ch. 535
Ch. 150A, Rental Property
Art. I, Receipt of Rents Ch. 467, Art. I
Ch. 151, Rent Control Ch. 472
Ch. 154, Pest Control
Art. I, Rodent Control Ch. 449, Art. I
Art. II, Pesticide Reduction Ch. 449, Art. II
Ch. 158, Sales
Art. I, Going-Out-of-Business Sales Ch. 478, Art. I
Art. II, Garage Sales Ch. 478, Art. II
Ch. 159, Secondhand Dealers
Art. I, Used Precious Metals, Gems and
Jewelry
Ch. 491, Art. I
Ch. 161, Sewers and Sewage Disposal
Art. I, User Charges Ch. 499, Art. I
Art. II, Cost Recovery Charges for Industrial
Users
Ch. 499, Art. II
Art. III, Use of Public Sewers Ch. 499, Art. IV
Ch. 163, Sewer Use Ch. 499, Art. III
Ch. 164, Sexual Offenders REP
Ch. 165, Sanitary Sewer Laterals Ch. 483
Ch. 167, Smoke Control REP
Ch. 168, Smoking
Art. I, Smoking in Public Places
§§ 168-1 through 168-4 and 168-5 REP
§ 168-4.1, Smoking Near Public
Places
Ch. 524, Art. I
Art. II, Smoking in Township Vehicles REP
Ch. 169, Solid Waste Collectors REP
Ch. 170, Special Improvement Districts
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:1235
Chapter/Title From 1981 Revised Code Location in 2017 Code
Art. I, Springfield Avenue Center Special
Improvement District
Ch. 544, Art. I
Art. II, Camptown Business Improvement
District
Ch. 544, Art. II
Ch. 171, Streets and Sidewalks
Art. I, General Provisions Ch. 555, Art. I
Art. II, Use and Occupancy Ch. 555, Art. II
Art. III, Construction and Repair of
Sidewalks
Ch. 555, Art. III
Art. IV, Snow and Ice on Sidewalks Ch. 555, Art. IV
Art. V, Parades Ch. 415
Art. VI, Obstructions Ch. 555, Art. V
Art. VII, Installation of Communications
Systems
Ch. 555, Art. VI
Ch. 172, Stormwater Management
Art. I, Standards and Management Ch. 550, Art. I
Art. II, Refuse Containers and Dumpsters Ch. 550, Art. II
Art. III, Private Storm Drain Inlet Retrofitting Ch. 550, Art. III
Ch. 174, Subdivision and Site Plan Review Ch. 560
Ch. 177, Sunday Construction Ch. 566
Ch. 180, Swimming Pools Ch. 571
Ch. 182, Taxation
Art. I, Tax Abatement Procedures Ch. 577, Art. I
Art. II, Hotel and Motel Occupancy Tax Ch. 577, Art. II
Ch. 183, Taxicabs Superseded by Ord. No.
MC 3512; see now Ch.
582
Ch. 185, Tax Liens
Art. I, Fire-Damaged Property Ch. 586, Art. I
Art. II, Demolition of Dangerous Buildings Ch. 586, Art. II
Art. III, Actions Resulting in Tax Sale, Lien
Sale or Assessment for Foreclosure
Ch. 586, Art. III
Ch. 186, Tobacco Products, Sale of Ch. 598
Ch. 187, Towing
Art. I, General Provisions Ch. 604, Art. I
Art. II, Notification; Fees; Enforcement Ch. 604, Art. II
Art. III, Apartment Complexes Ch. 604, Art. III
§ DT-1 IRVINGTON CODE § DT-1
1:1236
Chapter/Title From 1981 Revised Code Location in 2017 Code
Art. IV, Tows from Private Property;
Registration of Towing Companies; Towing
Lots
Ch. 604, Art. IV
Ch. 188, Trees and Shrubs Ch. 610
Ch. 192, Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 620
Ch. 195, Water
Art. I, Water Emergency Ch. 639, Art. I
Ch. 197, Zoning Ch. 650
Appendix
Ch. A205, Cable Television Superseded by Ord. No.
MC 3524; see now Ch.
A670
Ch. A210, Communications Facilities Franchises
Art. I, Verizon New Jersey Ch. A675, Art. I
Art. II, TGC New Jersey Ch. A675, Art. II
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Ordinances.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
MC 3249 1-13-2004 Bond NCM
MC 3250 1-27-2004 Litter regulations,
handbills and posting
notices amendment
Ch. 380, Art. I
MC 3251 1-27-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3252 1-27-2004 Sale of property NCM
MC 3253 1-27-2004 Sale of property NCM
MC 3254 1-27-2004 Sale of property NCM
MC 3255 2-10-2004 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 355
MC 3256 2-9-2004 Appropriation NCM
MC 3257 3-9-2004 Towing amendment Ch. 604
MC 3258 3-9-2004 Redevelopment plan NCM
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1237
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
MC 3259 3-23-2004 Garbage, rubbish and
refuse amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. MC 3412
MC 3260 4-21-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3261 4-21-2004 Food establishments:
grease traps
Ch. 324, Art. V
MC 3262 5-4-2004 Abandoned property:
rehabilitation
Ch. 140, Art. I
MC 3263 5-18-2004 Sale of tobacco products Ch. 598
MC 3264 5-18-2004 Redevelopment plan
amendment
NCM
MC 3265 6-15-2004 Zoning Ch. 650
MC 3266 6-15-2004 Appropriation NCM
MC 3267 7-13-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3268 8-10-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 650
MC 3269 8-10-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 650
MC 3270 8-10-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3271 8-10-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3272 9-14-2004 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 355
MC 3273 9-28-2004 Uniform construction code
amendment
Ch. 240
MC 3274 10-13-2004 Fees and licenses
amendment
Ch. 290
MC 3275 10-13-2004 Sale of property repealer NCM
MC 3276 10-13-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3277 10-26-2004 Sale of property NCM
MC 3278 11-23-2004 Salaries amendment NCM
MC 3279 11-23-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3280 12-14-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3281 12-28-2004 Abandoned property list Ch. 140, Art. II
MC 3282 12-28-2004 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 IRVINGTON CODE § DL-1
1:1238
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
MC 3283 12-28-2004 Taxicabs amendment Superseded by
Ord. No. MC 3512;
see now Ch. 582
MC 3284 1-11-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3285 2-8-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3286 3-15-2005 Taxicabs amendment;
vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. MC 3512;
see now Ch. 582
and Ch. 620
MC 3287 4-26-2005 Sale of properties NCM
MC 3288 5-10-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3289 5-10-2005 Appropriation NCM
MC 3290 6-14-2005 Tax exemption NCM
MC 3291 6-14-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3292 6-14-2005 Salaries and compensation
amendment
Ch. 110
MC 3293 6-14-2005 Sale of property NCM
MC 3294 6-14-2005 Sale of property NCM
MC 3295 6-14-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3296 6-28-2005 Food establishments:
hours of operation
amendment
Ch. 324, Art. III
MC 3297 7-12-2005 Appropriation NCM
MC 3298 9-13-2005 Redevelopment plan NCM
MC 3299 9-13-2005 Street vacation NCM
MC 3300 9-13-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3301 9-27-2005 Uniform construction code
amendment
Ch. 240
MC 3302 9-27-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3303 9-27-2005 Salaries NCM
MC 3304 9-27-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1239
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
MC 3305 9-27-2005 2006 budget NCM
MC 3306 10-12-2005 Fees and licenses
amendment; various fees
amendments
Ch. 290; multiple
chapters
MC 3307 10-9-2005 Bond NCM
MC 3308 12-20-2005 Appropriation NCM
MC 3309 12-20-2005 Sale of property NCM
MC 3310 1-10-2006 Food establishments:
hours of operation
amendment
Ch. 324, Art. III
MC 3311 1-10-2006 Litter regulations,
handbills and posting
notices amendment
Ch. 380, Art. I
MC 3312 1-24-2006 Redevelopment plan NCM
MC 3313 3-14-2006 Portrait photographs:
Municipal Council and
Clerk
Ch. 96, Art. I
MC 3314 3-14-2006 Tax exemption for
residential units in East
Ward Redevelopment Area
NCM
MC 3315 Appropriation NCM
MC 3316 3-28-2006 Fences amendment;
Zoning amendment
Ch. 294; Ch. 650
MC 3317 3-28-2006 East Ward Redevelopment
Area amendment
NCM
MC 3318 4-25-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3319 7-11-2006 Salaries NCM
MC 3320 7-11-2006 Litter regulations,
handbills and posting
notices amendment
Ch. 380, Art. I
MC 3321 9-12-2006 Springfield Avenue Center
BID amendment
NCM
MC 3322 9-26-2006 Smoking amendment Ch. 524
MC 3323 9-26-2006 Hair braiding and nail
salons amendment
Ch. 180, Art. I
MC 3324 Agreement for financing
telecommunications
system
Tabled
MC 3325 10-12-2006 Exceed budget NCM
§ DL-1 IRVINGTON CODE § DL-1
1:1240
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
MC 3326 10-12-2006 Pesticide reduction Ch. 449, Art. II
MC 3327 10-12-2006 Salaries NCM
MC 3328 11-9-2006 Township-owned vehicles:
control of emissions
Ch. 122, Art. II
MC 3329 11-9-2006 Dogs and cats amendment Ch. 167, Art. II
MC 3330 11-9-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3331 11-9-2006 Refunding bond ordinance NCM
MC 3332 11-9-2006 Bond cancellations NCM
MC 3333 12-27-2006 Redevelopment plan for
sites designated as areas
in need of redevelopment
NCM
MC 3334 1-23-2007 Food establishments:
hours of operation
amendment
Ch. 324, Art. III
MC 3335 2-14-2007 Stormwater management Ch. 550, Art. I
MC 3336 3-13-2007 Laundromats amendment Ch. 369
MC 3337 3-13-2007 Bond amendment NCM
MC 3338 3-13-2007 Salaries NCM
MC 3339 3-13-2007 Mill Road Redevelopment
Plan
NCM
MC 3340 3-13-2007 Agreement with Bank of
America to finance
telecommunications
system
NCM
MC 3341 3-27-2007 Dogs and cats amendment Ch. 167, Art. II
MC 3342 3-27-2007 Sale of property NCM
MC 3343 4-10-2007 Flood damage prevention Ch. 313
MC 3344 4-10-2007 Laundromats amendment Ch. 369
MC 3345 4-24-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3346 5-15-2007 Dogs and cats amendment Ch. 167, Art. II
MC 3347 7-10-2007 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 158
MC 3348 7-10-2007 Off-duty police officers Superseded by
Ord. No. MC 3553;
see now Ch. 7
MC 3349 8-14-2007 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1241
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
MC 3350 9-5-2007 Sale of property NCM
MC 3351 9-11-2007 Redevelopment plan for
Urban Enterprise Zone
Rehabilitation Area
NCM
MC 3352 9-25-2007 Bond NCM
MC 3353 9-11-2007 Redevelopment plan for
Urban Enterprise Zone
Rehabilitation Area
NCM
MC 3354 9-25-2007 Bond NCM
MC 3355 9-25-2007 Purchase of property NCM
MC 3356 9-25-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3357 10-10-2007 Appropriation NCM
MC 3358 10-10-2007 Emergency appropriation NCM
MC 3359 12-11-2007 Salaries NCM
MC 3360 12-11-2007 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 355
MC 3361 12-11-2007 Exceed budget; establish
cap bank
NCM
MC 3362 12-11-2007 Fees and licenses
amendment
Ch. 290
MC 3363 12-11-2007 Solid waste collectors Repealed at time of
adoption of Code;
see Ch. 1, Art. I
MC 3364 12-27-2007 Sale of property NCM
MC 3365 12-27-2007 Salaries and compensation
amendment
Ch. 110
MC 3366 1-15-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 650
MC 3367 1-15-2008 Streets and sidewalks: use
and occupancy
amendment
Ch. 555, Art. II
MC 3368 1-15-2008 Taxicabs amendment Superseded by
Ord. No. MC 3512;
see now Ch. 582
MC 3369 1-15-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3370 1-29-2008 Tax exemption NCM
MC 3371 1-29-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
§ DL-1 IRVINGTON CODE § DL-1
1:1242
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
MC 3372 2-13-2008 Litter regulations,
handbills and posting
notices amendment
Ch. 380, Art. I
MC 3373 2-26-2008 Recycling amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. MC 3412
MC 3374 3-11-2008 Bond NCM
MC 3375 3-11-2008 Fees and licenses
amendment
Ch. 290
MC 3376 4-08-2008 Bond amendment NCM
MC 3377 4-22-2008 Fees and licenses
amendment
Ch. 290
MC 3378 4-22-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3379 4-22-2008 Tax exemption for
residential units in East
Ward Redevelopment Area
amendment
NCM
MC 3380 5-6-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3381 6-10-2008 Towing: general provisions
amendment
Ch. 604, Art. I
MC 3382 9-9-2008 Acceptance of property NCM
MC 3383 9-9-2008 Appropriation NCM
MC 3384 10-15-2008 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
MC 3385 11-12-2008 Tax exemption for certain
properties within an urban
enterprise zone
NCM
MC 3386 11-12-2008 Bond amendment NCM
MC 3387 11-12-2008 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 158
MC 3388 1-13-2009 Claims against Township:
tort claim notice
Ch. 222, Art. I
MC 3389 2-10-2009 Appropriation NCM
MC 3390 2-10-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. MC 3402
MC 3391 2-24-2009 Animals: feeding wildlife
on public property
Ch. 167, Art. IV
MC 3392 3-10-2009 Administration
amendment
Ch. 7
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1243
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
MC 3393 3-10-2009 Administration
amendment
Ch. 7
MC 3394 3-10-2009 Administration
amendment
Ch. 7
MC 3395 3-10-2009 Administration
amendment
Ch. 7
MC 3396 3-24-2009 Recision of conveyance of
property
NCM
MC 3397 5-12-2009 Salaries NCM
MC 3398 5-12-2009 Bond amendment NCM
MC 3399 5-12-2009 Urban Enterprise
Redevelopment Plan
amendment
NCM
MC 3400 5-27-2009 Sale of property
amendment
NCM
MC 3401 6-23-2009 Bond NCM
MC 3402 6-23-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3403 6-23-2009 Bond NCM
MC 3404 6-23-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3405 6-23-2009 Urban Enterprise Zone
Redevelopment Plan
amendment
NCM
MC 3406 6-23-2009 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 460
MC 3407 7-14-2009 Nomenclature change
(Department of
Neighborhood Services)
Repealed by Ord.
No. MC 3511
MC 3408 9-15-2009 Authorization to exceed
cap bank
NCM
MC 3409 11-10-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3410 11-24-2009 Noise regulations
amendment
Ch. 397, Art. I
MC 3411 10-27-2009 Bond NCM
MC 3412 12-29-2009 Solid waste and recycling Ch. 535
MC 3413 12-29-2009 Fees amendment Multiple chapters
MC 3414 12-29-2009 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 IRVINGTON CODE § DL-1
1:1244
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
MC 3415 12-29-2009 Bond NCM
MC 3416 1-26-2010 Sale of property NCM
MC 3417 1-26-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3418 1-26-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3419 3-9-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3420 3-9-2010 Stormwater management:
refuse containers and
dumpsters
Ch. 550, Art. II
MC 3421 3-9-2010 Stormwater management:
private storm drain inlet
retrofitting
Ch. 550, Art. III
MC 3422 5-18-2010 Purchase of property NCM
MC 3423 6-29-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3424 7-13-2010 Streets and sidewalks: use
and occupancy
amendment
Ch. 555, Art. II
MC 3425 8-10-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 650
MC 3426 9-14-2010 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
MC 3427 9-14-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3428 11-9-2010 Towing: vehicles towed
from parking areas
amendment
Ch. 604, Art. II
MC 3429 11-23-2010 Sale of property
amendment
NCM
MC 3430 12-28-2010 Lease agreement NCM
MC 3431 2-8-2011 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 355
MC 3432 2-23-2011 Fees and licenses
amendment
Ch. 290
MC 3433 2-23-2011 Appropriation NCM
MC 3434 3-15-2011 Parks and recreation:
general regulations
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. I
MC 3435 3-29-2011 Fees and licenses
amendment
Ch. 290
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1245
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
MC 3436 3-29-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3437 4-26-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3438 5-24-2011 Smoking amendment Ch. 524
MC 3439 5-24-2011 Bond NCM
MC 3440 5-24-2011 Bond NCM
MC 3441 5-24-2011 Bond NCM
MC 3442 5-24-2011 Best practices
requirement for Council
members to attend basic
course
NCM
MC 3443 5-24-2011 Contracts: political
contribution limits for
professional contracts
Repealed by Ord.
No. MC 3519
MC 3444 6-14-2011 Authorization of reversion
to calendar fiscal year
from state fiscal year
NCM
MC 3445 6-14-2011 Taxicabs amendment Superseded by
Ord. No. MC 3512;
see now Ch. 582
MC 3446 6-28-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3447 7-12-2011 Fees and licenses
amendment
Ch. 290
MC 3448 7-12-2011 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 460
MC 3449 8-9-2011 Police Department:
establishment and
organization amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. MC 3553
MC 3450 9-13-2011 Bond NCM
MC 3451 9-27-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3452 9-27-2011 Bond NCM
MC 3453 9-27-2011 Sale of property NCM
MC 3454 12-28-2011 Bond NCM
MC 3455 1-24-2012 Urban Enterprise Zone
redevelopment plan
amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 IRVINGTON CODE § DL-1
1:1246
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
MC 3456 1-24-2012 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 355
MC 3457 2-15-2012 General provisions: Local
Supplemental Violations
Bureau Schedule
Ch. 1, Art. IV
MC 3458 3-13-2012 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
MC 3459 3-13-2012 Tax exemption NCM
MC 3460 4-10-2012 Parking Service Agency Repealed by Ord.
No. MC 3468
MC 3461 4-10-2012 Fees and licenses
amendment
Ch. 290
MC 3462 4-24-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3463 5-15-2012 Bond NCM
MC 3464 5-30-2012 Parking Service Agency Repealed by Ord.
No. MC 3468
MC 3465 5-30-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3466 6-26-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3467 6-26-2012 Solid waste and recycling
amendment
Ch. 535
MC 3468 6-26-2012 Parking Service Agency
repealer (repealed Ord.
No. MC 3460)
Repealer only
MC 3469 8-14-2012 Towing: vehicles towed
from parking areas
amendment
Ch. 604, Art. II
MC 3470 9-11-2012 Street vacation NCM
MC 3471 9-11-2012 Towing: vehicles towed
from parking areas
amendment
Ch. 604, Art. II
MC 3472 9-25-2012 Appropriation NCM
MC 3473 11-8-2012 Taxicabs amendment Superseded by
Ord. No. MC 3512;
see now Ch. 582
MC 3474 11-8-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3475 11-20-2012 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1247
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
MC 3476 12-18-2012 Fees and licenses
amendment
Ch. 290
MC 3477 12-18-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3478 1-15-2013 Bond NCM
MC 3479 1-15-2013 Bond NCM
MC 3480 1-15-2013 Bond NCM
MC 3481 1-29-2013 Bond NCM
MC 3482 1-29-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3483 1-29-2013 Granting of public right-ofway
to Cross River Fiber,
LLC
NCM
MC 3484 2-26-2013 Taxicab license fee
amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. MC 3512
MC 3485 3-26-2013 Fees and licenses
amendment
Ch. 290
MC 3486 3-26-2013 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
MC 3487 4-9-2013 Urban Enterprise Zone
Redevelopment Plan
amendment
NCM
MC 3488 4-9-2013 Fees and licenses
amendment
Ch. 290
MC 3489 4-23-2013 Bond NCM
MC 3490 4-23-2013 Citizens' Advisory
Commission amendment
Ch. 22, Art. IV
MC 3491 5-25-2013 Police Department:
establishment and
organization amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. MC 3553
MC 3492 5-14-2013 Housing standards
amendment; rent control
amendment
Ch. 355; Ch. 472
MC 3493 5-29-2013 Tax exemption for Phase I
of Hilltop Development
NCM
MC 3494 6-25-2013 Fees and licenses
amendment
Ch. 290
MC 3495 6-25-2013 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 460
MC 3496 8-6-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
§ DL-1 IRVINGTON CODE § DL-1
1:1248
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
MC 3497 8-6-2013 Fire prevention:
enforcement of Uniform
Fire Code amendment
Ch. 307, Art. II
MC 3498 8-6-2013 Food establishments: food
handler's card amendment
Ch. 324, Art. II
MC 3499 8-6-2013 Parks and recreation:
general regulations
amendment; smoking
amendment
Ch. 428, Art. I; Ch.
524
MC 3500 9-10-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3501 9-10-2013 Bond NCM
MC 3502 10-8-2013 Retail beauty supply
establishments
Ch. 180, Art. II
MC 3503 11-13-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3504 12-10-2013 Auxiliary Police Superseded by
Ord. No. MC 3553;
see now Ch. 7
MC 3505 12-10-2013 Bond NCM
MC 3506 12-26-2013 Bond refund NCM
MC 3507 1-28-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3508 2-25-2014 Salaries and compensation
amendment
Ch. 110
MC 3505A 3-25-2014 Bond NCM
MC 3506A 3-25-2014 Bond refund NCM
MC 3509 3-25-2014 Commissions, committees,
councils and other
agencies: Green Team
Ch. 22, Art. XI
MC 3510 5-6-2014 Exceed budget and
establish cap bank
NCM
MC 3511 7-1-2014 Administration
amendment: abolishing
Department of
Neighborhood Services;
reestablishing
Departments of Health,
Housing Services and
Public Works
Ch. 7; various
chapters
MC 3512 6-24-2014 Taxicabs Ch. 582
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1249
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
MC 3513 9-9-2014 Employer regulations: paid
sick time
Ch. 277, Art. I
MC 3514 9-23-2014 Emergency appropriation NCM
MC 3515 10-15-2014 Bond NCM
MC 3516 11-12-2014 Administration
amendment
Ch. 7
MC 3517 11-25-2014 Fees and licenses
amendment
Ch. 290
MC 3518 11-25-2014 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 460
MC 3519 11-25-2014 Political contribution limits
for professional contracts
repealer (repeals Ord. No.
MC 3443)
Repealer only
MC 3520 11-25-2014 Salaries and expenses for
Mayor and Council
NCM
MC 3521 12-23-2014 Energy and Natural Gas
Aggregation Program
NCM
MC 3522 12-23-2014 Bond NCM
MC 3523 1-5-2015 Emergency appropriation NCM
MC 3524 1-13-2015 Cable television and
communications system
Ch. A670
MC 3525 1-13-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3526 2-24-2015 Urban Enterprise Zone
Redevelopment Area
amendment: Mixed Use
Overlay District-1
(MUOD-1)
NCM
MC 3527 2-24-2015 Sales: garage sales
amendment
Ch. 478, Art. II
MC 3528 3-24-2015 Administration
amendment
Ch. 7
MC 3529 3-24-2015 Signs and billboards
amendment
Ch. 513
MC 3530 3-24-2015 Animals: dogs and cats
amendment
Ch. 167, Art. II
MC 3531 4-14-2015 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 355
§ DL-1 IRVINGTON CODE § DL-1
1:1250
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
MC 3532 4-14-2015 Registration of commercial
and multifamily properties
Ch. 464
MC 3533 4-28-2015 Employment applications Ch. 37
MC 3534 4-28-2015 Police Department:
establishment and
organization amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. MC 3553
MC 3535 4-28-2015 Police Department:
establishment and
organization amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. MC 3553
MC 3536 4-28-2015 Police Department: special
detail assignments for offduty
officers amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. MC 3553
MC 3537 4-28-2015 Exceed budget and
establish cap bank
NCM
MC 3538 4-28-2015 Emergency appropriation NCM
MC 3539 6-23-2015 Bond amendment NCM
MC 3540 6-23-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3541 6-23-2015 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 460
MC 3542 7-14-2015 Registration of commercial
and multifamily properties
amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. MC 3558
MC 3543 7-14-2015 Licensing of contractors
amendment
Ch. 245
MC 3544 7-14-2015 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 355
MC 3545 7-14-2015 Financial agreement
amendment
NCM
MC 3546 8-11-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3547 8-11-2015 Tax exemption NCM
MC 3548 8-11-2015 Tax exemption NCM
MC 3549 8-11-2015 Redevelopment Plan NCM
MC 3550 9-15-2015 Financial agreement
amendment
NCM
MC 3551 9-15-2015 Towing: general provisions
amendment
Ch. 604, Art. I
MC 3552 9-15-2015 Towing amendment Ch. 604
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1251
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
MC 3553 10-14-2015 Administration
amendment: Department
of Public Safety
Ch. 7
MC 3554 10-14-2015 Salaries amendment NCM
MC 3555 10-14-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3556 12-15-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3557 12-15-2015 Firearms and weapons: toy
or imitation firearms
Ch. 304, Art. I
MC 3558 12-15-2015 Registration of commercial
and multifamily properties
amendment
Ch. 464
MC 3559 12-29-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3560 12-29-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3561 12-29-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3562 1-12-2016 Administration
amendment
Ch. 7
MC 3563 1-26-2016 General provisions: Local
Supplemental Violations
Bureau Schedule
amendment; various fines
Ch. 1, Art. IV
MC 3564 4-5-2016 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 240
MC 3565 4-5-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3566 4-5-2016 Exceed budget and
establish cap bank
NCM
MC 3567 4-21-2016 First source employment
linkage program
amendment
Ch. 49
MC 3568 4-21-2016 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 365
MC 3569 4-21-2016 Escrow fees for
redevelopment and
foreclosure matters
Ch. 282
MC 3570 5-17-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
§ DL-1 IRVINGTON CODE § DL-1
1:1252
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
MC 3571 5-17-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3572 5-17-2016 Political contribution limits
for professional contracts
repealer (pay to play):
Repeals Ord. Nos. MC
2443 and MC 3519
Repealer only
MC 3573 6-14-2016 Zoning Map amendment NCM
MC 3574 6-14-2016 Redevelopment plan
amendment; Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
MC 3575 6-14-2016 Tax exemption amendment NCM
MC 3576 6-14-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 650
MC 3577 6-14-2016 Bond NCM
MC 3578 7-28-2016 Tax exemption NCM
MC 3579 8-9-2016 Animals: dogs and cats
amendment
Ch. 167, Art. II
MC 3580 8-16-2016 Bond NCM
MC 3581 8-16-2016 Bond NCM
MC 3582 9-13-2016 Schedule of fines Multiple chapters
MC 3583 9-13-2016 Animals: dogs and cats
amendment
Ch. 167, Art. II
MC 3584 9-13-2016 Bond NCM
MC 3585 10-12-2016 Littering: dumping and
littering
Ch. 380, Art. III
MC 3586 11-10-2016 Bond NCM
MC 3587 11-10-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3588 11-10-2016 Food establishments: retail
food establishments
amendment
Ch. 324, Art. I
MC 3589 11-10-2016 Food establishments: retail
food establishments
amendment; food
handler's card amendment
Ch. 324, Art. I; Ch.
324, Art. II
MC 3590 11-10-2016 Salaries amendment NCM
MC 3591 11-10-2016 Towing: consensual and
nonconsensual towing
from private property
Ch. 604, Art. V
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1253
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
MC 3592 12-13-2016 Tax exemption NCM
MC 3593 12-28-2016 Food establishments: retail
food establishments
amendment; food
handler's card amendment
Ch. 324, Art. I; Ch.
324, Art. II
MC 3594 12-28-2016 Administration
amendment
Ch. 7
MC 3595 1-24-2017 Accepting deed in lieu of
foreclosure
NCM
MC 3596 1-24-2017 Accepting quit claim deed NCM
MC 3597 2-15-2017 Accepting quit claim deed NCM
MC 3598 2-15-2017 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 460
MC 3599 2-15-2017 Unsafe buildings Ch. 200, Art. III
MC 3600 3-28-2017 Accepting quit claim deed NCM
MC 3601 3-28-2017 Accepting quit claim deed NCM
MC 3602 5-9-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3603 5-9-2017 Noise: noise regulations
amendment
Ch. 397, Art. I
MC 3604 5-9-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3605 5-9-2017 Tax exemption NCM
MC 3606 5-23-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3607 5-23-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3608 5-23-2017 Constables Ch. 24
MC 3609 5-23-2017 Uniform construction code
amendment
Ch. 240
MC 3610 6-27-2017 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 582
MC 3611 6-27-2017 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 460
MC 3612 6-27-2017 Retail food establishments
amendment
Ch. 324, Art. I
MC 3613 6-27-2017 Exceed budget and
establish cap bank
NCM
§ DL-1 IRVINGTON CODE § DL-1
1:1254
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
MC 3614 8-15-2017 Littering amendment;
Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 380, Art. II;
Ch. 620
MC 3615 8-15-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3616 9-12-2017 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 365
MC 3617 9-12-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3618 9-26-2017 Fees and licenses
amendment
Ch. 290
MC 3619 9-26-2017 Peace and good order:
miscellaneous offenses
amendment
Ch. 439, Art. I
MC 3620 9-26-2017 Food establishments:
hours of operation
amendment
Ch. 324, Art. III
MC 3621 10-11-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3622 10-11-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3623 10-11-2017 Accepting quit claim deed NCM
MC 3624 10-11-2017 Accepting quit claim deed NCM
MC 3625 10-11-2017 Accepting quit claim deed NCM
MC 3626 10-11-2017 Accepting quit claim deed NCM
MC 3627 10-11-2017 Accepting deed in lieu of
foreclosure
NCM
MC 3628 10-11-2017 Animals: feral cat trap,
neuter, return program
Ch. 167, Art. V
MC 3629 11-9-2017 Emergency appropriation NCM
MC 3630-A 3-13-2018 Refunding Bond NCM
MC 3631 2-14-2018 Accepting Quit Claim Deed NCM
MC 3632 2-14-2018 Accepting Quit Claim Deed NCM
MC 3633 2-14-2018 Accepting Quit Claim Deed NCM
MC 3634 2-14-2018 Accepting Deed in Lieu of
Foreclosure
NCM
MC 3635 3-13-2018 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
MC 3636 3-13-2018 Accepting Deed in Lieu of
Foreclosure
NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1255
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
MC 3637 3-27-2018 Accepting Quit Claim Deed NCM
MC 3638 3-27-2018 Accepting Quit Claim Deed NCM
MC 3639 3-27-2018 Accepting Quit Claim Deed NCM
MC 3640 3-27-2018 Accepting Quit Claim Deed NCM
MC 3641 4-10-2018 Fees and Licenses
Amendment; Fire
Prevention: Enforcement
of Uniform Fire Code
Amendment
Ch. 290; Ch. 307,
Art. II
MC 3642 5-15-2018 Land Use Procedures
Amendment
Ch. 365
MC 3643 5-15-2018 Accepting Quit Claim Deed NCM
MC 3644 5-15-2018 Accepting Quit Claim Deed NCM
MC 3645 5-15-2018 Accepting Quit Claim Deed NCM
MC 3646 5-15-2018 Accepting Quit Claim Deed NCM
MC 3647 5-15-2018 Accepting Quit Claim Deed NCM
MC 3648 5-15-2018 Accepting Quit Claim Deed NCM
MC 3649 5-15-2018 Accepting Quit Claim Deed NCM
MC 3650 5-15-2018 Accepting Quit Claim Deed NCM
MC 3651 5-15-2018 Accepting Quit Claim Deed NCM
MC 3652 5-15-2018 Accepting Quit Claim Deed NCM
MC 3653 5-15-2018 Accepting Quit Claim Deed NCM
MC 3654 5-15-2018 Abandoned Property:
Abandoned Property List
Amendment
Ch. 140, Art. II
MC 3655 5-30-2018 Fees and Licenses
Amendment
Ch. 290
MC 3656 6-26-2018 Property Maintenance
Amendment
Ch. 460
MC 3657 6-26-2018 Smoking: Smoking Near
Public Places Amendment
Ch. 524, Art. I
MC 3658 6-26-2018 Administration
Amendment
Ch. 7
MC 3659 6-26-2018 Fees and Licenses
Amendment
Ch. 290
MC 3660 7-10-2018 Tax Exemption NCM
MC 3661 7-10-2018 Exceed Budget; Cap Bank NCM
§ DL-1 IRVINGTON CODE § DL-1
1:1256
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
MC 3662 9-11-2018 Administration
Amendment
Ch. 7
MC 3663 9-11-2018 Abandoned Property:
Qualified Rehabilitation
Entity Application Fee
Ch. 140, Art. III
MC 3664 9-11-2018 Fees and Licenses
Amendment
Ch. 290
MC 3665 9-11-2018 Voluntary Property
Transfer
NCM
MC 3666 9-25-2018 Salaries and
Compensation: Non-Union
Elected Officers and
Employees
Ch. 110, Art. II
MC 3667 10-10-2018 Administration
Amendment
Ch. 7
MC 3668 10-10-2018 Day-Care Facilities:
Licensing; Fees and
Licenses Amendment
Ch. 255, Art. I: Ch.
290
MC 3669 10-10-2018 Food Establishments: Food
Handler's Card
Amendment
Ch. 324, Art. II
MC 3670 11-8-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3671 11-8-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3672 11-8-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3673 11-8-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 620
MC 3674 12-18-2018 Bond NCM
MC 3675 12-18-2018 Bond NCM
MC 3676 1-14-2019 Accepting Quit Claim Deed NCM
MC 3677 1-14-2019 Accepting Quit Claim Deed NCM
MC 3678 1-14-2019 Accepting Quit Claim Deed NCM
MC 3679 1-14-2019 Accepting Quit Claim Deed NCM
MC 3680 1-14-2019 Accepting Quit Claim Deed NCM
MC 3681 1-28-2019 Fees and Licenses
Amendment
Ch. 290
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1257
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
MC 3682 1-28-2019 Registration of
Commercial and
Multifamily Properties
Amendment
Ch. 464
MC 3683 1-28-2019 Sunday Construction
Amendment
Ch. 566
MC 3684 1-28-2019 Administration
Amendment
Ch. 7
MC 3685 2-11-2019 Accepting Quit Claim Deed NCM
MC 3686 2-11-2019 Accepting Quit Claim Deed NCM
MC 3687 2-11-2019 Accepting Quit Claim Deed NCM
MC 3688 2-11-2019 Accepting Quit Claim Deed NCM
MC 3689 2-11-2019 Administration
Amendment
Ch. 7
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
MC 3690 3-11-2019 Littering:
Clean
Communities
Program
Amendment;
Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 380, Art.
II; Ch. 620
3
MC 3691 3-25-2019 Rent Control
Amendment
Ch. 472 3
MC 3692 3-25-2019 Accepting
Quit Claim
Deed
NCM 3
MC 3693 3-25-2019 Accepting
Quit Claim
Deed
NCM 3
MC 3694 3-25-2019 Streets and
Sidewalks:
Use and
Occupancy
Amendment
Ch. 555, Art.
II
3
MC 3695 3-25-2019 Signs and
Billboards
Amendment
Ch. 513 3
§ DL-1 IRVINGTON CODE § DL-1
1:1258
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
MC 3696 4-8-2019 Fees and
Licenses
Amendment
Ch. 290 3
MC 3697 5-13-2019 Street
Vacation
NCM 3
MC 3698 5-28-2019 Streets and
Sidewalks:
Use and
Occupancy
Amendment
Ch. 555, Art.
II
3
MC 3699 6-24-2019 Curfew
Amendment
Ch. 249 3
MC 3700 7-8-2019 Streets and
Sidewalks:
Use and
Occupancy
Amendment
Ch. 555, Art.
II
3
MC 3701 7-8-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 620 3
MC 3702 7-8-2019 Exceed
Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM 3
MC 3703 9-9-2019 Lease
Agreement
NCM 3
MC 3704 9-9-2019 Accepting
Quit Claim
Deed
NCM 3
MC 3705 9-9-2019 Accepting
Quit Claim
Deed
NCM 3
MC 3706 9-9-2019 Accepting
Quit Claim
Deed
NCM 3
MC 3707 9-9-2019 Accepting
Quit Claim
Deed
NCM 3
MC 3708 9-9-2019 Accepting
Quit Claim
Deed
NCM 3
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:1259
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
MC 3709 9-9-2019 Tax
Exemption
NCM 3
MC 3710 9-9-2019 Tax
Exemption
NCM 3
MC 3711 9-23-2019 Construction
Code,
Uniform:
Certificate of
Compliance
Exemption
Ch. 240, Art.
II
3
MC 3712 9-23-2019 Fees and
Licenses
Amendment
Ch. 290 3
MC 3713 9-23-2019 Administration
Amendment
Ch. 7 3
MC 3714 9-23-2019 Accepting
Quit Claim
Deed
NCM 3
MC 3715 11-12-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 620 3
MC 3716 12-9-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 620 3
§ DL-2. Resolutions.
Res. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
DP
04-0421-9
4-21-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
04-0421-10
4-21-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
04-0421-11
4-21-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
04-0421-12
4-21-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
04-0615-15
6-15-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
04-0615-16
6-15-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
§ DL-1 IRVINGTON CODE § DL-2
1:1260
Res. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
DP
04-0615-17
6-15-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
04-0629-18
6-29-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
04-0713-18
7-13-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
04-0713-19
7-13-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
04-0810-20
8-10-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
04-0810-21
8-10-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
04-0810-24
8-10-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
04-0810-20
8-10-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
04-0914-28
9-14-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
04-1228-37
12-28-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
04-1228-38
12-28-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
04-1228-39
12-28-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
04-1228-40
12-28-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
04-1228-41
12-28-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
05-0125-1
1-25-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
05-0125-2
1-25-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
05-0125-3
1-25-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
05-0223-9
2-23-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
05-0223-10
2-23-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
05-0223-11
2-23-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
§ DL-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-2
1:1261
Res. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
DP
05-0412-14
4-12-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
05-0426-15
4-26-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
05-0510-19
5-10-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
05-0510-20
5-10-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
05-0524-23
5-24-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
05-0614-25
6-14-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
05-0614-26
6-14-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
05-0628-30
6-28-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
05-0712-32
7-12-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
05-0913-35
9-13-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
05-0913-37
9-13-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
05-0913-38
9-13-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
05-0913-40
9-13-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
05-0927-45
9-27-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
06-0228-6
2-28-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
06-0516-11
5-16-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
06-0328-8
6-28-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
06-0711-17
7-11-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Repealed by DP
06-1011-36
DP
06-0711-19
7-11-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
06-0815-23
8-15-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
§ DL-2 IRVINGTON CODE § DL-2
1:1262
Res. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
DP
06-0815-24
8-15-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
06-0912-25
9-12-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
06-0912-26
9-12-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
06-0912-30
9-12-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
06-1011-35
10-12-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
06-1011-36
10-12-2006 Handicapped space repealer NCM
DP
06-1024-37
10-24-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
06-1024-38
10-24-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
06-1212-40
12-12-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
06-1212-41
12-12-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
07-0123-2
1-23-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
07-0214-4
2-14-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
07-0214-5
2-14-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
07-0214-6
2-14-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
07-0410-15
4-10-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
07-0410-16
4-10-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
07-0410-17
4-10-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
07-0515-19
5-15-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
07-0612-22
6-12-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
07-0612-23
6-12-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
§ DL-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-2
1:1263
Res. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
DP
07-0710-25
7-10-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
07-0710-26
7-10-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
07-0710-27
7-10-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
07-0814-27
8-14-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
07-0814-28
8-14-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
07-0814-29
8-14-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
07-0814-30
8-14-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
07-0911-39
9-11-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
07-0911-40
9-11-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
07-0911-41
9-11-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
07-0925-43
9-25-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
07-0925-44
9-25-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
07-1010-47
10-10-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
07-0925-43
11-8-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
07-1120-49
11-20-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
07-1120-50
11-20-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
07-1211-52
12-11-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
08-0129-3
1-29-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
08-0129-4
1-29-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
08-0226-6
2-26-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
§ DL-2 IRVINGTON CODE § DL-2
1:1264
Res. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
DP
08-0325-9
3-25-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
08-0325-10
3-25-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
08-0325-11
3-25-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
08-0422-12
4-22-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
08-0422-13
4-22-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
08-0909-28
9-9-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
08-1223-36
12-23-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
09-0127-2
1-27-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
09-0210-3
2-10-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
09-0210-5
2-10-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
09-0324-8
3-24-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
09-0414-9
4-14-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
009-0428-11
4-28-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
09-0428-12
4-28-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
09-0528-16
5-27-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
09-0623-17
6-23-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
09-0623-18
6-23-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
09-0811-23
8-11-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
09-0811-24
8-11-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
09-0915-25
9-15-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
§ DL-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-2
1:1265
Res. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
DP
09-0915-26
9-15-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP 1027-29 10-27-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
09-1110-30
11-10-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
09-1110-31
11-10-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
09-1124-32
11-24-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
09-1124-33
11-24-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
09-1124-34
11-24-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
10-0112-1
1-12-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
10-0112-2
1-12-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
10-0209-4
2-9-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
10-0422-6
4-22-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
10-0422-7
4-22-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
10-0422-8
4-22-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
10-0615-10
6-15-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
10-0713-10
7-13-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
10-0713-11
7-13-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
10-0914-18
7-13-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
10-0914-19
9-14-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
10-1123-23
11-23-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
11-1223-1
2-23-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
§ DL-2 IRVINGTON CODE § DL-2
1:1266
Res. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
DP
11-0223-2
2-23-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
11-0426-9
4-26-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
11-0524-12
5-24-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
11-0809-17
8-9-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
11-0809-18
8-9-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
11-0927-28
9-27-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
11-1122-36
11-22-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
11-1122-37
11-22-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
11-1213-39
12-13-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
12-0215-2
2-15-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
12-0327-4
3-27-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
12-0327-5
3-27-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
12-0710-14
7-10-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
12-1023-25
10-23-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
12-1023-26
10-23-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
13-0226-3
2-26-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
13-0226-11
6-25-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
13-0806-15
8-6-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
13-1113-27
11-13-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
13-1226-34
12-26-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
§ DL-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-2
1:1267
Res. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
DP-14-0114-21-14-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP-14-0114-31-14-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
14-0311-8
3-11-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
14-0506-14
5-6-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
14-0610-16
6-11-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
14-0909-32
9-9-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
14-0923-36
9-23-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
14-1015-39
10-16-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
14-1209-46
12-9-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
14-1209-48
12-9-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
14-1223-50
12-23-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
15-0203-3
2-3-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
15-0310-8
3-10-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
14-1015-44
11-26-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
15-0324-10
3-24-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DPW
15-0414-11
4-14-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DPW
15-0428-12
4-28-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DPW
15-08-11-15-19
8-11-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DPW
15-0915-20
9-15-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DPW
15-0929-22
9-29-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
§ DL-2 IRVINGTON CODE § DL-2
1:1268
Res. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
DP
16-0308-5
3-8-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
16-0308-6
3-8-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
16-0503-11
5-3-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
16-0517-13
5-17-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
16-0614-15
6-14-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
16-1110-26
11-10-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
16-1213-28
12-13-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
16-1228-32
12-28-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
17-0215-4
2-15-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
17-0215-5
2-15-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
17-0228-6
2-28-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
17-0411-10
4-11-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
17-0411-11
4-11-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
17-0426-12
4-26-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
17-0523-13
5-23-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
17-0523-14
5-23-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
17-0613-15
6-13-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
17-0627-16
6-27-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
17-1024-19
10-24-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
17-1024-20
10-24-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
§ DL-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-2
1:1269
Res. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
DP
17-1121-24
11-17-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
17-1212-25
12-12-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
17-1212-26
12-12-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 620
DP
18-0123-1
1-23-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 620
DP
18-0214-2
2-14-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 620
DP
18-0313-5
3-13-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 620
DP
18-0327-6
3-27-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 620
DP
18-0515-12
5-15-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 620
DP
18-0530-15
5-30-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 620
DP
18-0530-16
5-30-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 620
DP
18-0626-17
6-26-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 620
DP
18-0710-18
7-10-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 620
DP
18-0814-20
8-14-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 620
DP
18-1023-23
10-23-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 620
DP
18-1218-26
12-18-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 620
DP
19-0114-1
1-14-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 620
DP
19-0128-2
1-28-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 620
§ DL-2 IRVINGTON CODE § DL-2
1:1270
Res. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
DP 19-0311-7 3-11-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 620 3
DP 19-0325-9 3-25-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 620 3
DP
19-0610-14
6-10-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 620 3
DP
19-0708-19
7-8-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 620 3
DP
19-0812-23
8-12-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 620 3
DP
19-1028-31
10-28-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 620 3
DP
19-1028-32
10-28-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 620 3
§ DL-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-2
1:1271

ZONING
650 Attachment 2
Township of Irvington
Schedule of Area, Yard and Height Requirements
R-1L R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5
Maximum residential density (units/net acre) 8.0 16.0 20.0 26.0 33.0 60.0
Minimum lot area (square feet)
One-family 5,000 2,500 2,000 1,500 1,200 n.p.
Two- , three- , or four-family n.p. n.p. 2,000/
unit
1,500/
unit
1,200/
unit
n.p.
Garden apartments n.p. n.p. n.p. n.p. 1,320/
unit
1,320/
unit
High-rise apartments n.p. n.p. n.p. n.p. n.p. 730/
unit
Maximum impervious coverage (percent)
One- , two- , three- , or four-family 45% 55% 60% 70% 80% n.p.
Garden or high-rise apartments n.p. n.p. n.p. n.p. 60% 60%
Minimum lot width (feet)
One- , two- , three- , or four-family 50 35 301
281
281
n.p.
Garden or high-rise apartments n.p. n.p. n.p. n.p. 250 250
Minimum yards (feet)
Front 20 15 15 15 152
50
Side (one/both) 5/12 4/10 0/03
0/03
0/02,3 20/50
Rear 20 15 15 15 152
75
Maximum stories 2½ 2½ 2½ 2½ 3 8
Maximum building height (feet) 35 35 35 35 45 100
NOTES:
1. Applies only to one-family lots. For each additional dwelling unit, the minimum lot width is increased by 10 feet.
2. Applies to one- , two- , three- , and four-family lots. For garden apartments, the minimum yards shall be as
required for the R-5 Zoning District.
3. Applies only to one-family lots. For each additional dwelling unit, the minimum side yard (one) is increased by
four feet and the minimum side yard (both) is increased by 10 feet.
650 Attachment 2:1 12 - 01 - 2017
IRVINGTON CODE
Schedule of Area, Yard and Height Requirements
B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 B-5 CBD
Maximum floor area ratio
Ground floor only 0.60 n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. 0.75
Entire building 2.40 0.45 0.40 0.40 0.35 2.25
Minimum lot area (square feet) 3,500 2 acres 10,000 10,000 5 acres 3,500
Maximum impervious coverage (percent) 80% 80% 75% 75% 70% 85%
Minimum lot width (feet) 30 200 80 80 300 30
Minimum yards (feet)
Front 0 40 10 10 150 0
Side (one/both) 0/0 40/100 10/25 10/25 100 0/0
Rear 20 80 25 25 150 20
Maximum stories 3 1 1 1 1 3
Maximum building height (feet) 45 30 20 20 30 45
O-1 P-1 P-2 M-1 M-2 M-3
Maximum floor area ratio 0.50 0.30 0.35 0.40 0.50 0.60
Minimum lot area (square feet) 5,000 1 acre 20,000 1 acre 1 acre 2 acres
Maximum impervious coverage (percent) 60% 45% 55% 60% 75% 75%
Minimum lot width (feet) 50 100 80 150 150 200
Minimum yards (feet)
Front 20 25 20 25 25 40
Side (one/both) 7/15 25/60 7/15 25/60 25/60 40/100
Rear 25 50 25 50 50 50
Maximum stories 2½ 3 3 2 2 2
Maximum building height (feet) 35 45 45 35 35 35
650 Attachment 2:2 12 - 01 - 2017